 SLOVAK REPUBLIC
 The Slovak Republic became an independent state in 1993, following the dissolu-
 tion of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR). Its Constitution provides for
 a multiparty, multiethnic parliamentary clemocracy. Slovakia chose to carry over the
 entire body of CSFR domestic legislation and international treaty obligations, which
 gradually are being renewed or updated.
 In March President Michal Kovac dismissed the government headed by Vladimir
 Meciar, chairman of the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), following a
 parliamentary vote of no confidence. Pending early parliamentary elections on Sep-
 tember 30/October 1, a coalition government headed by Jozef Moravcik, leader of the
 Democratic Union of Slovakia (DU), held office. In the elections, the HZDS obtained
 a plurality of 40 percent of the parliamentary seats and formed a working par-
 liamentary alliance with the Slovak National Party (SNS) and the Association of
 Slovak Workers (ZRS). On December 12, a government of those three parties, led
 by Vladimir Meciar, was sworn in by President Kovac.
 The Slovak Information Service (SIS) is responsible for all civilian security and
 intelligence activities. A five-member parliamentary commission oversees the SIS.
 There were no reports of human rights abuses by the SIS or the military security
 apparatus of the Slovak Government.
 Since independence, Slovakia has made intermittent progress in developing a
 market economy. The private sector accounts for some 40 percent of the gradually
 rising gross domestic product. After the elections, the HZDS announced that the sec-
 ond wave of voucher privatization, scheduled for December by the Moravcik govern-
 ment, would be postponed until late January 1995. Industry and construction em-
 ploy 43 percent of the labor force, and agriculture 12 percent. Major exports are ma-
 chinery and transport equipment, chemicals and fuels, minerals, and metals.
 The Government respects freedom of assembly, association, and religion. Laws
 prohibiting defamation of the President and utterances fostering ethnic or religious
 hatred limit freedom of speech, and dismissals of media personnel following changes
 of government in March and December inf    ed on the freedom and independence
 of the media. Laws permitting bilingual road signs in areas inhabited by ethnic
 Hungarians and the registration of non-Slovak names eased some ethnic tensions.
 Skinheads occasionally attacked Roma and at times harassed Jews as well. Dis-
 crimination against minorities, particularly Roma, continued to be a problem. Vio-
 lence against women is a serious problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judcial Rllling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. The village policeman charged in 1993 with murder in
 connection with the abduction and killing of two Roma at Klenovec was remanded
 to psychiatric care.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of any such practices.
 d Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for protection
 against unlawful or unreasonable detention. A person accused or suspected of a
 crime must be given a hearing within 24 hours and either set free or remanded to
 the court. During this time, the detainee hthe he right to an attorney. If remanded
 to a co a hearin                            within 24 hours, at which the judge
 will set the accused free or issue a substantive written order placing the accused
 in custody. Investigative detention may last up to 2 months and may be extended.
 The total length of pretrial detention may not exeed 1 year, unless the Supreme
 Court extends it by determining that the person constitutes a serious danger to soci-
 ety. The law allows family visits and provides for a court-paid attorney, if needed,
 although human rights observers point out that this applies only to defendants
 whose alleged offenses are punishable by more than 5 years in prison. A system of
 bail has existed since July 1990.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for courts that are inde-
 pendent, impartial, and separate from the other branches of government. Some crit-
 ics allege, however, that the dependence of judges upon the Ministry of Justice for
 logistical support, the granting of leave requests, and other services undermines
 their independent status. The President appoints Constitutional Court judges, while
 Parliament elects other judges, based on recommendations from the Ministry of Jus-
 tice.
 
 
 The court system consists of local and regional courts, with the Supreme Court
 as the highest court of appeals. In addition, there is a separate military court sys-
 tem, the decisions of which may be appealed to the Supreme Court and the Con-
 stitutional Court.
 Persons charged with criminal offenses are entitled to fair and open public trials.
 They have the right to be informed of the charges against them and of their legal
 rights, to retain and consult with counsel sufficiently in advance to prepare a de-
 fense, and to confront witnesses. They enjoy a presumption of innocence and have
 the right to refuse to testify against themselves. They may appeal any judgment
 against them.
 The "lustration' law of the former CSFR, barring from high public office persons
 who previously collaborated with the Communist-era secret police, is technically still
 in effect in Slovakia, though not enforced. Opponents of enforcement consider the
 law discriminatory and a violation of due process because decisions would be based
 on unverifiable secret police records and no mechanism for appeal is available. The
 law's supporters cite the need to ban from public office those responsible for abuses
 of power and repression during the years of Communist rule. A challenge to the
 lustration law was filed in the Slovak Constitutional Court in May 1994, but the
 Court declined to hear the case citing a 1991 decision by the Czechoslovak court on
 this issue as a precedent.
 With respect to the Roma minority, human rights monitors charged that police
 appeared reluctant to take the testimony of witnesses to skinhead attacks on Roma.
 Further, they reported that police used the device of countercharges to pressure
 Roma victims of police brutality to drop their complaints, that medical doctors and
 investigators cooperated with police by refusing to describe accurately the injuries
 involved, and that lawyers often were reluctant to represent Roma in such situa-
 tions, for fear this would have a negative effect on their practice.
 There were no reports of political prisoners in 1994.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code requires police to obtain a judicial search warrant in order to enter
 a home. The court may issue such a warrant only if there is a well-founded sus-
 picion that important evidence or persons accused of criminal activity are present
 inside or if there is some other important reason. Police must present the warrant
 before conducting the house search or within 24 hours after the search.
 The 1993 police law regulates wiretapping and mail surveillance for the purposes
 of criminal investigation, which may be conducted, on the order of a judge or pros-
 ecutor, only in cases of extraordinarly serious premeditated crimes or crimes involv-
 ing international treaty obligations. There were no reports of illegal surveillance of
 persons or communications or of mail tampering.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution prohibits censorship and pro-
 vides for freedom of information and the right of expression. In a December speech
 introducing his new Government, Prime Minister Meciar said that "We recognize
 that a free and independent media is also the foundation of a democratic society"
 and thus "the Slovak Government shall, in the spirit of the Constitution of the Slo-
 yak Republic, consistently protect the freedom of expression as one of the fundamen-
 tal human rights." However, the law prohibits public utterances fostering ethnic or
 religious hatred.
 Human rights monitors objected to Article 103 of the Slovak Criminal Code, which
 prohibits defamation of the President, on the grounds that it was being imple-
 mented in a manner that limited freedom of the press. They cited the case of a
 newspaper editor under investigation in 1994 for publishing the letter of a reader
 who was indirectly critical of the President. Observers voiced concern over proposals
 by some nationalist politicians for a law on the protection of the Republic, fearing
 that such a law would undermine freedom of speech.
 During 1994 numerous newspapers, magazines, and journals spanning the entire
 spectrum of political views were published freely. The print media continued frank
 and occasionally critical coverage of government activities, but the HZDS renewed
 its call for increased government regulation of journalism, promising in its election
 program that it would not allow "tendentious fabrications and reporting by people
 in the mass media."
 There is no civil service law protecting jobs after a change of government. In
 March the Moravcik government took steps to restore employment to two persons
 who had lost their jobs in 1993 on free speech grounds. Lubomir Lintner, the Slovak
 radio journalist fired in 1993 because of alleged government pressure, was named
 press spokesman for the Office of the Prime Minister. Slovak Press Agency Chief
 Dusan Kleiman, dismissed by the incoming Moravcik government in March was re-
 
 
 962
 instated in his position by the incoming Meciar Government in December. The direc-
 tor of the National Oncology Institute, fired in 1993 after he had spoken critically
 of the health care system on television, regained his post in 1994 in a competitive
 selection process.
 Councils made up of nine members elected by Parliament to 6-year terms admin-
 ister the government-sponsored Slovak Radio and Slovak Television. Slovakia has
 one government-sponsored television station broadcasting on two channels. One of
 17 radio stations is government sponsored; the remainder are privately owned and
 controlled.
 The pro-HZDS majority in November replaced the members of both councils. Si-
 multaneously, the Radio Council fired the director of Slovak Radio, who had served
 continuously since 1989. A new director of Slovak Television-the seventh since the
 1989 revolution-was appointed in January. Subsequently a number of other staff
 changes were made at beth radio and television. Listeners report that coverage of
 internal political news was greatly reduced, with the views of opposition politicians
 reported only minimally, if at all.
 Early in 1994, agreement was reached for Radio Free Europe (RFE) to continue
 its medium-wave broadcasts to Slovakia. At an HZDS demonstration on the day of
 the Meciar government's March ouster, an angry crowd viciously beat RFE journal-
 ists covering the event after a speaker at the rally identified them. Police refused
 to aid the journalists, who subsequently reported they were afraid to cover HZDS
 meetings. The Government later replaced the police chief of Bratislava.
 Just prior to the Meciar government's fall, reception of some Radio Free Europe
 (RFE) broadcasts was blocked for several hours. The Meciar government denied re-
 sponsibility, and reception subsequently was restored.
 After the fall of the Meciar government, the new government dismissed the gen-
 eral director and chief editor of the fovernment-owned Slovak Republic Press Agen-
 cy (TASR). TASR soon thereafter divested itself of its ownership of the pro-HZDS
 newspaper Republika, which continued its activities under private ownership as
 Slovenska Republika. Some HZDS representatives criticized these actions as inter-
 ference in the media. Subsequently the -ZDS hired the editor as its press spokes-
 man. (HZDS restored him to his former position when it returned to power in De-
 cember.)
 The law provides for academic freedom, which is generally respected, and grants
 universities the authority to decide their internal affairs, including pedagogic and
 academic orientation and internal structure.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for the right
 of persons to assemble peacefully. The Government requires permits for some public
 demonstrations, but there were no reports of refusals, nor of police interference with
 public demonstrations.
 The law also provides for the right of persons to associate freely and to form polit-
 ical parties and movements, a right which was respected in practice. Some organiza-
 tions, including political parties, are required to register, but there were no reports
 that this requirement presented an obstacle to free association.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religious belief
 and faith, and the Government respects this provision. Under existing law, only reg-
 istered churches and religious organizations have the explicit right to conduct public
 worship services and other activities, although no specific religions or practices are
 banned or discouraged by the authorities. The State provides financial subsidies
 only to registered churches and religious organizations, of which there are 15. There
 are no special laws or regulations governing foreign missionanes desiring to enter
 the country and proselytize or foreign clergy entering to serve expatriate congrega-
 tions; they fall under the general provisions concerning the entry of foreigners.
 Based on a law passed in 1993, the property of religious organizations that was
 confiscated during World War H and the Counist period was returned to them.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on the freedom of movement of citizens within
 or outside the country. Former Czechoslovak citizens who emigrated during the pe-
 riod of Communist rule are free to return for visits and may obtain Slovak citizen-
 s hil if the wish.
 fugees and asylum seekers are treated in accordance with international norms.
 There were no reports of refugees being forced to return to countries in which they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the constitutional right to change their government through the
 periodic free election of their national and local representatives. Citizens over the
 
 
 age of 18 are eligible to vote, and voting is by secret ballot. The Constitution re-
 serves certain powers to the President as Chief of State (elected by the Parliament),
 but executive power rests with the Government. Legislative power is vested in the
 National Council of the Slovak Republic (parliament).
 There are no official restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in
 politics, but they are underrepresented in government. A total of 22 women were
 elected to the 150-member Parliament in October, a reduction from 26 in the pre-
 vious parliament.
 The ethnic Hungarian coalition gained 17 seats in Parliament. Ethnic Hungarian
 calls for greater local self-government or "autonomy," in the January 1994 Komarno
 declaration, which were repeated in the Hungarian political parties coalition agree-
 ment, caused anxiety among Slovaks that the Hun arians intended eventually to se-
 cede from Slovakia and become a part of Hungary.%The Slovak National Party (SNS)
 reacted by calling for a ban on ethnic Hungarian political parties, but no action was
 taken in 1994.
 Some members of the opposition have charged that in its rush to implement
 changes following the election, the HZDS violated the Constitution on a number of
 occasions, for example, by nominating a new Prosecutor General before waiting for
 the President to act on Parliament's proposed recall of the then current prosecutor
 general. Opposition members have also voiced serious concern over HZDS attempts
 to deprive deputies from former Prime Minister Moravchik's DU of their electoral
 mandates by claiming that they failed to gain enough voter signatures, despite the
 fact that the DU obtained significant voter support in the election itself. Critics as-
 sert that the HZDS violated citizens' right to privacy after a HZDS-led parliamen-
 tary committee broke the seals on the signature petitions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Representatives of local and international nongovernmental human rights organi-
 zations worked freely, without government interference. The Commissioner for Mi-
 norities of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) visited the
 country to study conditions facing ethnic Hungarians (see Section 5).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination and provides for the equality of all citizens.
 Health care, education, retirement benefits, and other social services are provided
 regardless of race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status.
 Women.-Women in Slovakia are eal under the law. They enjoy the same prop-
 erty, inheritance, and other legal rights as men and receive pay equal to that of
 male colleagues for the same job. Women are well represented in the judicial and
 administrative professions but are underrepresented in other public service areas.
 Despite the lack of overt discrimination, some cultural barriers to their advance-
 ment remain. Labor law prohibits women from engaging in certain types of work
 considered dangerous to their health.
 The Democratic Union of Women of Slovakia monitors observance of the rights
 of women and their families in light of internationally accepted documents and the
 Constitution, especially as they affect the social and family spheres. At a conference
 in Bratislava in October on intolerance and violence against women, participants re-
 ported that 80 percent of women frequently experienced family violence; 90 percent
 faced various forms of intolerance; and 25 percent had experienced sexual harass-
 ment and extortion in the workplace.
 Police deal with spousal abuse, child abuse, and other violence against women in
 the same way as other criminal offenses. They believe that two-thirds of female rape
 victims fail to report the cases for personal reasons. Once reported, police inves-
 tigate such cases as they would any other under the Criminal Code.
 As a result of amendments to the Criminal Code which took effect during 1994,
 prostitution is not an illegal act. However, the Code prohibits activities related to
 prostitution, such as renting apartments for conducting prostitution, spreading con-
 tagious diseases, or trafficking in women for the purpose of prostitution. The au-
 thorities prosecuted several cases involving prostitution-related offenses.
 Children.-The Constitution, the Law on Educat the the Labor Code, and the sys-
 tem of child welfare payments to families with children each provide in part for chil-
 dren's rights. There is no evidence of a pattern of abuse or denial of rights to chil-
 dren.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides minorities with
 the right to develop their own culture, receive information and education in their
 mother tongue, and participate in decisionmaking in matters affecting them. The
 
 
 964
 
 Government continued to provide funding for cultural, educational, broadcasting,
 and publishing activities for the major ethnic minorities. A November proposal by
 ethnic Hungarian parliamentarians to create a parliamentary committee for human
 rights, ethnic minorities, and reli ion was defeated. In December incoming Prime
 Minister Meciar told the diplomatic corps, 'The new Government of the Slovak Re-
 public considers as its fundamental duty towards all citizens of Slovakia, regardless
 of their nationality ** *, the fulfillment and protection of human rights as stipu-
 lated in the Constitution of the Slovak Republic." He continued, 'The Slovak Gov-
 ernment denounces all manifestations of intolerance, above all chauvinism, aggres-
 sive nationalism, racism, anti-Semitism and xenophobia * * * That is why we shall
 try to suppress and remove them-
 During 1994 educational benefits were extended in different forms to different mi-
 nority groups, depending on the nature of their requests and the availability of gov-
 ernment resources. For example, while German- and Ukrainian-speaking represent-
 atives preferred and were granted a mixed form of schooling only partly in the
 mother tongue, ethnic Hungarians actively sought complete mother-tongue edu-
 cation through university level. (Currently Hungarian-language education is avail-
 able only through secondary school.)
 The ethnic Hungarian minority, which is the most numerous, is concentrated pri-
 marily in southern Slovakia, with a population estimated at 570,000 (many of whom
 are Roma). During 1994 Hungarians participated successfully at all levels in the po-
 litical, economic, and social rife of the country, although none rose to government
 ministerial posts. Most ethnic Hungarians and ethnic Slovaks living in mixed areas
 continued to coexist peacefully, although political frictions were evident over the mi-
 nority's legal status, and there were occasional outbreaks of anti-Hungarian feeling.
 In March, on the day Parliament voted to recall the Meciar government, an angry
 crowd attacked two leading officials of the Hungarian Christian Democratic Move-
 ment (MKDH) as they exited the Parliament building. Police at the scene declined
 to intervene, saying they lacked sufficient force. The MKDH filed a complaint, but
 the authorities apparently took no disciplinary action against the police.
 After his 1994 visit to Slovakia, the CSCE Commissioner for Minorities expressed
 confidence in the ability of Slovakia's democratic institutions to handle minority
 rights issues without external assistance. He also noted that ample opportunities
 exist for the use of Hungarian as a minority language in Slovakia.
 Although the Government provides elementary and secondary education in Hun-
 garian, some 20 percent of ethnic Hungarian families choose to send their children
 to Slovak-language schools. During 1994 the Government suspended plans to insti-
 tute a number of alternative' schools in which ethnic Hungarian students could
 choose to study some subjects in Slovak (aimed, according to the plan's advocates
 at offering those students a chance to achieve a level of proficiency in technical
 fields that would enable them to compete more effectively for technical jobs later
 in life). Some Hungarian representatives had criticized the plan as aimed at eroding
 the Hungarian-language educational base.
 Controversy arose during 1994 when ethnic Hungarian parents sought to prevent
 a Slovak nationalist known for his negative attitudes toward Hungarians from
 teaching as a substitute in their children's cass at their ethnically mixed local
 school. Slovak activists immediately protested, appealing to the Ministry of Edu-
 cation to prevent what they considered a violation of the teacher's rights. The
 school's parent-teachers' association, after considering the case, retained the teach-
 During 1994 Slovakia fulfilled two commitments made in connection with its ac-
 ceptance into the Council of Europe: it altered legislation so as to allow towns to
 post road sigus in the Hungarian langage and to authorize Hungarians to register
 names officialy in. their Hungarian form, without Slovak grammatical endings. By
 years end, regulations were in plac to implement oth laws, and no complaints
 were reported.
 Although Hungarian activists in the past had criticized a number of passages in
 the Constitution, including a phrase in its preamble (ewe, the Slovak nation,") which
 they felt relegated nonetbnic Slovak citizens to second-rate status, during 1994 they
 did not press for changes in the Constitution itself. They did, however, call for a
 constitutional law protecting the rights of the nonlovak minorities.       _
 Roma constitute the second largest ethnic minority, although many do not offi-
 cially declare their ethncity because of social prejudice against them. Thus, the offi-
 cial census figure of 81,000 is considered low- estimates of their actual numbers
 range as high as 500,000. Rema are economically disadvantaged, and their situation
 worsened somewhat when the budget-strapped Government cut the Communist-era
 welfare subsidies on which many had come to depend. In his December speech to
 the diplomatic corps, Prime Minister Meiar said, Tnhe Government shall devote
 
 
 965
 special attention to the economic, social, and cultural advancement of the national
 minority of the Roma, while using extensive possibilities of international coopera-
 tion."
 Although the nation's higher pedagogical school has a division to train teachers
 for schools with a high Roma population and the first Roma-language primers and
 readers were published in 1994, Education Ministry officials report that Roma have
 not requested separate mother-tongue instruction and Roma-language classrooms do
 not exist. A 2-year pilot project for Roma preschoolers in six towns, designed to pre-
 pare them for successful entry into the Slovak school system, yielded impressive re-
 sults, but resources may not be available for its continuation. Both human rights
 monitors and Slovak officials report that many Roma pupils do not complete their
 secondary education because of poverty, unavailability of transportation from Roma
 settlements, and family and social pressures.
 Roma representatives report that many employers are reluctant to hire members
 of the group, and that Roma unemployment soared when the Communist-era prac-
 tice of universal mandatory employment ended in 1989. Unemployment is highest
 in areas heavily populated by Roma. During 1994 officials in one locality reportedly
 exerted psychological pressure on a hotel owner to revoke a residence permit he had
 given to two Roma families, on the grounds that allowing them to stay would stimu-
 late a further influx of Roma into the town.
 During 1994 several incidents of skinhead street violence against Roma were re-
 ported. Human rights monitors charged that police often were absent during such
 incidents, seemed reluctant to take action, and in some cases were guil themselves
 of brutality toward Roma. Observers report that attempts to improve the poor rela-
 tionship between Roma and the police by hiring Roma into the police force
 foundered when few Roma with clean police records could meet the minimum edu-
 cational requirements.
 Isolated incidents of verbal harassment of Jews by skinheads and others occurred
 during the year. Jewish spokesmen voiced concern aver a number of news articles
 with an anti-Semitic slant. In the one reported case of the desecration of a Jewish
 cemetery, in which gravestones were overturned, local authorities apologized, and
 the juvenile pe  trators were sentenced to community service.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution and implementing legislation provide
 for health protection and special working conditions for mentally and physically dis-
 abled persons, including special protection in employment relations and special as-
 sistance in training. The law also prohibits discrimination against physically dis-
 abled individuals in employment, education, and provision of other state services.
 Nevertheless, experts report discrimination in such areas as accessibility of prem-
 ises and access to education (especially higher education). Although not speci ically
 required by law, existing government executive orders mandate the provision of ac-
 cessibility for the disabled. However, the Government does not enforce these provi-
 sions effectively due to budgetary constraints.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to form and
 join unions, except in the armed forces. In 1994 between 70 and 75 percent of the
 work force was organized. Unions are independent of the Government and political
 parties. There are no restrictions on the right to strike, but there were no reports
 of strikes during the year.
 There were no reported instances of retribution against strikers or labor leaders,
 but the law and regulations do not explicitly prohibit such retribution. There were
 no reports of human rights abuses targeted against unions or workers.
 Unions are free to form or join federations or confederations and to affiliate with
 and participate in international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The collective bargaining law
 provides for collective bargaining, which is freely practiced throughout the country.
 Employers and unions set wages in free negotiations. The Law on Citizens' Associa-
 tions prohibits discrimination by employers against union members and organizers.
 Complaints may be resolved either in collective negotiations or in court. If found
 guilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate workers fired
 for union activities.
 The Customs Act of 1992 regulates duty-free stores and free customs zones. Firms
 operating in several such zones must comply with the Labor Code; to date, there
 have been no reports of special involvement by the trade unions. Slovakia has no
 special legislation governing labor relations in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Both the Constitution and the Em-
 ployment Act prohibit forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of viola-
 
 
 tions. The Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and Family, as well as district and local
 labor offices, have responsibility for enforcement.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law sets the minimum em-
 ployment age at 15 years of age. Under a law amended in 1994, children must re-
 main in school for 9 years, or until age 15. Workers under age 16 may not work
 more than 33 hours per week; may not be compensated on a piecework basis; may
 not work overtime or night shifts; and may not work underground or in specified
 conditions deemed dangerous to their health or safety. Special conditions and pro-
 tections, though somewhat less strinent, apply to young workers up to the age of
 18. The Ministry of Labor enforces this legislation. There were no reports of viola-
 tions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage, effective October 1993, is
 $82 (2,450 Slovak crowns) per month. Even when combined with special allowances
 p aid to families with children, it does not provide an adequate standard of living
 for workers and their families. The Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, and the Family
 is responsible for enforcing the minimum wage; no violations were reported.
 The standard workweek mandated by the Labor Code is 42.5 hours, although col-
 lective bargaining agreements have achieved reductions in some cases. The law re-
 quires overtime payment up to a maximum of 8 hours per week and 150 hours per
 year, and it provdes 3 weeks of annual leave. There is no specifically mandated 24-
 hour rest period during the workweek. The trade unions, the Ministry of Labor, and
 local employment offices monitor observance of these laws, and the authorities effec-
 tively enforce them.
 The Labor Code establishes health and safety standards which the Office of Labor
 Safety effectively enforces. For hazardous employment, workers undergo medical
 screening under the supervision of a physician. They have the right to refuse to
 work in situations which endanger their health and safety and may file complaints
 against employers in such situations. In February the Government adopted a resolu-
 tion on work safety, which created a timetable for taking the steps necessary to
 bring Slovakia into conformity with European Union norms.
