 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia, formerly one of the constituent republics of the Socialist Federal Repub-
 lic of Yugoslavia (SFRY), declared- its independence from the SFRY on June 25,
 1991. The Yugoslav National Army (JNA) attempted to prevent this action by force
 but after 10 days of fighting agreed to a cease-fire and withdrawal of JNA units
 
 
 from Slovenia. The United States recognized Slovenia as a sovereign state on April
 7, 1992.
 The Constitution adopted on December 23, 1991, proclaims that Slovenia is a
 democratic republic governed by the rule of law. Slovenia has a multiparty system
 with a mixed presidential and parliamentary form of government. The President
 serves as Chief of State and as commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The coali-
 tion government of Prime Minister Iojze Peterle, formed in April 1990, fell in April
 1992, and the State Assembly (legislature) confirmed a new coalition Government
 headed by Janez Drnovsek on May 14. In the elections held on December 6, 1992,
 Milan Kucan was elected President with 63.8 percent of the total vote. Janez
 Drnovsek has been proposed as Prime Minister and is expected to be confirmed in
 January 1993. In the multiparty parliamentary elections held at the same time, no
 party won a clear majority. The three parties winning the most seats were the Lib-
 eral Democratic Party with 22 percent, the Slovenian Christian Democrats with 15
 percent, and the Associated List with 14 percent.
 Police and security forces are under the control of the Ministry of the Interior,
 which a civilian official heads. The security forces have been slower to adjust to the
 democratic transition than other components of the Government. The armed forces
 do not exercise civil police functions.
 The Government is attempting to move from a largely state-owned economy to one
 primarily based on private ownership. The collapse of the unified Yugoslav market
 and a recession put serious strains on both labor and capital in Slovenia. Unemploy-
 ment of 12 percent and the fall in industrial production of more than 20 percent
 since 1990 struck hard at the relatively compact Slovenian economy. Inflation, how-
 ever, was cut sharply in 1992, exports increased, and the new currency, introduced
 in   October   1991,  remained   stable.  Nevertheless,  unemployment    and
 underemployment continued to be major problems.
 Human rights are generally well respected in Slovenia; however, the transition to
 a democratic society and a free market economy has raised political and social ten-
 sions, for example, on the issue of whether Communists and former Communists
 should be allowed to continue in public life. Slovenia is also confronting decisions
 regarding political activity, including dissent, and issues of minority rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Unlawful killing instigated by offi-
 cial organs or vigilante groups did not occur in 1992. In June, however, Ivan
 Kramberger, a presidential candidate campaigning in Jurovksi Dol, was murdered
 by a suspect who alleged personal motives for the attack.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated or government-
 instigated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment, and such treatment is
 not known to have occurred.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest or deprivation of liberty and requires that, on the detainee's request, the de-
 taining authority must advise family or friends of the detention. A suspect may be
 detained on the basis of a court decision and has the right to immediate legal coun-
 sel of his choice. The suspect must be informed of the reason for his detention with-
 in 24 hours and may appeal that decision, and the court must decide the appeal
 within 48 hours. Such detention may not exceed 3 months, unless the Supreme
 Court extends it for another 3 months. If not indicted, the suspect is released. These
 rights and limitations are respected in practice. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system comprises local and district
 courts, and the Supreme Court as the highest court in the State. The Constitution
 states that judges are independent and fill their offices permanently, subject to an
 age limit. They are elected by the State Assembly on the nomination of the Judicial
 Council. The Council is composed of 11 members, 5 of whom are elected by the State
 Assembly on the nomination of the President of the Republic, and the remaining
 6 are sitting judges selected by their peers. The nine-member Constitutional Court
 rules on the constitutionality of legislation and legal regulations and on jurisdic-
 tional disputes, and it also acts as a final court of appeal in cases requiring a con-
 stitutional interpretation. Members of the Constitutional Court are appointed for
 one 9-year term. The President submits nominations to the State Assemb  or their
 approval.
 Trials are public. Defendants have the right to be given time to prepare their de-
 fense, to be present at their trial, to defendthemselves on their own or with an at-
 
 
 909
 torney, to present evidence on their own behalf, and not to be obliged to testify
 against themselves. They have the right of appeal, and there is a presumption of
 innocence. These rights are generally respected in practice. There are no known po-
 litical prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that a person's privacy and home are inviolable. A residence
 or other premises may only be searched by court order in the presence of the owner
 or person concerned and two witnesses. An official may enter such .premises and
 conduct a search without witnesses, if necessary to capture a criminal or to protect
 people and property.
 he privacy of correspondence and communications may not be violated, except
 by court order if necessary for criminal proceedings or state security. These rights
 are generally respected in practice.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, speech, public association, press, and other forms of public communication
 and expression.
 Slovenia has lively print and broadcast media, with both public and private own-
 ers. Newspapers tend to be affiliated with political parties. There are four major dai-
 lies, and a fifth began publishing in November. Weekly newspapers are numerous.
 There are two television channels in Slovenia and radio stations in all the major
 cities. Television and radio stations were socially owned under the Communist re-
 me, and formal privatization has not yet been completed; however, Television
 lhannel A (Kanal A) is privately owned and operated. The State Assembly regu-
 lates the broadcast media through an appointed supervisory board. Journalists were
 not immune from political pressure; a television newsperson received a 1-month sus-
 pension for his comments on a statement by a Slovenian politician. Although the
 journalists' trade union protested, the suspension was upheld.
 As Slovenia emerged from over four decades of an authoritarian political system,
 the legacy of self-censorship remained a problem among journalists trained under
 the old system. The newer group of print and broadcast journalists, however, do not
 seem to share that perceived need for self-censorship.
 Some representatives of the private and publicly owned media protested that Arti-
 cle 5 of the election law is unfair. That article specifies that the media must offer
 free space and time to political parties for party use. The owners claim that such
 a regulation interferes with the media's commercial and editorial independence.
 The Constitution provides that universities and other institutions of higher edu-
 cation shall be autonomous and scientific and artistic endeavor shall be free. Aca-
 demic freedom is respected. Numerous private interest and academic journals and
 publications are available in Slovenia.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly and participation in public meetings, as well as the
 right to associate freely with others. These rights may be restricted in the interest
 of national security, public safety, or health. Career military and police personnel,
 however, may not be members of political parties. In general, permits for meetings
 and other gatherings are routinely granted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution states that the profession of religious
 and other beliefs of any person in p rivate and public shall be free. No person may
 be compelled to acknowledge his religious or other beliefs. There is no state religion.
 While 70 percent of the population of 2.2 million is Roman Catholic, Protestant and
 other religious clergy, churches, and centers operate without hindrance. There are
 no restrictions on particular religious groups or on foreign clergy.
 Some religious leaders have expressed concern that some teachers were continu-
 ing to promote an antireligious outlook in the classroom, a legacy of the educational
 system under the former Communist regime.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 movement, to choose a place of residence, to leave the country, and to return. Any
 limitations on this right must be legally executed, and only when necessary in crimi-
 nal cases, in protecting public health, and in defense of the State. In practice,
 Slovenes travel widely, freely, and often, without practical restrictions on their
 movements. The right of political asylum is provided for those foreign nationals and
 persons without citizenship persecuted for their stand on human rights and fun-
 damental freedoms.
 Slovenia has taken in some 100,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina; it
 serves primarily as a transit country for those going to third states. The Govern-
 ment stated in September that there were 20,000 refugees in camps and 80,000 in
 
 
 private homes or awaiting housing. Many of these refugees hope to return home
 once the fighting ends.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Slovene citizens have the right to change their government. In April 1992, Prime
 Minister Peterle lost a vote of no confidence in the Assembly and was replaced in
 May by Janez Drnovsek who formed a moderate-left coalition Government, retaining
 12 of the 27 ministers from the previous government.
 In the December elections for President and Parliament, Milan Kucan won the
 Presidency handily with 63.8 percent of the vote. In the parliamentary contest, the
 Liberal Democratic Party won 22 seats, the Slovenian Christian Democrats 15, the
 Associated List 14, the Slovenian National Party 12, Slovenian People's Party 10,
 Democratic Party 6, Greens of Slovenia 5, and the Social Democratic Party of Slove-
 nia 4. The Hungarian and Italian minorities had one reserved seat each for which
 they selected their candidates. Janez Drnovsek has been proposed as Prime Minister
 and is expected to be confirmed in January 1993. Some public concern was ex-
 pressed by the relatively strong showing of the rightwing Slovenian National Party
 whose appeal was linked to economic problems and the lingering market crisis.
 Slovenia has a mixed parliamentary and presidential form of government. The
 President serves as Head of State and commander-in-chief of the armed forces, with
 the power to call elections and proclaim statutes. He may not serve more than two
 consecutive 5-year terms. The President nominates the Prime Minister, who must
 be confirmed by the State Assembly (Parliament). The 90-member State Assembly
 is headed by the president of the Assembly and has a 4-year term of office.
 An elected 40-member State Council, representing social, economic, professional,
 and local interests, is an advisory body that, among other duties, may propose legis-
 lation, give the Assembly its opinion on legislation, and ask the Assembly to recon-
 sider legislation before it becomes law. Its term of office is 5 years.
 There are no de jure restrictions on women or minorities participating in politics
 or government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigations of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Slovenia has a well-respected, independent Council of Human Rights and Fun-
 damental Freedoms, founded by law in 1990. The Council, composed of men and
 women from various professions associated with human rights and freedoms, as well
 as nongovernmental, judicial, and political officials, investigates complaints about
 violations of human rights and governmental responsibility. The Government places
 no formal obstacles in the way of visits or investigations by international or local
 human rights groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 In addition to the majority Slovenes (88 percent of the population), the predomi-
 nant ethnic groups living in Slovenia are Croats, Serbs, Muslims, Hungarians, and
 Italians.
 Hungarians and Italians are constitutionally guaranteed one seat each in the
 State Assembly. In addition, the Italian and Hungarian ethnic communities have
 special rights, including the right to use national symbols, establish organizations,
 and enjoy bilingual education. The Constitution states that the position and special
 rights of the Gypsy community are regulated by law.
 Slovenia has made the equality of males and females a matter of state policy, and
 the Constitution and various laws are intended to promote that policy. Slovenia gen-
 erally provides equal pay for equal work for both males and females. In general,
 there appears to be little official discrimination against women or minorities in
 housing, jobs, education, or elsewhere in the society.
 There is a government bureau for women's policy which, among other activities,
 participated in the Female Entrepreneurship competition organized by the Fund for
 the Promotion of Small Businesses. Women are active in trade, consulting, edu-
 cation, marketing, advertising, tourism, design, and food production. In practice,
 women, including those who are otherwise employed, continue to bear a dispropor-
 tionate share of household chores and family care. Although many women still are
 found more often in lower paying jobs in the society, they do not suffer dispropor-
 tionately from growing unemployment. It is difficult to determine with specificity
 the extent of violence against women in Slovenia. Informed observers have not high-
 lighted domestic violence as a major problem.
 
 
 911
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides that the establishment
 and activities of trade unions and the recruitment of their membership shall be un-
 restricted. Except for the police and security forces, virtually all workers are eligible
 to form and join labor organizations of their own choosing. Slovenian labor has t ree
 main labor federations, with constituent branches throughout the society. Unions
 are formally independent of government and political parties, but individual union
 members may and do hold positions in the legislature. For example, the head of the
 Nezavidnost Trade Union Federation was a presidential candidate of the Social
 Democratic Party of Slovenia.
 The right to strike is constitutionally guaranteed. During 1992 a number of
 strikes occurred, largely over wages and working conditions. Two independent trade
 unions organized a 1-hour general warning strike on March 18 to protest the rapid
 fall in the standard of living, and 400,000 workers participated without government
 interference.
 There are no restrictions on joining or forming federations or affiliating with like-
 minded international unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.--Slovenia is in transition from
 a Socialist to a market-based economy. The collective bargaining process is under-
 going change. The Government still had a role in setting minimum wage and other
 conditions, although private businesses, which are growing in number, set such pay
 scales directly with their employees' unions or representatives.
 There are no export processing zones in Slovenia.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labdr.-Article 49 of the Constitution pro-
 hibits forced labor, and it does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16. Some farm communities probably employ younger children during harvest or
 for farm chores. In general, urban employers reaped these age limits.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In general, Slovenian enterprises and busi-
 nesses provide acceptable conditions of work for their employees. The Government
 and trade union federations try to set adequate minimum wages through negotia-
 tions. Such a wage base serves as a standard for both public and private firms. In-
 solvent firms during this period of economic change have been reported to renege
 or delay wage payments. Workers, faced with unemployment in a tight market,
 often prefer to get a delayed payment than no wages at all. The standard workweek
 is 40 hours. Occupation health and safety standards are set by various government
 offices; standardization has not yet been achieved.
