 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional republic. Power is
 shared between a directly elected President, a Prime Minister, and a bicameral leg-
 islature. Since Slovenia's independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991, free,
 fair, and open elections have characterized. the political system. In 1997 elections
 were held to elect both a president and representatives to Parliament's upper house.
 Constitutional provisions, for an independent judiciary are respected by the Govern-
 ment in practice.
 - The police are under the effective civilian control of the Ministry of the Interior.
 By law the armed forces do not exercise civil police functions.
 The country has made steady progress- toward developing a market economy. The
 first phaseof privatization is now complete, and-sales of remaining large state hold-
 ings are planned for 1998. Trade has-been diversified toward the West and the
 growing markets of central and eastern Europe. Manufacturing accounted for most
 employment, with machinery and other manufactured products comprising the
 major exports. Labor force surveys put unemployment at approximately 7 percent,
 but registration for unemployment assistance is twice that number. Inflation has re-
 mained just below double-digit levels. Real-gross national product grew 2.9 percent
 in 1997. The currency is stable,. fully convertible, and backed by substantial re-
 serves. The economy provides citizens with a good standard of living.
 The Government respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law and judici-
 ary provide adequate means of dealing with individual instances of- abuse. An Om-
 budsman deals with human -rights problems, including citizenship cases. Minorities
 are generally treated fairly in practice as well as in law. However, 5,000 to 10,000
 non-Slovene (former Yugoslav) residents are without legal residency status due to
 the Government's slow processing of their applications for Slovene citizenship.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture .and Other Cruel, Inhuman; on Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment as well as "humiliating
 punishment or treatment," and there were no reports of such treatment.
 Prison conditions meet -minimum international standards and were not the sub-
 ject of complaint by any human rights organization.
 
 
 1292
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors and the media.
 In 1996 the Council of Europe sent a commission to review prison conditions. The
 Government accepted its report and implemented the recommendations for improve-
 ments.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, deprivation of liberty, and the use of exile, and the Government respects these
 provisions in practice.
 The authorities must advise detainees in writing within 24 hours, in their own
 language, of the reasons for the arrest. Until charges are brought, detention may
 last up to 6 months; once charges have been brought, detention may be prolonged
 for a maximum of 2 years. Thelaw also provides safeguards against self-incrimina-
 tion. These rights and limitations are respected in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The judicial system comprises district courts, regional courts, a court of appeals,
 and the Supreme Court as the highest court. Judges, elected by the State Assembly
 (Parliament) on the nomination of the Judicial Council, are constitutionally inde-
 pendent, and serve indefiitly, subject to an age limit. The Judicial Council is com-
 posed of six sitting judges elected by their peers and five presidential nominees
 elected by the State Assembly. The nine-member Constitutional Court rules on the
 constitutionality of legislation.
 The Constitution provides in great detail for the right to a fair trial, including
 provisions for: Equality before the law, presumption of innocence, due process, open
 court proceedings, guarantees of appeal, and a prohibition againt double jeopardy.
 Defenants by bawhave the right to counsel, without cost if need be. These rights
 are respected in practice, although the judicial system is so burdened that justice
 is frequently a protracted process. In some instances, criminal cases have been re-
 ported to take 2 to 5 years to come to trial. The problem is not widespread, and
 defendants are relesdon bail except in the most serious criminal cases.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the protection of privacy, "personal data rights," and the
 inviolability of the home, mail, and other means of communication. These rights and
 protections are respected in practice, and violations are subject to effective legal
 sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, speech, public association, the press, and other forms of public communica-
 tion and expression. Lingering self-censorship and some indirect political pressures
 continue to influence the media.
 The press is now a vigorous institution emerging from its more restricted past.
 The media span the political spectrum. The major media do not represent a broad
 range of ethnic interests, although there is an Italian-language television channel
 as well as a newspaper available to the ethnic Italian minority who live on the Adri-
 atic Coast. Hungarian radio programming is common in the northeast where there
 are about 8,500 ethnic Hungarians. Bosnian refugees and the Albanian community
 have newsletters in their own languages.
 Four major daily and several weekly newspapers are published. Two major daily
 newspapers with overtly partisan stances ceased publication due to a level of read-
 ership insufficient to support their costs of operation. The major print media are
 supported through private investment and advertising, although the national broad-
 caster, RTV Slovema, enjoys government subsidies, as do cultural publications and
 book publishing. There are seven television channels, four of which are independent
 private stations. Numerous foreign broadcasts are available via satellite and cable.
 All major towns have radio stato ns and cable television. Numerous business and
 academic publications are available. Foreign newspapers, magazines, and journals
 are widely available.
 In theory and practice, the media enjoy full freedom in their journalistic pursuits.
 However, for over 40 years Slovenia was ruled by an authoritarian Communist po-
 litical system, and reporting about domestic politics may be influenced to some de-
 gree by self-censorship and ndirect political pressures.
 The election law requires the media to ofer free space and time to political par-
 ties at election time. Television networks routinely give public figures and opinion
 makers from across the political spectrum access via a broad range of public interest
 The Constitution provides for autonomy and freedom for universities and other in-
 stitutions of higher education. The  are two universities, each with numerous affili-
 
 
 1293
 ated research and study institutions. Academic freedom is respected, and centers of
 higher education are lively and intellectually stimulating.
 b. Freedom of PeacefubAssembly-and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of peaceful assembly, association, and participation in public meetings,
 'and the Government respects these rights in practice. These rights can be restricted
 only in circumstances involving 7national security, public safety, or protection
 against infectious diseases, and then only by act of the National Assembly.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution explicitly provides for the unfettered
 profession of religious and other 'beliefs in private and in public, and. the Govern-
 ment respects these rights in practice. No person can be compelled to -admit his reli-
 gious or other beliefs. There is no state religion. About 70 percent of the population
 adheres to the Roman Catholic faith, and 2.5 percent to the Orthodox. There are
 also Protestant congregations, especially in the eastern part of the country. Clergy,
 missionaries-some from abroad--churches, and religious groups operate without
 hindrance.
 The appropriate role for religious instruction in the schools continues to be an
 issue of debate. The Constitution states that parents are entitled "to give their chil-
 dren a moral and religious upbringing .. " Before 1945. religion was much more
 -prominent in the schools, but-now only-those. schools- supported by religious bodies
 teach religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Withimr the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 opatriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 movement, to choice of-place of residence, to leave the country freely, and to return.
 Limitations -onthese rights, may be made-only by statute and only where necessary
 in criminal cases, to control infectious disease, or in wartime. In practice, citizens
 travel widely and often.
 The Constitution provides for a right of-political asylum for foreigners and state-
 less persons "who are persecuted for their stand on human rights and fundamental
 freedoms." The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organization in assisting refu-
 gees. The Government provides first asylum (or "temporary protection ") to refugees,
 and in 1991. granted this status to- 70,000 refugees from  Croatia and Bosnia-
 Herzegovina. Only 7,000 refugees with temporary protection status remained by
 July 31. On that date, the Government abolished temporary protection status for
 2,303 refugees, requiring them either to return to their homeland or to apply for
 the status of foreigner (placing on them the burden of financial support). The re-
 maining refugees received extended temporary protection status until April 30, 1998
 (or until June 30, 1998 if their residence of origin remains occupied by hostile
 forces). More than half of the- 2,303 refugees whose temporary protection status
 lapsed have voluntarily returned to Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. There are no
 reports that the Government returned any refugees. against their will.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of-Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government, voting by secret ballot on the
 basis of universal suffrage. Slovenia has a mixed parliamentary and presidential
 system. The President proposes a candidate to the legislature for confirmation as
 Prime Minister, after consultations with the leaders of the political parties in the
 National Assembly.
 There are no restrictions on the participation of-women or minorities in politics.
 Of the 90 members of Parliament, 8 are women. There are no women in the Cabi-
 net. The Prime Minister's Office has an active agency for-monitoring and promoting
 the participation by women in public life.
 The Constitution stipulates that the Italian and Hungarian ethnic communities
 are each entitled to at least one representative in the Assembly, regardless of their
 population.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Independent human rights monitoring groups promote respect for human rights
 and freedoms and freely investigate complaints about violations. The Government
 places no obstacles in the way of investigations by international or local human
 rights groups. The United Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRO) in 1994 de-
 leted Slovenia from the group of Yugoslav successor states monitored by the
 UNHRC for human rights abuses.
 
 
 1294
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law, and the Government ob-
 served this provision in practice. According to the 1991 census, the population (ex-
 cluding refugees) is approximately 2 million, of whom 1,727,018 are Slovenes and
 the remainder persons of 23 other nationalities. There are 54,212 Croats, 47,911
 Serbs, 26,842 Muslims, 8,500 Hungarians, and 3,064 Italians.
 The Constitution provides special rights for the "autochthonous Italian and Hun-
 garian ethnic communities," including the right to use their own national symbols,
 enjoy bilinual education, and other privileges. It also provides for special status
 and rights or the small Romani communities, which are observed in practice.
 Women.-The awareness of spousal abuse and violence against women is on the
 rise. There are two shelters for battered women, which are partially funded by the
 State; a third was expected to open during the winter. The existing shelters operate
 at capacity (about 30 beds combined) and turn away numerous women every year.
 In cases of reported spousal abuse or violence, the police are active in intervening,
 and criminal charges are filed.
 Equal rights for women are a matter of state policy. There is no official discrimi-
 nation against women or minorities in housing, jobs, education, or other walks of
 life. Marriage, under the Constitution, is based on the equality of both spouses. The
 Constitution stipulates that the State shall protect the family, motherhood, and fa-
 therhood.
 In rural areas, women, even those employed outside the home, bear a dispropor-
 tionate share of household work and family care because of a generally conservative
 social tradition. However, women are frequently encountered in business and in gov-
 ernment executive departments.
 Equal pay for equal work for men and women is the norm. Although both men
 and women suffer from the loss of work and both sexes have the same average pe-
 riod of unemployment, women are still found more often in lower paying jobs.
 Children .-The Constitution stipulates that children "enjoy human rights and
 fundamental freedoms consistent with their age and level of maturity: Moreover
 special protection from exploitation and maltreatment is provided by statute. Social
 workers visit schools regularly to monitor for any incidents of mistreatment or
 abuse of children.
 The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's welfare through its
 system of public education and health care. There is no societal pattern of abuse
 against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled are not discriminated against, and the
 Government has taken steps to facilitate access to social and economic opportuni-
 ties. In practice, modifications of public and private structures to ease access by the
 handicapped continue slowly but steadily.
 National/Racil/Ethnic Minorities.-Minorities make u p about 12 percent of the
 population; most are nationals of the former Yugoslavia. The Hungarian and Italian
 ethnic communities (under 1 percent) enjoy constitutionally provided representation
 in the National Assembly. Minorities are generally treatedfairly in practice as well
 as in law. However, 5,000 to 10,000 non-Slovene (former Yugoslav) residents are
 without legal residency status due to the Government's slow processing of their ap-
 plications or Slovene citizenship.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution stipulates that trade unions, their
 operation, and their membership shall be free and provides for the right to strike.
 Virtually all workers, except the police and military personnel, are eligible to form
 and join labor organizations. In 1993 the National Assembly for the first time
 passed legislation restricting strikes by some public sector employees. However,
 after government budget-cutting, some public sector professionals (judges, doctors,
 and educators) have become increasingly active on the labor front.
 Labor has two main groupings, with constituent branches throughout the country.
 A third, much smaller, regional labor union operates on the Adriatic coast. Unions
 are formally and actually independent of the Government and political parties, but
 individual union members hold positions in the legislature. The Constitution pro-
 vides that the State shall be responsible for "the creation of opportunities for em-
 plo yment and for work."
 There are no restrictions on unions joining or forming federations and affiliating
 with like-minded international union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The economy is in transition
 from the former Communist system, which included some private ownership of en-
 terprises along with state-controlled and "socially-owned" enterprises. In the transi-
 
 
 1295
 tion to a fully market-based economy, the collective bargaining process is under-
 going change. Formerly, the old Yugoslav Government had a dominant role in set-
 ting the minimum wage and conditions of work. The Government still exercises this
 role to an extent, although in the private sector wages and working conditions are
 agreed annually in a general collective agreement between the "social partners:" the
 labor unions and the Chamber of Economy. There are no reports of antiunion dis-
 crimination.
 Export processing zones have been established in Koper, Maribor, and Nova
 Gorica. Worker rights are the same in these zones as in the rest of the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced and bond-
 ed labor, including by children, and there were no reports of forced labor by adults
 or children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children. The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years. Children must remain in school until the age of 15. During the harvest
 or for other farm work, younger children do work. In general, urban employers re-
 spect the age limits.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage is $358 (Sit 59,150) per
 month effective in July, which provides a decent standard of living for the average
 worker and family. The workweek is 40 hours. In general businesses provide accept-
 able conditions of work for their employees. Occupational health and safety stand-
 ards are set and enforced by special commissions controlled by the Ministries of
 Health and Labor. Workers have the right to remove themselves from unsafe condi-
 tions without jeopardizing their continued employment.
