 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional republic. Power is
 shared between a directly elected president, a prime minister, and a bicameral legis-
 lature. Since Slovenia's independence with the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991, free,
 fair, and open elections have characterized the political system. In 1997 elections
 were held to elect both a president and representatives to Parliament's upper house.
 The Government respects constitutional provisions for an independent judiciary in
 practice.
 The police are under the effective civilian control of the Ministry of the Interior.
 By law, the armed forces do not exercise civil police functions.
 The country has made steady progress toward developing a market economy. As
 of November 1, "social property" no longer exists, although sales of remaining large
 state holdings have not occurred as rapidly as planned. Trade has been diversified
 toward the West and the growing markets of Central and Eastern Europe. Manufac-
 turing accounts for most employment, with machinery and other manufactured
 
 
 1504
 products constituting the major exports. Labor force surveys put unemployment at
 7.7 percent, but registration for unemployment assistance is 14.4 percent. Inflation
 has remained just below double-digit levels. Real gross national product grew 3.8
 percent in 1997. The currency is stable, fully convertible, and backed by substantial
 reserves. The economy provides citizens with a good standard of living.
 The Government respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law and judici-
 ary provide adequate means of dealing with individual instances of abuse. An om-
 budsman deals with human rights problems, including citizenship cases. Minorities.
 generally are treated fairly in practice as well as in law. However, 5,000 to 10,000
 non-Slovene (former Yugoslav) residents are without legal residency status due to
 the Governments slow processing of their applications for Slovene citizenship.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment as well as "humiliating
 punishment or treatment," and there were no reports of such treatment.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards and were not the sub-
 ject of complaint by any human rights organization.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights-monitors and the media.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, deprivation of liberty, and the use of exile, and the Government respects these
 provisions in practice.
 The authorities must advise detainees in writing within 24 hours, in their own
 language, of the reasons for the arrest. Until charges are brought, detention may
 last up to 6 months; once charges have been brought, detention may be prolonged
 for a maximum of 2 years. The law also provides safeguards against self-incrimina-
 tion. These rights and limitations are respected in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The judicial system comprises district courts, regional courts, a court of appeals,
 an administrative court, and the Supreme Court. A nine-member Constitutional
 Court rules on the constitutionality of legislation. Judges, elected by the State As-
 sembly (Parliament) on the nomination of the Judicial Council, are constitutionally
 independent, and serve indefinitely, subject to an age limit. The Judicial Council is
 composed of six sitting judges elected by their peers and five presidential nominees
 elected by the State Assembly.
 The Constitution provides in great detail for the right to a fair trial, including
 provisions for: Equality before the law, presumption of innocence, due process, open
 court proceedings, the right of appeal, and a prohibition against double jeopardy.
 Defendants by law have the right to counsel, without cost if need be. These rights
 are respected in practice, although the judicial system is so burdened that justice
 is frequently a protracted process. In some instances, criminal cases have reportedly
 taken 2 to 5 years to come to trial. The problem is not widespread, and defendants
 are released on bail except in the most serious criminal cases.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the protection of privacy, "personal data rights," and the
 inviolability of the home, mail, and other means of communication. These rights and
 protections are respected in practice, and violations are subject to effective legal
 sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, speech, public association, the press, and other forms of public communica-
 tion and expression. Lingering self-censorship and some indirect political pressures
 continue to influence the media.
 The press is now a vigorous institution emerging from its more restricted past.
 The media span the political spectrum. The major media do not represent a broad
 range of ethnic interests, although there is an Italian-language television channel
 as well as a newspaper available to the ethnic Italian minority who live on the Adri-
 atic Coast. Hungarian radio programming is common in the northeast where there
 are about 8,500 ethnic Hungarians. Bosnian refugees and the Albanian community
 have newsletters in their own languages.
 
 
 1505
 
 Four major daily and several weekly newspapers are published. The major print
 media are supported through private investment and advertising, although the na-
 tional broadcaster, RTV Sloveia, enjoys government subsidies, as do cultural publi-
 cations and book publishing. There are seven television channels, four of which are
 independent private stations. Numerous foreign broadcasts are available via sat-
 ellite and cable. All major towns have radio stations and cable television. Numerous
 business and academic publications are available. Foreign newspapers, magazines,
 and journals are widely available.
 In theory and practice, the media enjoy full freedom in their journalistic pursuits.
 However, for over 40 years Sloveia was ruled by an authoritarian Communist po-
 litical system, and reporting about domestic politics may be influenced to some de-
 gree by self-censorship and indirect political pressures.
 The election law requires the me dia to offer free space and time to political par-
 ties at election time. Television networks routinely give public figures and opinion
 makers from across the political spectrum access via a broad range of public interest
  r a     i  .
 te   o   tion provides for autonomy and freedom for universities and other in-
 stitutions of higher education. There are two universities, each with numerous affili-
 ated research and study institutions. Academic freedom is respected, and centers of
 higher education are lively and intellectually stimulating.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of peaceful assembly, association, and participation in public meetings,
 and the Government respects these rights in practice. These rights can be restricted
 only in circumstances involving national se urity, pubic safety, or protection
 against infectious diseases, and then oniy by act of the State Assembly.
 c. Freedom of Religion-The Constitution explicitly provides for the unfettered
 profession of religious and other beliefs in private and in public, and the Govern-
 ment respects these rights in practice. No person can be compelled to admit his reli-
 gious or other beliefs. There is no state religion. About 71 percent of the population
 are Roman Catholic, 2.5 percent are Orthodox, and 1.5 percent are Muslim. Protes-
 tants, mostly in the eastern part of the country, constitute less than 1 percent of
 the populace. Clergy, missionaries--some from  foreign  churches-and religious
 groups operate without hindrance.
 The appropriate role for religious instruction in the schools continues to be an
 issue of debate. The Constitution states that parents are entitled "to give their chil-
 dren a moral and religious upbringing...." Before 1945 religion was much more
 prominent in the schools, but now oniy those schools supported by religious bodies
 teach religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 movement, to choice of place of residence, to leavete  country freely, and to return.
 Limitations on these rights may be made oniy by statute and oniy where necessary
 in criminal cases, to control infectious disease, or in wartime. In practice citizens
 travel widely and often.
 The Constitution provides for a right of political asylun for foreigners and state-
 less persons "who are persecuted for their stand on human rights and fundamental
 freedoms." The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organization in assisting refu-
 gees. The Government provides first asylum (or "temporary protection") to refugees
 but on a very limited basis in recent years. There were no reports that the Govern-
 ment forcibly returned any refugees against their will to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government, voting by secret ballot on the
 basis of universal suffrage. Slovenia has a mixed parliamentary and presidential
 system. The President proposes a candidate to the legislature for confirmation as
 Prime Minister, after consultations with the leaders of the political parties in the
 State Assembly.
 No restrictions hinder the participation of women or minorities in politics. Of the
 90 members of Parliament, 8 are women. There are no women in the Cabinet. The
 Prime 1Miistets Office has an active agency for monitoring and promoting the par-
 ticipation by women in public life.
 The Constitution stipulates that the Italiaiand Hungarian ethnic communities
 are each entitled to at least one representative in the Assembly, regardless of their
 population.
 
 
 1506
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Independent human rights monitoring groups promote respect for human rights
 and freedoms and freely investigate complaints about violations. The Government
 places no obstacles in the way of investigations by international or local human
 rights groups.
 A government-appointed but nominally independent ombudsman deals with
 human rights problems, including so-called "economic rights." The incumbent gen-
 erally is regarded as fair, but some see him as unable to probe too deeply into sen-
 sitive issues because of his overt links to the Government. He nevertheless has criti-
 cized the Government for the slow pace of legal proceedings, both in civil and crimi-
 nal cases.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law, and the Government ob-
 served this provision in practice. According to the 1991 census, the population is ap-
 proximately 2 million, of whom 1.7 million are Slovenes and the remainder persons
 of 23 other nationalities. There were some 50,000 Croats, 48,000 Serbs, 27,000 Mus-
 lims, 8,500 Hungarians, and 3,000 Italians.
 The Constitution provides special rights for the "autochthonous Italian and Hun-
 garian ethnic communities," including the right to use their own national symbols,
 enjoy bilingual education, and other privileges. It also provides for special status
 and rights for the small Romani community, which are observed in practice.
 Women.-The awareness of spousal abuse and violence against women is on the
 rise. In 1996 51 men were convicted of rape (latest statistic available). There are
 three shelters for battered women, which are partially - funded by the State. The
 shelters operate at capacity (about 40 beds combined) and turn away numerous
 women every year. In cases of reported spousal abuse or violence, the police actively
 intervene, and criminal charges are filed.
 Equal rights for women are a matter of state policy. There is no official discrimi-
 nation against women or minorities in housing, jobs, education, or other walks of
 life. Marriage, under the Constitution, is based on the equality of both spouses. The
 Constitution stipulates that the state shall protect the family, motherhood, and fa-
 therhood.
 In rural areas, women, even those employed outside the home, bear a dispropor-
 tionate share of household work and family care because of a generally conservative
 social tradition. However, women are frequently encountered in business and in gov-
 ernment executive departments.
 Equal pay for equal work for men and women is the norm. Although both men
 and women suffer from the loss of work and both sexes have the same average pe-
 riod of unemployment, women are still found more often in lower paying jobs. On
 average, women's earnings are 85 percent of those of men.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's welfare
 through its system of public education and health care.
 The Constitution stipulates that children "enjoy human rights and fundamental
 freedoms consistent with their age and level of maturity." Moreover, special protec-
 tion from exploitation and maltreatment is provided by statute. Social workers visit
 schools regularly to monitor for any incidents of mistreatment or abuse of children.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled are not discriminated against, and the
 Government has taken steps to facilitate access to social and economic opportuni-
 ties. In practice, modifications of public and private structures to ease access by the
 handicapped continue slowly but steadily.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Minorities make up about 12 percent of the
 population; most are nationals of the former Yugoslavia. The Hungarian and Italian
 ethnic communities (under 1 percent) enjoy constitutionally mandated representa-
 tion in the State Assembly. Minorities are treated fairly in practice as well as in
 law. However, 5,000 to 10,000 non-Slovene (former Yugoslav) residents are without
 legal residency status due to the Government's slow processing of their applications
 for Slovene citizenship.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution stipulates that trade unions, their
 operation, and their membership shall be free and provides for the right to strike.
 Virtually all workers, except police and military personnel, are eligible to form and
 join labor organizations. In 1993 the State Assembly for the first time passed legis-
 lation restricting strikes by some public sector employees. However, after govern-
 
 
 1507
 ment budget-cutting, some public sector professionals (judges, doctors, and edu-
 cators) have become increasingly active on the labor front.
 Labor has two main groupings, with constituent branches throughout the country.
 A third, much smaller, regional labor union operates on the Adriatic coast. Unions
 are formally and actually independent of the Government and political parties, but
 individual union members hold positions in the legislature. The Constitution pro-
 vides that the State shall be responsible for "the creation of opportunities for em-
 ployment and for work."
 There are no restrictions on unions joining or forming federations and affiliating
 with like-minded international union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The economy is in transition
 from the former Communist system, which included some private ownership of en-
 terprises along with state-controlled and "socially owned" enterprises. In the transi-
 tion to a fully market-based economy, the collective bargaining process is under-
 going change. Formerly, the old Yugoslav Government had a dominant role in set-
 ting the minimum wage and conditions of work. The Government still exercises this
 role to an extent, although in the private sector wages and working conditions are
 agreed annually in a general collective agreement between the "social partners:" The
 labor unions and the Chamber of Economy. There are no reports of antiunion dis-
 crimination.
 Export processing zones exist in Koper, Maribor, and Nova Gorica. Worker rights
 are the same in these zones as in the rest of the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced and bond-
 ed labor, including that performed by children, and there were no reports of forced
 labor by adults or children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 16 years. Children must remain in school until the age
 of 15. During the harvest or for other farm work, younger children do work. In gen-
 eral, urban employers respect the age limits. The law prohibits forced and bonded
 labor by children, and there were no reports of its use (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The minimum wage is $358 (Sit 59,150) per
 month effective in July, which provides a decent standard of living for the average
 worker and family. The workweek is 40 hours. In general, businesses provide ac-
 ceptable conditions of work for their employees. Occupational health and safety
 standards are set and enforced by special commissions controlled by the Ministries
 of Health and Labor. Workers have the right to remove themselves from unsafe con-
 ditions without jeopardizing their continued employment.
