 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional republic which declared
 its independence from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1991. Power
 is shared between a directly elected President, a Prime Minister, and a bicameral
 legislature. Three free and fair elections since independence and a lively multiparty
 political process reflect real progress toward an open and established democratic
 system. The Government respects the constitutional provisions for an independent
 judiciary in practice.
 The police are under the effective civilian control of the Ministry of the Interior.
 By law, the armed forces do not exercise civil police functions.
 The country has made steady progress toward developing a market economy. Pri-
 vatization of the old Socialist economy continues, and trade has been reoriented to
 the West. Manufacturing accounts for most employment; machinery and other man-
 ufactured products are the major exports. Unemployment remains a concern, but in-
 flation has declined markedly, and real growth has reached 5 percent. The currency
 is stable, fully convertible, and backed by substantial reserves. The economy pro-
 vides citizens with a modest standard of living.
 The Government fully respected the human rights of its citizens, and the law and
 judiciary provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse.
 Slovenia's small minority communities (under 8 percent of population) enjoy con-
 stitutionally protected status and are dealt with fairly in practice.
 
 
 1029
 RESPE T FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudical Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Crud, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment as well as "humiliating
 punishment or treatment," and there were no reports of such treatment of detainees
 or prisoners.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards and were not the sub-
 ject of complaint by any human rights organization.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, deprivation of liberty, and the use of exile. The detaining authority must ad-
 vise the detainee in writing within 24 hours, in his own language, of the reasons
 for his arrest. The law also provides safeguards against self-incrimination.
 The Constitution also spells out the rights of detainees and limits on the Govern-
 ment's power to hold them (3 months maximum, with right of appeal). These rights
 and limitations are fully respected in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The judicial system comprises local and district courts, with the Supreme Court
 as the highest court. Judges, elected by the State Assembly (parliament) on the
 nomination of the Judicial Council, are constitutionally independent and serve in-
 definitely, subject to an age limit. The Judicial Council is composed of six sitting
 judges elected y their peers and five presidential nominees elected by the State As-
 senbly. The nine-member Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of leg-
 islation.
 The Constitution in great detail provides for the right to a fair trial, including
 provisions for. equality before the law, presumption of innocence, due process, open
 court proceedings, guarantees of appeal, and a prohibition against double jeopardy.
 These rights are respected in practice.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Corresjondence.-The
 Constitution provides protection for privacy, "personal data rights, and the invio-
 lability of the home, mail, and other means of communication. These rights and pro-
 tections are respected in practice.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, speech, public association, the press, and other forms of public communica-
 tion and expression. Lingering self-censorship and some indirect political pressures
 continue to influence the media.
 The press is now a vigorous institution growing out of its more restricted past.
 The media span the political spectrum from left to right. Because Slovenia is eth-
 nically homogeneous, the major media do not represent a broad range of ethnic in-
 terests, although there is an Italian-language television channel as well as a news-
 paper available to the ethnic Italian minority who live on the Adriatic Coast. Hun-
 garian radio programming is common in the northeast where there are about 10,000
 ethnic Hungarians. Bosnian refugees and the Albanian community have newsletters
 in their own langages.
 Slovenia has five major daily and several weekly newspapers. The major print
 media are supported through private investment and advertising, although the na-
 tional broadcaster, RTV Slovenia, enjoys government subsidies, as do cultural publi-
 cations and book publishing. There are five television channels, two of them inde-
 pendent private stations. Numerous foreign broadcasts are available via satellite
 and cable. All the major towns have radio stations and cable television. Numerous
 business and academic journals and publications are available. Foreign newspapers,
 ma gazines, and journals are available in the larger towns.
 For over 40 years Slovenia was ruled by an authoritarian Communist political
 system. In theory and practice, the media enjoy full freedom in their journalistic
 pursuits. However, reporting about domestic politics may be influenced to some de-
 gree by self-censorship and indirect political pressures.
 The election law requires the media to offer free space and time to political par-
 ties at election time.
 The Constitution provides for autonomy and freedom for universities and other in-
 stitutions of higher education. Slovenia has two universities, each with numerous
 
 
 1030
 affiliated research and study institutions. Academic freedom is respected, and cen-
 ters of higher education are lively and intellectually stimulating.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of peaceful assembly, association, and participation in public meetings,
 and the Government respects these rights in practice. These rights caa be restricted
 only in circumstances involving national security, public safety, or protection
 against infectious diseases, and then only by act of the National Assembly.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution explicitly provides for the unfettered
 profession of religious and other beliefs in private and in public and the Govern-
 ment respects these rights in practice. No person can be compelled to admit his reli-
 gious or other beliefs. There is no state religion. About 70 percent of the population
 adheres to the Roman Catholic faith, and 2.5 percent to the Orthodox. There are
 also Protestant congregations, especially in the eastern part of the country. Clergy,
 missionaries--some from abroad--churches, and religious groups operate without
 hindrance.
 The appropriate role for religious instruction in the schools continues to be an
 issue of debate. The Constitution states thatparents are entitled "to give their chil-
 dren a moral and religious upbringing ...   Before 1945 religion was much more
 prominent in the schools, but now only those schools supported by religious bodies
 teach religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 movement, to choose his or her place of residence, to leave the country freely, and
 to return. Limitations on these rights may only be made by statute and only where
 necessary in criminal cases, to control infectious disease, or in wartime. In practice,
 citizens travel widely and often.
 The Constitution provides for a right of political asylum for foreigners and state-
 lesspersons "who are persecuted for their stand on human rights and fundamental
 freedoms."
 Since 1991 Slovenia has taken in refugees from the fighting in Croatia and espe-
 cially Bosnia-Herzegovina, and has dealt with them humanely. The Government af-
 fords good protection to refugees; there are some 24,000 in the country, about 20,000
 of them registered.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government, voting by secure ballot on the
 basis of universal suffrage. In 1992 national elections-with 10 parties competing
 for national office-brought to power a coalition government. The elections were con-
 ducted peacefully, without allegations of fraud. Slovenia has a mixed parliamentary
 and presidential system. The President proposes a candidate to the legislature for
 confirmation as Prime Minister, after consultations with the leaders of the political
 parties in the National Assembly.
 The Constitution stipulates that the Italian and Hungarian ethnic communities
 are each entitled to at least one representative in the Assembly, regardless of their
 population numbers.
 There are no restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in politics;
 the Prime Minister's office has an active watchdog agency for monitoring and pro-
 moting participation by women in public life. Thirteen of 90 Members of Parliament
 are women, as are 2 cabinet ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Independent human rights monitoring groups promote respect for human rights
 and freedoms and freely investigate complaints about violations of human rights.
 The Government places no obstacles in the way of investigations by international
 or local human rights groups. The United Nations Human Rights Commission
 (UNHRC) in 1994 deleted Slovenia from the group of Yugoslav successor states
 monitored by the UNHRC for human rights abuses.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law, and that is observed in
 practice. Slovenia's population (excluding refugees) is approximately 2 million, of
 which 1,727,018 are Slovenes and the remainder persons of 23 other nationalities.
 There are 54,212 Croats, 47,911 Serbs, 26,842 Muslims, 8,503 Hungarians, and
 3,064 Italians.
 The Constitution provides special rights for the "autochthonous Italian and Hun-
 garian ethic communities", including the right to use their own national symbols,
 
 
 1031
 enjoy bilingual education, and other privileges. It also provides that the small
 Romani communities shall have special status and rights, which are observed in
 practice.
 Women.-In general, the level of personal crime and violence is relatively low. The
 problem of spousal abuse and violence against women exists, and police are not re-
 luctant to intervene in such cases. Crimes of abuse against women are dealt with
 in accordance with the Penal Code. There is no special legislation on crimes against
 women.
 Equal rights for women are a matter of state policy. There is no official discrimi-
 nation against women or minorities in housing, jobs, education, or other walks of
 life. Marriage, under the Constitution, is based on the equality of both spouses. The
 Constitution stipulates that the State shall protect the family, motherhood, and fa-
 therhood.
 In rural areas women, even those employed outside the home, bear a dispropor-
 tionate share of household work and family care because of a generally conservative
 social tradition. However, women are frequently encountered in business and in gov-
 ernment executive departments.
 uEqual ay for equal work for men and women is the norm. Slovenia has gradually
 but steadiy increased employment, although the unemployment rate is 13 percent.
 In such conditions, men and women both suffer from the loss of work. Both sexes
 have the same average period of unemployment. Women, however, still are found
 more often in lower paying jobs.
 Children.-The Conatitution stipulates that children "enjoy human rights and
 fundamental freedoms consistent with their age and level of maturity." Moreover,
 the are guaranteed special protection from exploitation and maltreatment.
 The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's welfare through its
 system of public education and health care. There is no pattern of societal abuse
 against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The disabled are not discriminated against, and the
 Government has taken steps to facilitate access to social and economic opportuni-
 ties. In practice, modifications of public and private structures to ease access by the
 handicapped continue slowly but steadily.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution stipulates that trade unions, their
 operation, and their membership shall be free, and provides for the right to strike.
 Virtually all workers, except for the police and military, are elirbl to orm and join
 labor organizations. In 1993, however, the National Assembly fr te first time
 passed legislation restricting strikes by some public sector employees. The past inear
 has seen some scattered labor unrest,       in the large  A   me    cngom-
 erate.
 Slovene labor has two main groupings, with constituent branches throughout the
 country. A third, much smaller, regional labor union operates on the Adriatic coast.
 Unions are formally and actually independent of Government and the  litical par-
 ties, but individual union members hold positions in the legislature. Th~e Constitu-
 tion provides that the State shall be responsible for "the creation of opportunities
 for employment and for work".
 There areno restrictions on joining or forming federations and affiiating with
 like-minded international union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Slovenia's economy is in tran-
 sition from the command economy of the former Communist system, which included
 some private ownership of enterprises along with state-controlled and "socially-
 owned enterprises. In the transition to a fully market-based economy, the collective
 bargaining process is undergoing change. Formerly, the old Yugoslav Government
 had a dominant role in setting the minimum wage and conditions of work. The
 Slovene Government still exeres this role, to an extent, although private busi-
 nesses, growing steadily in number, set pay scales directly with their employees'
 unions or employee representatives. There are no reports of antiunion discrimina-
 tion.
 Export processing zones have been established in Koper, Maribor, and Nova
 Gorica. Workers' rights are the same in these zones as in the rest of the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Child   wiThe minimum age for employment
 is 16 years. Children must remainin tschool until age 15. During the harvest or for
 other farm work, younger children do work. In general, uban employers respect the
 age limits.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wo.-The minimum wage is $370 (Sit 46,250) per
 month, which provides a decent standard of living. The workweek is 40 hours. In
 
 
 1032
 general businesses provide acceptable conditions of work for their employees. Occu-
 pational health and safety standards are set and enforced by special commissions
 controlled by the Ministries of Health and Labor. Workers have the right to remove
 themselves from unsafe conditions without jeopardizing their continued employ-
 ment.
