 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional republic. It declared its
 independence from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on June 26, 1991.
 A 10-day war ended with the withdrawal of the Yugoslav National Army units. The
 country has been free of strife since then.
 The 1991 Constitution proclaims Slovenia a democratic republic "governed by the
 rule of law." The President serves as the Head of State and commander in chief of
 the armed forces. Prime Minister Janez Drnovsek of the Liberal Democratic Party
 leads a coalition Government formed after free and fair multiparty elections held
 in December 1992.
 Slovenia is a functioning multiparty democracy with more than 10 active political
 arties offering a wide variety of political and economic programs to the voters. Na-
 rional elections for the presidency and legislature, in which over 1,000 candidates
 competed, were held in December 1992.
 Police and security forces are under the control of the Ministry of the Interior,
 headed by a civilian official. The armed forces of Slovenia do not exercise civil police
 functions.
 Slovenia is in a slow but steady transition from a largely state-owned economy
 to one based on private ownership. The Slovene currency is fully convertible inter-
 nally and is judged stable. It is linked to the German mark but is allowed to depre-
 ciate in accordance with internal price changes. Inflation, now running at 25 percent
 per annum and falling, has declined markedly since independence. Unemployment,
 at year's end 15.3 percent, was a minor source of concern. The loss of most of the
 Slovenian market in the old Yugoslavia and the Europe-wide recession have put tre-
 mendous strains on both labor and management.
 There were no major human rights problems in 1993. The Constitution and actual
 practice accord protected status to the Italian and Hungarian communities, as well
 as to the Gypsies. The media exploit their freedoms with caution, and the role of
 former Communists in public life is still at issue despite (or because of) their con-
 tinuing participation in the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No unlawful killings instigated by
 official organs or vigilante groups were known to have occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated or government-
 insti ated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment as well as "humiliating
 punishment or treatment." There were no reports of such treatment of prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest or deprivation of liberty and requires that the detaining authority must advise
 the detainee in writing within 24 hours, in his own language, of the reasons for his
 arrest. The law also provides safeguards against self-incnmination. The detainee
 has the right to legal counsel of his choice and may appeal his detention, which the
 court must decide on within 48 hours.
 The detainee may be held with cause for a maximum of 3 months, and the Su-
 preme Court may extend detention for another 3 months. In practice, these rights
 and limitations are fully respected.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system comprises local and district
 courts, and the Supreme Court acts as the highest court in the country. The Con-
 stitution states that judges are independent and fill their offices permanently, sub-
 
 
 1059
 
 ject to an age limit. They are elected by the State Assembly (parliament) on the
 nomination of the Judicial Council. The Council is composed of11 members, 5 of
 whom are elected by the State Assembly on the nomination of the President of the
 Republic, and the remaining 6 are sitting judges selected by their peers.
 The nine-member Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of legislation
 and legal regulations and on jurisdictional disputes, and it also acts as a final court
 of appeal in cases requiring a constitutional interpretation. Members of the Con-
 stitutional Court, who are appointed for one 9-year term, are nominated by the
 President and approved by the State Assembly.
 According to the Constitution, a defendant's rights include: equality before thc
 law, presumption of innocence, due process, open court proceedings, guarantees of
 appeal, and a prohibition against double jeopardy. These rights are respected in
 practice. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides protection for privacy, personal rights, the inviolability of the
 home, mail, and other means of communication and personal data. In practice, these
 rights and protections are respected.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press. There are five major dailies and numerous weekly newspapers. Most of
 the major print media are supported through private investment and advertising.
 The media span the political spectrum from left to right.
 Although Slovenia is ethnically fairly homogeneous, there is a newspaper for the
 Italian minority living along the Adriatic coast and an Italian-language television
 channel. Hungarian radioprogramming is common in the northeast region of Slove-
 nia. Bosnian refugees andthe Albanian community publish newspapers or news-
 letters in their own languages.
 The Parliament has been debating a media law for the past 2 years but has yet
 to pass one. A council appointed by Parliament controls Radio-Television Slovenia,
 which regulates the country's television transmitters. Radio-Television Slovenia
 broadcasts on two television channels and three radio stations. In addition, one
 independent television station and more than 50 independent radio stations broad-
 cast in Slovenia. Most of the media are politically independent, offering diverse
 opinions on a wide range of subjects. Numerous private interest and academic jour-
 nals and publications are available, as are foreign newspapers, magazines, and jour-
 nals.
 Newly emerging from over four decades of an authoritarian political system, Slo-
 venia retains some of the legacies of such a regime, especially in self-censorship.
 Some journalists, who were supported by the previous regime, continue to be loyal
 to their patrons from the Communist past, a few of whom still hold influential posts.
 Accustomed to having their articles published under the old system, these journal-
 ists remain cautious about expressing criticism. Members of the younger generation
 of print and broadcast journalists seem relatively unrestrained in their dealings
 with government officials and others in public life.
 The election law specifies that the media must offer free space and time to politi-
 cal parties for party use at election time. Some critics claim that this provision
 interferes with the commercial and editorial independence of the media. The Con-
 stitution provides that universities and other institutions of higher education shall
 be autonomous and that scientific and artistic endeavor shall be free. Academic free-
 dom is rigorously respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution guarantees
 the right of peaceful assembly and participation in public meetings. Permits for
 meetings are routinely granted. Persons have the right to associate freely. These
 rights may be restricted only in circumstances involving national security, public
 safety, or for protection against infectious diseases, and then only by act of the State
 Assembly. Career military and police personnel are not allowed to be members of
 political parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution guarantees the unfettered profession of
 religious and other beliefs in private and in public. No person may be compelled to
 admit his religious or other beliefs. There is no state religion, although the appro-
 priate role, if any, for religious instruction in the schools is still the subject of politi-
 cal debate. Approximately 70 percent of the population adheres to the Roman Catho-
 lic faith, and 2.5 percent to the Eastern Orthodox. There are also Protestant con-
 gregations, especially in the eastern part of the country. Clergy, missionaries,
 churches, and religious centers in the country operate without hindrance.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 
 
 1060
 movement, to choose a place of residence, to leave the country, and to return as de-
 sired. Any limitations on these rights may only be made by statute and only when
 necessary in criminal cases, to control infectious disease, and in defense of the
 State. In practice, Slovenes travel widely, freely, and often.
 The Constitution guarantees the right of political asylum for those foreign nation-
 als and persons without citizenship -who are persecuted for their stand on human
 rights and fundamental freedoms." Slovenia has taken in over 75,000 refugees,
 mainly Muslims, from    Bosnia-Herzegovina, which  represents 3.5 percent of
 Slovenia's population. The refugees are accommodated in more than 40 centers
 where they receive aid and education in their language.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Slovene citizens have the right to change their government and have done so
 peacefully through two free and fair elections since independence. As a result of na-
 tional elections in December 1992--:.- which 10 parties competed-a four-party coa-
 lition, led by Prime Minister Janez Drnovsek of the Liberal Democratic Party, came
 to power.
 Slovenia has a mixed parliamentary and presidential system. The President
 serves as Head of State and commander in chief of the armed forces and has the
 power to call elections for the State Assembly and proclaim statutes. He may not
 serve more than two consecutive 5-year terms. The President nominates the Prime
 Minister who must be confirmed by the State Assembly. The 90-member State As-
 sembly has a 4-year term of office. The elected 40-member National Council in the
 legislature, representing social, economic, trade and professional, and local interests,
 serves somewhat as an upper house.
 There are no restrictions on women or minorities voting or participating in poli-
 tics. The Italian and Hungarian ethnic communities are each entitled to elect one
 representative to the Assembly, regardless of their numbers. The Woman's Issues
 Office in the Prime Minister's office is very active in the promotion of women's
 rights.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Slovenia has a well-respected independent Council of Human Rights and Fun-
 damental Freedoms, founded in 1990, which investigates complaints about viola-
 tions of human rights and governmental responsibility. The Government places no
 formal or practical obstacles in the way of visits or investigations by international
 or local human rights groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Slovenia has made gender equality a matter of state policy. In general,
 there is no official discrimination against women or minorities in housing, jobs, edu-
 cation, or other facets of the society. The Constitution specifies that marriage is
 based on the equality of both spouses and that the State shall protect the family,
 motherhood, and fatherhood. Women are well represented throughout Slovene pub-
 lic life, in business, in academia, and in government.
 In practice, women, even those employed, continue to bear a disproportionate
 share of household work and family care as a result, particularly in rural areas, of
 a generally conservative social tradition. Slovenia generally provides equal pay for
 equal work for men and women. In the current recession, both men and women may
 suffer from loss of work, and they endure the same average period of unemploy-
 ment. Women, however, still are found more often in lower paying jobs.
 It is difficult to determine with any specificity the extent of violence against
 women in Slovenia. In general, the level of personal crime and violence is relatively
 low. The problem of spousal abuse and violence against women exists and public
 discussion of this issue is common. Police are not reluctant to intervene in such
 cases. Crimes of abuse of women are treated according to the existing Penal Code.
 There is no special legislation on crimes against women.
 Children.-The Constitution provides that children enjoy human rights in accord-
 ance with their age and maturity and, in Article 56, are guaranteed special protec-
 tion against economic, social, physical, or mental exploitation or abuse.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-At the last census, in 1991, Slovenia had a
 population of approximately 2 million-including 1,727,018 Slovenes and persons of
 23 other nationalities. There were 54,212 Croats, 47,911 Serbs, 26,842 Muslims,
 8,503 Hungarians, and 3,064 Italians, as well as Albanians and Macedonians. The
 Constitution provides special rights to the "autochthonous Italian and Hungarian
 ethnic communities," such as the right to elect a representative to the Assembly,
 
 
 1061
 use their own national symbols, establish organizations, enjoy bilingual education,
 and other privileges and imposes a special obligation on the Republic to support fi-
 nancially and morally the implementation of those rights. Article 65 of the Constitu-
 tion also provides that the small Roma (Gypsy) communities, which have approxi-
 mately 6,500 members, shall have special status and rights. Some members of the
 Serbian- and German-speaking communities have complained that they are not spe-
 cifically mentioned in the Constitution and granted "minority" status.
 People with Disabilities.-Slovenia has taken steps to provide access to social and
 economic opportunities for the disabled, for whom the Constitution guarantees secu-
 rity and training for work. The law mandates access to public facilities for disabled
 persons.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides that the establishment
 and activity of trade unions, as well as the recruitment of their members, are unre-
 stricted. Virtually all workers, except for the police and members of the security
 forces, are eligible to form and join labor organizations of their own choosing.
 Slovenian labor now has two nationwide labor groupings with constituent
 branches throughout the country. A third, much smaller, regional labor union is ac-
 tive on the Adriatic coast. Unions are formally and actually independent of govern-
 ment and the political parties, but individualunionists may and do hold positions
 in the legislature. For example, the head of the Neodvisnost Trade Union Federation
 was a presidential candidate of the Social Democratic Party of Slovenia. The Con-
 stitution provides that the State shall be responsible for "the creation of opportuni-
 ties for employment and for work."
 Workers enjoy the right to strike, but in October the State Assembly for the first
 time passed legislation restricting strikes by some public sector employees. A num-
 ber of strikes occurred in 1993, largely over wages and working conditions. Inde-
 pendent farmers went on strike against the Government's liberal policy on cheap
 imported agricultural products. They demanded, with little success, protectionist im-
 port taxes.
 There are no restrictions on joining or forming federations and affiliating with
 like-minded international union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.--Slovenia's economy is in tran-
 sition from the command economy of the pre-1991 Communist system to a fully
 market-based system, and the collective bargaining process is undergoing change.
 Under the old system, the Yugoslav government had a dominant role in setting the
 minimum wage and other conditions of work. Through negotiations with trade union
 federations, the Government still exercises an influential role in setting the mini-
 mum wage and other conditions for unprivatized enterprises. Private businesses,
 growing steadily in number, set pay scales directly with their employees unions or
 employee representatives. Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by law.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no forced labor in Slove-
 nia; the legal prohibition of forced labor is effectively enforced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years. Compulsory education is 8 years. Some farm communities employ
 younger children during the harvest or for other farm work. In general, urban em-
 ployers respect these age limits, which are c'nforcd by the Ministry of Labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government and trade union federations
 try to set adequate minimum wages through negotiations. The minimum wage per
 month, mandated nationally, was approximately $200 (27,000 tolars) as of year's
 end. Such a wage base serves as a standard for both public and private firms.
 The standard[ workweek is 40 hours.,There is a 24-hour rest period provided after
 40 hours per week, as well as 12 hours' rest after each 8-hour period of work.
 Occupational health and safety standards are set and enforced by special commis-
 sions (for example, sanitary and labor inspections). The inspection bodies are con-
 trolled by the Ministries of Health and Labor respectively.
