 SLOVENIA
 Slovenia is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional republic which declared
 its independence from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1991. The
 President serves as Head of State and commander in chief of the armed forces.
 Prime Minister Janez Drovsek of the Liberal Democratic Party leads a coalition
 Government formed after free and fair elections.
 The Ministry of the Interior supervises the police. The security services report to
 the Prime Minister. There were no reports of human rights abuses committed by
 police or security services. The armed forces do not exercise civil police functions.
 Since independence, the economy has made steady progress in developing a mar-
 ket economy. Most housing and 20 percent of state-owned firms have been
 privatized. Trade has been reoriented to Western markets, with less than 25 percent
 still going east. The gross domestic product increased for the second year since 1990.
 Manufacturing and mining employ 46 percent of the labor force, and agriculture 2
 percent. Major exports include machinery, transport equipment, and other manufac-
 tured products.
 There were no major human rights problems in 1994. The Constitution and actual
 practice accord protected status to the small Italian and Hungarian communities,
 as well as to the Roma. The President named a national ombudsman in 1994, with
 the specific mandate of monitoring human rights. The ombudsman, recently ap-
 pointed, so far has not played a particularly active role. A vigorous, but at times
 not fully responsible, free press and an independent judiciary serve to some extent
 as human rights "watchdogs." The legacy of-the Communist past, however, makes
 this a new and unfamiliar role for the press.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of such
 killin~s_
 b. Asappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman treatment as well as "humiliating"
 punishment, and there were no reports of such treatment of detainees or prisoners.
 
 
 967
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest or deprivation of liberty. The detaining authority must advise the detainee in
 writing within 24 hours, in his own language, of the reasons for his detention. The
 law also provides safeguards against self-incrimination. The detainee has the right
 to legal counsel of his choice and may appeal his detention, on which the court must
 decide within 48 hours.
 The authorities may hold a detainee with cause for a maximum of 3 months, and
 the Supreme Court may extend detention for another 3 months. In practice, the au-
 thorities fully respect these rights and limitations.
 In a highly publicized as well as politicized event in March, the Defense Minister
 was forced rm office after active members of a military unit pulled a former De-
 fense Ministry civilian employee from his car and beat him. The individual was sus-
 pected of illegally holding classified documents. The circumstance and legality under
 Slovene law of his arrest in a nonmilitary place and his subsequent treatment at
 the hands of the soldiers have not been fully explained, but the actions of the mili-
 tary unit appeared arbitrarily to contravene civil authority.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The Constitution provides that a defendant's
 rights include equality before the law, the presumption of innocence, due process,
 open ourt proceedings, guarantees of appeai, and a prohibition against double jeop-
 ardy. These rights are respected in practice. There are no political prisoners.
 TIhe judicial system  omprises local and district ourts, with the Supreme Court
 as the highest court. Judges, elected by the State Assembly (parliament) on the
 nomination of the JudicialCouncil, are onstitution ally independent and serve in-
 definitely, subject to an age limit. The Judicial Council has six sitting judges elected
 by their peers and five presidential nominees elected by the State Assembly. The
 nine-member Constitutional Court rules on the constitutionality of legislation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides protection for privacy and the inviolability of the home, mail,
 and other means of communication. These rights and protections are usually re-
 spected in practice. However, in March parts of a university professor's private cor-
 respondence, critical of a minister in the Government, were read out in a broadcast
 on a government-controlled television station. The issue is now in the courts.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press. The press is a vigorous and at times free-swinging institution, spanning
 the political spectrum. Although Slovenia is ethnically very homogeneous, there is
 an Italian-language radio and television station as well as a newspaper serving the
 Italian minority on the Adriatic coast. The volume of programming in the Italian
 language has been an issue. Some in the Italian community, particularly in the tele-
 vision station, have complained that Italian-language programming has been re-
 duced. Hungarian radio programming is common in noreast Slovenia. Bosnian ref-
 ugees and the Albanian community publish newsletters in their own languages.
 Slovenia has five major dailies and several weekly newspapers. There are three
 television channels, one of them independent of government control. All the major
 towns have radio stations. Two of the newspapers and one television station are pri-
 vately owned. The major print media are supported through private investment and
 advertising, although some of the electronic media enjoy indirect government sub-
 sidies. Foreign newspapers, magazines, and journals are available in the larger
 towns.
 After 40 years of authoritarian one-party rule, self-censorship in the media is a
 way of life for journalists brought up and supported by the Communist regime. Long
 accustomed to getting articles published under the old system, these journalists
 have been cautious about expressing criticism. Print and broadcast journalists who
 have taken up the profession more recently, however, are less inclined to engage in
 self-censorship.
 The election law requires the media to offer free space and time to political par-
 ties at election time.
 Universities and other institutions of higher education are constitutionally auton-
 omous, and academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government respects these
 rights. By law, the Government may restrict these rihts, but only in circumstances
 involving national security, public safety, or protection against infectious diseases.
 c. Freedom of                 on itution explicitly provides for the unfettered
 profession of religious and other beliefs in private and in public, and the Govern-
 ment respects this provision. Clergy, churches, missionaries, including some from
 
 
 968
 abroad, and religious centers of all faiths operate without hindrance. Some parents,
 relying on the constitutional provision of a "right * * * to educate and guide their
 children" have, with the backing of the Roman Catholic Church, argued for some
 form of religious education in public schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides that each person has the right to freedom of
 movement, to choose his or her place of residence, to leave the country, and to re-
 turn as desired The Government respects these rights in practice.
 The Constitution provides for the right of political asylumn for foreigners and state-
 less persons "who are persecuted for their stand on human rights and fundamental
 freedomst
 Slovenia since 1991 has taken in refugees from the  tin in Croatia and espe-
 cially in Bosnia and Herzegovina and has dealt with  em  umanely and expedi-
 tiously. There are some 35,000 registered refugees. The number of refues reported
 by the U.N. High Commissioner or Refugees decreased significantly t 1994 after
 an official registration drive. Some refugees have blended into the local population,
 and others have resettled out of Slovea.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Rght of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government. They last participated in free
 and fair parliamentary elections in 1992 when 10olitical partieS ~opeed.a The y
 elected a 90-member State Assembly (legislature) fo  -year tema    ela     0-
 member National Council, an organization representing social, economic, trade and
 professional, and local interests.
 The Constitution provides that the Italian and Hungarian ethnic communities, re-
 gardless of their total population, are each entitled to at least one representative
 in the State Assembly.
 There are no restrictions on women or minorities voting or participating in poli-
 tics; the Prime Minister's office has a watchdog agency for monitoring and promot-
 ing participation by women in public life. There are 12 women in the Parliament.
 The Cabinet has two female Ministers, those of Justice and Labor.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The independent Council of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, founded
 in 1990, investigates complaints about violations of human rights and governmental
 responsibility without official interference. The Government places no obstacles in
 the way of investigations by local or international human rights groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution, buttressed by actual practice, guarantees equality before the
 law.
 Slovenia has a population (excluding refugees) of approximately 2 million, 91 per-
 cent of whom are Slovenes, 3 percent Creats, 2 ercent Sorbe, and 1 percent Mus-
 lims. Of the remainder, some           ethnic  ungarians, and 3,100 are ethnic
 Italians.
 The Constitution guarantees special rights to the "autochthonous Italian and
 Hungarian ethnic communities, such as the right to use theirown national  -
 bovs, establish organizations, enjoy bilingual education, and other privileges.  e
 small Roma communities also have special status and rights, which are observed in
 practice.
 Women.--The Government does not discriminate against women in the prvision
 of housing, jobs, education, or other services. The Constitution stipulates that mar-
 riage is based on the equality of both spouses and that the State shall protect the
 family, motherhood, and fatherhood.
 In practice, women, even those employed outside the home, bear a disproportion-
 ate share of household work and family care, resulting, particularly in rra areas,
 from a generally conservative social tradition Slovenia generally provides equal pay
 for equal work for men and women. Emerging from an economic recession with un-
 employment rates close to 14 percent, both men and women have suffered from loss
 of work, and both have the same average period of unemployment. Women, how-
 ever, still are found more often in lower paying jobs. At the same time, women are
 frequently encountered in business, academia, public life, and government.
 It is difficult to determine with specificity the extent of violence against women
 in Slovenia. In general, the level of personal crime and iholence is relatively low.
 The problem of spouse abuse and violence against women exists, and police are not
 reluctant to intervene in such cases. Crimes of abuse of women are dealt with in
 
 
 accordance with the Penal Code. There is no special legislation on crimes against
 women.
 Children.-The Constitution stipulates that children enjoy human rights and fun-
 damental freedoms consistent with their age and level of maturity and are assured
 special protection from exploitation and maltreatment. Child abuse is rare, and the
 authorities take action against perpetrators.
 People With Disabilities.-Slovenia has taken steps to provide social and economic
 opportunities for the disabled. The law mandates access to public facilities for the
 disabled, and, in practice, modifications of public and private facilities and struc-
 tures continue slowly but steadily.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers, except for the police and military, may
 form and join labor organizations of their own choosin. The Constitution provides
 that trade unions, their operations, and their membership shall be free.
 Slovenia now has two main labor groupings, with constituent branches through-
 out the country, as well as a third, much smaller, regional labor union on the AP-
 atic coast. Unions are formally and actually independent of government and the po-
 litical parties, but individual unionists may and do hold positions in the legislature.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike, but in 1993 Parliament for the
 first time passed legislation restricting strikes by some public sector employees. A
 number of strikes occurred in 1994, largely over wages and working conditions.
 There are no restrictions on joining or forming federations and affiliating with
 like-minded international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Slovenia's economy is in tran-
 sition from the command economy of the Communist system, which included some
 private ownership of enterprises along with state and "socially owned" enterprises.
 In the transition to a fully market-based economy, the collective bargaining process
 is undergoing change. The Government still exercises a role in setting minimum
 wages and conditions, although private businesses, growing steadily in number set
 pay scales directly with their employees' unions or employee representatives. There
 are no reports of antiunion discrimination.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years. Children must remain in school until age 15. Some farm communities
 employ younger children during the harvest or for other farm work. In general,
 urban employers respect the ag limits.
 e. Acceptable Con  tions of  ork.-Slovenia has a minimum wage of $240 (gross
 wages) per month. The workweek is 40 hours, with a 24-hour rest period, as well
 as 12 hours' rest alter each 8-hour period of work.
 Occupational health and safety standards are set and enforced by special commis-
 sions controlled by the Ministries of Health and Labor.
