 SkWBDEII
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty,
 parliamentary democracy. The King is Chief of State. All
 executive authority is vested in the Cabinet, which is formed
 through direct parliamentary elections every 3 years and
 consists of the Prime Minister XHead of Government) and some
 20 mini-ters. The Social Democratic Party, Sweden's largest,
 retained power in the September 1988 elections.
 The police, all security organizations, and the armed forces
 are controlled by and responsive to the civilian government
 and, with very few exceptions, are scrupulous in their
 protection of human rights. Either the Government, the
 judicial system, the Parliament, or an ombudsman investigates
 thoroughly any allegations of human rights violations.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of businesses are'privately owned.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and-seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament but with full autonomy, investigate private
 complaints of alleged abuse of authority by officials and
 prescribe corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that
 underlies Sweden's active support of international efforts to
 improve human rights observance. The human rights situation
 was largely unchanged in 1989. Some human rights
 organizations, such as the Swedish section of Amnesty
 International, again complained about human rights violations,
 particularly with reference to refugees seeking asylum who are
 rejected at the border. There have also been complaints about
 individual Kurds who have been found deportable as suspected
 terrorists. They have not been deported, however, since they
 would face possible death penalties or other severe
 punishments in their countries of origin. These Kurds are
 restricted to their resident municipality and are not free to
 travel in Sweden.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the'Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or by domestic
 opposition groups does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 Swedish authorities do not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and such prohibitions are
 respected by Swedish authorities. Occasional accusations
 against individual policemen for excessive use of force in
 connection with arrests are carefully investigated and have
 not produced evidence of a systematic problem. Three police
 
 
 1250
 officers were suspended ahd six subjected to other
 disciplinary actions after investigations.
 After a report was made public about the degrading treatment
 of some detainees, the Swedish Red Cross offered to provide
 Swedish citizens as witnesses to assist foreign detainees in
 Stockholm police custody. No actual proof of degrading
 treatment could be found, but two guards were given other
 assignments.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing public order or considered dangerous may be
 held. for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may be
 held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court may order detention for up to
 3 months (with judicial review every 2 weeks). Arrest is
 public and by warrant. Legislation that took effect in 1988
 to reduce the time between detention and arraignment from 5
 days to 48 hours has been criticized, particularly by
 prosecutors. The short time during which prosecutors have to
 reach a decision has led to an increase in arraignments. In
 particularlydifficult cases, the time between arrest and the
 first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours. Bail does
 not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to
 destroy evidence are released to await trial. By law, Swedish
 citizens may not be deported. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often deported at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless
 they risk execution or other severe punishment at home.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to counsel. Since
 1983, however, budget cutbacks have restricted the
 availability of public defenders to cases where the maximum
 penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or more.
 Convicted persons may appeal to a court of appeals, and in
 some cases also to the Supreme Court. There are no military
 courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is provided for by law. Home
 searches are limited to investigations of crimes punishable by
 at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape,
 arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Search warrants
 are granted only on the basis of well-founded suspicion.
 Wiretaps are permitted only in cases involving narcotics or
 national security. Searches and wiretaps normally require
 court approval. When the time factor is critical, or when
 life is believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police
 officer may approve these measures. Limitations on such
 police decisions were introduced in 1988.
 Human rights groups in Sweden have expressed concern about the
 increased number of wiretaps. The number of persons subjected
 to wiretaps, excluding those in connection with the Palme
 murder investigation, reached a high of 414 in 1984 but
 
 
 1251
 dropped to 213 in 1986 and to 197 in 1987. There have been
 public reports that illegal wiretaps and bugging were used by
 the Swedish secret police both in the Palme murder
 investigation and in a case involving a Soviet diplomat who
 later was expelled for industrial espionage. These reports,
 which caused a political scandal, are to be investigated by
 the parliamentary Constitutional Committee.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Newspapers and periodicals
 are for the most art privately owned. Government subsidies
 to daily newspape s, regardless of political affiliation,
 assure the expression of differing opinions. Swedish radio
 and television broadcasting is a government monopoly. An
 increasing number of Swedes are able to view foreign
 television broadcasts on cable.
 Publications containing sensitive national security
 information as well as film and television programs portraying
 excessive violence are subject to censorship. Commercial
 video tapes are also screened'and banned if they contain
 scenes of-unacceptable violence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach their
 children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated, though long waits
 and denial of asylum requests from applicants not meeting
 internationally agreed criteria have become common.
 Some travel restrictions were imposed on certain Kurds, who
 were to be deported after serving prison terms for terroristic
 crimes. Since it was legally impossible to deport the Kurds,
 because they faced possible execution or other severe
 penalties in their home countries, Swedish authorities have
 restricted their movement to their respective communities of
 residence.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 
 
 1252
 SWEDEN
 system. The 349 seats in the unicameral Parliament are
 divided proportionally among the 6 political parties currently
 represented. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum
 of 4 percent of the votes cast.. For the first time in 70
 years, a new party, the Greens, secured enough votes to be
 represented in Parliament. There is universal suffrage above
 the age of 18. Voting is not compulsory, but approximately 85
 percent of eligible voters participated in the 1988 election.
 Aliens who have been legal residents for at least 3 years have
 the right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 There has been periodic discussion about extending this right
 to national elections.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuses of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 legislation and the condition of the native Lapp population.
 Government agencies are in close contact with a variety of
 local and international groups working in Sweden and abroad to
 improve human rights observance. State-supported Stockholm
 University offers instruction in making human rights
 complaints to bodies such as the European Commission of Human
 Rights. The Government also published a pamphlet on the
 matter in 1989, which was widely distributed free of charge.
 In 1989 Sweden was criticized in three instances for
 violations of human rights by the European Commission of Human
 Rights. In all three cases, Swedish authorities took steps to
 provide redress to the complainant. Sweden is a member of the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC).
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and
 disability and unemployment insurance. The Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction).
 Two of Sweden's 284 municipalities refused to permit refugees
 to settle in them. Both the Government and the political
 parties tried to persuade these communities to change their
 attitude.' In a local referendum in connection with the 1988
 elections, 70 percent of the voters in one municipality voted
 to exclude refugees. The mayor of that town was expelled from
 his party, the Center Party. However, studies show that a
 majority of Swedes have a positive attitude towards refugees.
 Certain refugee groups, particularly those from the Middle
 East, complained that their relatives had difficulties in
 obtaining visitor visas for Sweden. Sweden has been
 restrictive in issuing such visas because many of these
 visitors apply for asylum upon arrival in Sweden.
 The Government supports groups working against racism.
 Swedish schools seek to provide education and information
 designed to counter racist tendencies. In 1986 the Government
 
 
 1253
 SW~EDEN
 appointed a special ombudsman to deal with complaints of
 racism and discrimination. As a result, the number of civil
 and criminal complaints being filed has increased.
 In October 1985, the UNHRC carried out a study on Sweden. The
 Commission commented upon the fact that Sweden lacks forceful
 legislation against racism. Sweden's answer was that such
 legislation would not be compatible with the Swedish
 Constitution, which guarantees full freedom of speech and the
 right to form organizations. However, a government commission
 was set up to study methods of stopping racist groups. The
 Commission presented its final report in February 1989. The
 report recommended legislation banning extremist racist groups
 and additional measures to discourage expressions of racism.
 The Government is studying the Commission's recommendations.
 Institutionalized efforts to extend equality between the sexes
 continue. A law adopted in 1988 aims at promoting equality in
 five general areas: in the labor market, in education, within
 families, and in terms of women's role in the economy and
 women's influence in society. A public ombudsman, called the
 Equality Ombudsman, investigates complaints of sex
 discrimination in the labor market. Emplqyers are required to
 base hiring decisions on merit and to pursue actively the goal
 of equality.
 Abuse against women has received a great deal of attention by
 the Government. Studies have been conducted to survey the
 cause and pattern of rapes and other forms of abuse. A
 temporary increase in street rapes in 1988 was the reason for
 one of the studies, but the rape rate during 1989 has been at
 the same level as in 1987. Thirty-six percent of convicted
 rapists were foreign nationals, although immigrants make up
 only 10 percent of the population. Researchers, however,
 believe that one cause for this may be that rapes perpetrated
 by foreign nationals are reported more frequently than those
 committed by native Swedes.
 In recent years, many old laws have been amended and new laws
 added to protect abused women from having their abusers
 contact them or find out their whereabouts. In a few cases
 women have been helped to obtain new identities and homes.
 Both national and local governments support voluntary groups
 that provide shelter and help-to abused women. The Government
 is continuing to investigate whether the increase in reported
 rapes and abuse of women represents an actual increase or
 reflects an improved awareness by women of their rights. Men
 who rape or abuse women are provided rehabilitative treatment.
 Section 6 Workers Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. A
 large majority of the working population, including career
 military personnel and civilian government officials, belongs
 -to trade unions. Unions conduct their activities with
 complete independence from the Government and freely affiliate
 with international organizations.
 Several strikes took place in 1989, some of them wildcat
 strikes. I-lost strikes were in the public sector in protest
 against reductions in the work force and the failure to meet
 demands for large salary increases.
 
 
 1254
 SWEDEN
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers are free to organize and bargain collectively.
 Swedish law fully protects workers from antiunion
 discrimination and has sophisticated and effective mechanisms
 for resolving disputes and complaints. There are no export
 processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited in law and does not
 exist in Sweden.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Compulsory education ends at age 16, and full-time employment
 is normally permitted at this age'under supervision of local
 municipal or community authorities. Young people under age 18
 may work only during daytime and under a foreman's
 supervision. During the summer and'in vacation periods,
 children as young as 13 years of age may be hired for
 part-time work or light "summer jobs" for periods of 5 days or
 less, although it is rare for young people under 15 years of
 age to find a job except with family members.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no minimum wage law. Wages are .set by collective
 bargaining contracts which typically are applied in nonunion
 establishments as well. Even the lowest paid workers are able
 to maintain a decent standard of living. A designated and
 trained trade union steward monitors observance of the
 regulations governing working conditions.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours, although collective
 bargaining agreements can provide for shorter or longer-
 workweeks. The amount of permissible overtime is also
 regulated, as are rest periods. Sweden has -a vacation law
 which guarantees all employees a minimum of 5 weeks' paid
 annual leave. A gradual increase to 6 weeks' annual leave
 will take effect by 1993.
 Occupational health and safety rules are closely observed.
 Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-threatening
 activity immediately and call for a labor inspector.' The
 Swedish courts~have upheld this authority. Swedish
 authorities are studying as many as 400,000 jobs to compile a
 list of those that are most dangerous and cause long-term
 health problems, and are actively trying to improve the
 situation for those employees.
 
 
 1255
