 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty, parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet which
 is formed through direct parliamentary elections every 3 years and which consists
 of the Prime Minister (Head of Government) and some 20 ministers. A four-party
 non-Socialist minority government came to power in October 1991 after national
 elections.
 The police, all security organizations, and the armed forces are controlled by and
 responsive to the civilian authorities and are scrupulous in their protection of
 human rights. Either the Government, the judicial system, the Parliament, or an
 ombudsman investigates thoroughly all allegations of human rights violations.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high standard of living, ex-
 tensive social services, and a mixed economy. Over 90 percent of businesses are pri-
 vately owned.
 Swedes are entirely free to express their political preferences, pursue individual
 interests, and seek legal resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the Par-
 liament but with full autonomy, investigate private complaints of alleged abuses of
 authority by officials and prescribe corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that underlies Sweden's active
 support of international efforts to improve human rights observance. Sweden affords
 full protection to children's rights and welfare, not only through legislation and ex-
 tensive entitlements, but also by the allocation of government funds to independent
 organizations working for and monitoring children' arights. The human rights situa-
 tion was largely unchanged in 1992. One human rights groupquestioned the Gov-
 ernment about the possible expulsion of some refugees from Peru who have links
 to the Shining Path terrorist group, asking if this was in line with Swedish law that
 prohibits expulsion of people if they risk execution or other severe punishment at
 home. The Government replied that this would be considered on a case-by-case bais.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Killing for political motives by the
 Government or by domestic opposition groups did not occur.
 b. Disappearance.-Abduction, secret arrest, or clandestine detention by Swedish
 authorities did not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions.
 Occasional accusations against individual policemen of excessive use of force in con-
 nection with arrests are carefully investigated and have not produced evidence of
 a systemic problem. After some of these investigations, police officers have been sus-
 pended or subjected to other disciplinary action. One police officer was charged with
 manslaughter for shooting a young man during a civil disturbance in southern Swe-
 den in the spring. The officer is appealing the verdict.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exi/e.-Statutory guarantees of individual lib-
 erty are observed. Persons disturbing public order or who are considered to be dan-
 gerous may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may be held no
 longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a person files for bankruptcy and
 refuses to cooperate with the official investigation, a court may order detention for
 up to 3 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks. Arrest is public and by warrant.
 The tine permitted by law betwcen detention and arraignment is 48 hours. In par-
 ticularly difficult cases, the time between arrest and the first court hearing may be
 extended to 96 hours. Bail does not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or
 likely to destroy evidence are released to await trial.
 By law, Swedish citizens may not be deported. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often deported at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution
 or other severe punishment at home.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without public trial by a court of law. The judiciary branch functions freely and
 independently. The accused have a right to competent counsel, although the avail-
 
 
 917
 ability of public defenders is restricted to cases where the maximum penalty could
 be a prison sentence of 6 months or more. Convicted persons in most instances may
 appeal to a court of appeals, and in some cases also to the Supreme Court. There
 are no military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 provides assurance against such arbitrary interference. Home searches are limited
 to investigation of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as
 murder, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Search warrants
 are granted only on the basis of well-founded suspicion. Wiretaps are permitted only
 in cases involving narcotics or national security. Searches and wiretaps normally re-
 gire court approval. When time is critical, or when life is believed to be in imme-
 diate danger, the ranking police officer may approve these measures. There is no
 indication that telephone monitoring is done arbitrarily, and the vast majority of
 such cases involve serious narcotics crimes.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Newspapers
 and periodicals are, for the most part privately owned. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of politicai affiliation, help assure a plurality of views.
 Broadcasting operates under a state concession. The Swedish Broadcasting Com-
 pany and its independent subsidiaries (TV-1 TV-2 and national and educational
 radio) previously had a monopoly over ground-based broadcasting, although a vari-
 ety of commercial television channels now are available via satellite or cable. In
 1991 the Government decided to permit the establishment of one independent com-
 mercial television channel with ground-based broadcasting rights. The independent
 channel started operations in March 1992.
 Publications containing sensitive national security information as well as film and
 television programs portraying excessive violence are subject to censorship. Com-
 mercial video tapes are also censored (and possibly banned) if they contain scenes
 of excessive violence.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Swedes exercise these free-
 doms without restraint. Public demonstrations require a police permit, for which ap-
 plications are routinely approved.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a
 state Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are freely observed.
 Parents have full freedom to teach their children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-reedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary repa-
 triation are guaranteed to citizens by law and respected in practice. Refugees, dis-
 placed persons, and others seeking political asylum are on the whole generously
 treated, although long waits and denial of asylum requests from applicants not
 meeting internationally ard criteria have become common. Refugees who do not
 meet the criteria for asylum are not returned to their countries of origin if the
 Swedish authorities believe they will be subjected to persecution. Some are sent
 back to the country from which they entered Sweden; many are allowed to stay in
 Sweden. Changes in Sweden's Terrorism Act, effective in 1991, eliminated the con-
 troversial provision of communal arrest. Such arrest allowed authorities to limit the
 movement within Sweden of foreigners with suspected links to terrorist organiza-
 tions, who were judged deportable under the Terrorism Act but could not be de-
 ported under other prvisions of Swedish law because they faced death or serious
 punishment in theirhome countries.
 Under the amended Terrorism Act, foreign suspects may still be required to re-
 port regularly to police authorities, but there are no travel restrictions, and each
 case must be reviewed by the courts on a regular basis-at least every 3 years.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 m en t                 -,
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political life within a represent-
 ative, multiparty parliamentary system. The 349 seats in the unicameral Par-
 liament are divided proportionally on an election district basis among the 7 political
 parties currently represented. A party must win a minimum of 4 percent of the
 votes cast to enter Parliament. Only citizens may be elected to Parliament. There
 is universal suffrage beginning at age 18. Approximately 85 percent of eligible vot-
 ers participated in the 1991 election. Voting takes place by secret ballot. Aliens who
 have been legal residents for at least 3 years have the right to vote and run for
 office in municipal elections. Women participate actively in government and the po-
 litical process, accounting for 33 percent of the members of Parliament. A Women's
 
 
 918
 Party was formed in October 1992 to offer an alternative to those who claim that
 women's issues are not adequately addressed by the established parties. There are
 no de jure or de facto barriers to participation by Lapps, whose civil and political
 rights are fully protected.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Active private organizations monitor issues such as the impact of comprehensive
 social legislation and the condition of the native La p population. Ombudsmen serve
 as official governmental monitors of individual rights in Sweden and are effective
 both in making citizens aware of their rights and in publicizing and correcting
 abuse of state authority. Government agencies are in close contact with a variety
 of local and international groups working in Sweden and abroad to improve human
 rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Basic economic, social, and cultural needs for the entire population are thoroughly
 met by the State without discrimination in the form of social welfare and medcal
 services, benefits to families, pensions, and disability and unemployment insurance.
 The Government runs special programs to help immigrants adust to Swedish life
 and culture (including 240 hours of free Swedish-language instruction).
 Some 17,000 Lapps live in Sweden. While there are no formal obstacles to their
 participation in the political process, they tend to address their specific interests
 through various organizations earmarked for Lapps such as the National Associa-
 tion of Swedish Lapps which was organized in 1918. Swedish Lapps maintain that
 government efforts to preserve Lapp culture are insufficient. The Lapps have de-
 manded special legislation to secure their rights to land and water for hunting and
 fishing and to provide legal protection for reindeer grazing. The Government sub-
 mitted a proposal in 1992 to set up a specially elected Lapp "Parliament" in 1993;
 the "Parliament" would be composed of 31 members elected by the Lapps and would
 have authority over Lapp issues, including schools and culture. The Lapps welcomed
 parts of the Government proposal but criticized it on the grounds that it did not
 provide Lapps exclusive rights to fish and hunt on designated reindeer pastures.
 Two of Sweden's 284 municipalities have refused to permit refugees to settle in
 them. Both the Government and the political parties have tried to persuade these
 communities to change their attitude. There were a number of anti-immigrant inci-
 dents in early 1992, some involving violence. Several immigrants were stabbed or
 shot and some immigrant-owned businesses and homes were burned or otherwise
 vandalized.The Government supports groups working against racism and anti-immi-
 grant sentiments. Swedish schools seek to provide education and information de-
 signed to counter racist tendencies. The Government, political parties, and other
 public and private institutions and organizations intensified their activities during
 1992 toward curbing the growing anti-immigrant attitudes that arose in part as a
 reaction to the economic downturn and rising unemployment. There are over 70,000
 refugees from the former Yugoslavia in Sweden.
 Immigrants continue to complain about difficulties in fmding professional employ-
 ment. The Government continued its efforts to evaluate and translate diplomas from
 foreign countries to facilitate the hiring of foreign nationals with documented profes-
 sional skills.
 Although there is no institutionalized job discrimination based on sex, surveys
 show that women are under represented in higher paying jobs, particularly in busi-
 ness, and often receive less pay for equal work. Institutionalized efforts to extend
 equality of the sexes continue. Employers are required to base hiring decisions on
 merit and to pursue actively the goal of equality. A public official (the Equality Om-
 budsman) investigates complaints of sex discrimination in the labor market. The ex-
 istence of sexual harassment at work received more attention in 1992; several work-
 places started programs to prevent such practices. Sexual harassment is prohibited
 y law.
 Rape and abuse of women continued to receive a great deal of attention. There
 are laws to protect abused women from having their abusers discover their where-
 abouts or contact them. In a few cases, women were helped to obtain new identities
 and homes. In 1992 the Government decided to provide bodyguards for women in
 extreme danger of being assaulted by former male companions. Those in slightl
 less danger were provided with electronic alarms that can summon the police. Both
 national and local governments supported voluntary groups that provide shelter and
 help to abused women. The number of reported rapes-some 1,400 yearly-has re-
 mained at aoroximatelv the same level since 1989.
 
 
 Swedish law prohibits parents or other caretakers from abusing children either
 mentally or physically. Parents, teachers and other adults are subject to prosecu-
 tion if they physically punish a child. Children have the right to report such abuses
 to the police- on some occasions parents have been found guilty of physical abuse
 in a court of law, and the usual sentence has been a fine.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to associate freely and to
 strike. A large majority of the working population, including career military person-
 nel, police officers, and civilian government officials, belong to trade unions. UNons
 conduct their activities with complete independence from the Government and polit-
 ical parties, although the Confederation of Labor Unions (LO), the largest federa-
 tion, has been allied for many years with the Social Democratic party. Swedish
 trade unions are free to affiliate internationally and are active in a broad range of
 international trade union organizations.
 Only a few minor strikes took place in 1992; most of them were settled quickly.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are free to organize
 and bargain collectively. Collective bargaining is carried out in the form of national
 framework agreements between centraT organizations of workers and employers, fol-
 lowed by industry- and plant-level agreements on details. The Government set up
 an independent commission for the 1991 wage negotiations with the task of curbing
 the rate of wage increases and cooling the overheated economy. Many unions signed
 agreements for comparatively low wage levels, but they reserved the right to reopen
 negotiations should certain criteria not be met or should inflation exceed certain
 limits. The agreement expires in March 1993.
 Swedish law fully protects workers from antiunion discrimination and provides so-
 phisticated and effective mechanisms for resolving disputes and complaints. Dis-
 putes concerning violations of labor laws are in the vast majority of cases solved by
 informal discussions between the involved parties. Should a settlement not be pos-
 sible, there is a labor court that tries cases of general interest for guidance an in-
 terpretation of the law, and its rulings in turn are followed by other courts.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is ef-
 fectively prohibited by law which is enforced by the police and public prosecutors.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children.-Compulsory 9-year education ends
 at age 16, and full-time employment is normally permitted at that age, but under
 supervision of municipal or local authorities. Those under age 18 may work only
 during daytime and under a foreman's supervision. During the summer and in vaca-
 tion periods, children as young as 13 may be hired for part-time work or light "sum-
 mer jobs" for periods of 5 days or less. It is rare for people under 15 to be employed
 except by family members. Violations are few, and enforcement-by police and pub-
 lic prosecutors, with the assistance of the unions--is considered good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which typically have been ob-
 served, even at nonunion establishments. Even the lowest paid workers are able to
 maintain a decent standard of living for themselves and their families because there
 is substantial assistance available from social welfare entitlements.
 The standard legal work week is 40 hours, or less. The amount of permissible
 overtime is also regulated, as are rest periods. Since 1991, Sweden's vacation law
 guarantees all employees a minimum of 5 weeks and 2 days of paid annual leave,
 and many labor contracts provide more. Occupational health and safety rules, set
 by the government-appointed National Board of Occupational Health and Safety in
 consultation with employer and union representatives, are closely observed. Trained
 trade union stewards and safety ombudsmen monitor observance of regulations gov-
 erning working conditions. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-threat-
 ening activity immediately and to call for a labor inspector. The courts have upheld
 this authority. The authorities compiled a list of the 400,000 most dangerous jobs
 that cause long-term health problems and started a program in the fall of 1990 to
 improve the situation for those employees.
