 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is chief of
 state. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet, which
 is formed through direct parliamentary elections every three
 years and consists of a Prime Minister (head of government) and
 some 20 Ministers. The 349 seats in the unicameral Parliament
 are divided proportionally among the five political parties
 currently represented. The Social Democratic Party, Sweden's
 largest, returned to power in the September 1982 elections
 after six years in opposition.
 Sweden is an advanced, industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned. The
 fundamental political freedoms and human rights of Swedish
 citizens are guaranteed by the Constitution and protected by
 the Government. Observance of and respect for human rights, at
 home and abroad, is a basic social value that underlies
 Sweden's active support of international efforts to enhance
 human rights observance.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes; Ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament
 with full autonomy, investigate private complaints of alleged
 abuse of authority by officials and stipulate corrective
 action, if required.
 The human rights situation remained exemplary and stable in
 1983. To combat signs of anti-immigrant sentiment, efforts
 were continued to encourage tolerance, and an individual was
 convicted under a new law forbidding the distribution of racist
 propaganda. There have been occasional accusations of police
 brutality. Complaints by individuals against Sweden to the
 European Commission on Human Rights have increased, perhaps
 encouraged by Sweden's first conviction by the European Court
 last year on a property case.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Respect for human life is high in Sweden. The Government,
 political institutions, and the public regard killing for any
 reason unacceptable. The Government minimizes the-potential
 for terrorism through  (A) cooperation with Interpol, (B)
 refusal of visas to known terrorists or persons with terrorist
 connections, (C) border control by immigration and customs
 authorities, and (D) surveillance of foreign persons who appear
 to be spying on refugee groups in the country. One case under
 investigation is an allegedly disorderly person's death while
 being detained by police.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abduction, secret arrests, or
 clandestine detention by Swedish authorities.
 
 (1096)
 
 
 1097
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment.
 Legal prohibition of these abuses is respected by Swedish
 authorities. Occasional accusations against individual
 policemen of excessive use of force in connection with arrests
 are carefully investigated and have not produced evidence of a
 systematic problem. Inquiry continues into accusations against
 six Stockholm policemen, temporarily suspended from their jobs
 but now returned to duty. A group of draftees have claimed
 that their training for a hypothetical prisoner-of-war
 situation (including long questioning while blindfolded)
 constituted torture. The military authorities acknowledged
 that standards of the Geneva Convention were violated and
 issued directives to prevent such incidents in the future.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are rigorously
 observed. Persons disturbing the public order or considered
 dangerous may be held for six hours without charge. Criminal
 suspects may be similarly held, but no longer than 12 hours
 without formal charges. If a person files for bankruptcy and
 refuses to cooperate with the official investigation, a court
 can order detention for up to three months (with judicial
 review every two weeks). Arrest is open and by warrant. Bail
 does not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely
 to destroy evidence are released to await trial. By law,
 Swedish citizens cannot be expelled from the country.
 Convicted foreign criminals are often expelled at the
 conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution or
 other severe punishment at home.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Swedish Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without
 public trial by a court of law. The European Court will
 reportedly be trying Sweden for violations of a five-day
 minimum standard for the time someone charged with a criminal
 offense can remain jailed without seeing a judge. Swedish
 officials have been studying how this period, which can last in
 Sweden up to 10 days, could be shortened. The judiciary
 functions freely and independently, and every citizen has the
 right to effective counsel. There are no military courts in
 Sweden in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice. Home searches are limited to investigations of
 crimes punishable by at least two years' imprisonment (such as
 first-degree murder, first-degree robbery, extremely violent
 rape, arson, serious sabotage, large-scale counterfeiting, and
 treason). Wiretapping is only permitted in cases involving
 narcotics or military security. Searches and wiretaps normally
 require court approval. When the time factor is critical, or
 when life is believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking
 police officer can approve these measures. Warrants are
 granted only after deliberation and only on the basis of
 well-founded suspicion.
 
 
 1098
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to the
 media, regardless of political affiliation, assure the airing
 of differing opinions. Publication of national security
 information, and excessive violence in films and television,
 are subject to censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved. Practical concerns occasionally
 require restrictions on time and place of such gatherings.
 Workers are free to organize and have the right to strike. A
 large majority of the working population belong to trade
 unions, including career military personnel and civilian
 government officials. Unions and trade associations manage
 their activities with complete independence from the Government
 and pursue intensive international contacts.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Marginal net immigration continues. Sweden maintains a quota
 for admission of refugees; displaced persons and others seeking
 political asylum are generously treated irrespective of
 quotas. Immigration to Sweden consists of roughly equal
 numbers of Nordics and non-Nordics. There is free immigration
 for the former. Family reunification accounts for the majority
 of the non-Nordic arrivals.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political life
 within a representative, multiparty parliamentary system. To
 enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of four percent of
 the votes cast. The Social Democratic Party governed Sweden
 alone or in coalition from 1932-76. Four non-Socialist
 governments held power from 1976 until the Social Democrats'
 electoral win in 1982. There is universal suffrage over age
 18. Although voting is not compulsory, over 90 percent of the
 eligible voters usually participate in national elections.
 Aliens who have been legal residents for at least three years
 have the right to vote and run for office in municipal
 elections. There is debate now about extending this right to
 national elections.
 
 
 1099
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding Interntional and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Official responses to last year's judgment against Sweden by
 the European Court have included amendments in Swedish
 legislation (to conform with international expropriation
 practice) and continuing negotiations with the offended
 individuals over compensation. This case received wide
 publicity. Private, confidential complaints to the European
 Commission of Human Rights against Sweden have increased in
 1983 over previous years, and the Commission had registered, as
 of October 31, 32 complaints for investigation. The University
 in Stockholm offers instruction in making such complaints.
 Sweden has no official internal human rights organization,
 though a few private organizations monitor issues such as the
 individual impact of comprehensive social legislation and the
 condition of the native Lapp population. Sweden works actively
 within the United Nations and other international organizations
 to promote international observance of human rights.
 Government agencies are in close contact with the Red Cross,
 church organizations, and a variety of other private public
 groups working in Sweden and abroad for the same purposes.
 Amnesty International did not report on Sweden in 1983; Freedom
 House called Sweden "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sweden's per capita gross national product (GNP) was $14,293 in
 1981. Life expectancy at birth is 75 years (1980) and the
 infant mortality rate is 6.94 per 1,000 live births (1983).
 Virtually the entire population is schooled and literate, with
 no discrepancy between males and females. Basic human needs
 for the entire population are thoroughly met without
 discrimination. The state provides social welfare and medical
 services, benefits to families, pensions, and disability and
 unemployment insurance. The taxation system is designed to
 evenly distribute wealth among all segments of the population.
 Unemployment (over four percent of the work force) is at a
 record high and constitutes a key governmental concern.
 Institutionalized efforts continue to extend equality between
 the sexes. There is a public Ombudsman for equal employment
 opportunity and for protecting the right to equal pay for equal
 work. The Ombudsman investigates complaints of sex
 discrimination in the labor market, where employers are
 required to base hiring decisions on merit and to pursue
 actively the goal of equality. The Government also sponsors
 efforts in the schools to break down sexual stereotypes by
 encouraging students to choose careers they might not otherwise
 consider.
 Government practice and popular attitudes encourage a wide
 variety of cultural expression, both from native Swedes and
 immigrants. The latter enjoy the same welfare benefits and
 legal protection as citizens. The Swedish Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction) and
 encourages the press to promote acceptance of immigrants by the
 Swedish public at large.
 
 
 1100
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWEDEN
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ....  ..................  0.0    0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        .      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TTLE I-TOTAL.1...   ,         0o0      0,0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............    .. .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ..... ...       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................  .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        D.0 0    0.0      0.0
 A..','AP  GRANTS ..........    0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL M!!L.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LDANS .................  .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     11.3      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     11.3      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .................    0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL........      0.0      0.0      0.0      0.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
