 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty, parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet which
 is formed through direct parliamentary elections every 3 years and consists of the
 Prime Minister (Head of Government) and some 20 ministers. A four-party non-so-
 cialist minority government came to power in October 1991 after national elections.
 The police, all security organizations, and the armed forces are controlled by and
 responsive to the civilian authorities and are generally scrupulous in their protec-
 tion of human rights. Either the Government, the judicial system, the Parliament,
 or an ombudsman investigates thoroughly all allegations of human rights violations,
 including the occasional allegation of police abuse.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high standard of living, ex-
 tensive social services and a mixed economy. Over 90 percent of businesses are pri-
 vately owned.
 Human rights are deeply respected and widely protected. Swedes are entirely free
 to express their political preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal res-
 olution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full auton-
 omy, investigate private complaints of alleged abuses of authority by officials and
 prescribe corrective action, if required. There continued to be instances of anti-for-
 eigner violnce, which were vigorously prosecuted by the Government. An assault
 on Somali immigrants led to prison terms for the perpetrators, and the infamous
 "laser man" who in 1991-92 shot almost a dozen immigrants (killing one) was con-
 victed in nine of the assaults late in the year. The overall human rights situation
 was largely unchanged in 1993.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Killing for political motives by the
 Government or by domestic opposition gups did not occur. Two deaths occurred
 in official custody. Swedish courts rulec dhowever, that although physical restraint
 contributed to causing both deaths, the deaths occured primarily as a result of medi-
 cal conditions missed by the custodial officers. The officers in question were fined
 for official negligence.
 b. Disappearance.-Abduction, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by Swed-
 ish authorities did not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-Swedish
 law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. Occasional
 accusations against individual policemen of excessive use of force in connection with
 arrests are carefully investigated, but have not produced evidence of a systematic
 problem. However, after the September 1993 alleged rape of a female motorist in
 a patrol car by a Gothenburg policeman, the national police undertook a review of
 some 10,000 cases of past alleged police abuse from the past several years to search
 again for such a pattern; this review continued at year's end. Police officers found
 guilty of abuse typically have been suspended or subjected to other disciplinary ac-
 
 
 1068
 tions, including prison terms. One such officer, a male accused of undue sexual lib-
 erties with an inebriated female, was at year's end in the process of being termi-
 nated from his position as well as facing rape charges in the criminal courts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Statutory guarantees of individual lib-
 erty are observed. Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous may
 be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may be held no longer than
 12 hours without formal charges. If a person files for bankruptcy and refuses to co-
 operate with the official investigation, a court may order detention for up to 3
 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks. Arrest is public and by warrant. The
 time permitted by law between detention and arraignment is 48 hours. In cases in-
 volving potential threat to public safety or risk of flight the time between arrest and
 the first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours (an extremely rare occurence).
 Bail does not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to destroy evi-
 dence are released to await trial.
 By law, Swedish citizens may not be deported. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often deported at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution
 or other severe punishment at home.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without public trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and independ-
 ently. The accused have the right to competent counsel, although the availability of
 public defenders is restricted to cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison
 sentence of six months or more. Convicted persons in most instances may appeal
 to a court of appeals, and in some cases also to the Supreme Court. There are no
 military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 provides assurance against such arbitrary interference. Home searches are limited
 to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as
 murder, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Search warrants
 are granted only on the basis of well-founded suspicion. Wiretaps are permitted only
 in cases involving narcotics or national security. earches and wiretaps normally re-
 quire court ap proval. When the time factor is critical, or when life is believed to be
 in immediate an er, the ranking police officer may approve these measures. There
 is no indication that telephone monotoring is done arbitrarily, though an increase
 of permits was noted during 1992, primarily involving serious narcotics crimes.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Newspapers
 and periodicals are, for the most part privately owned. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, help assure a plurality of views.
 Broadcasting in Sweden operates under a state concession. The Swedish Broad-
 casting Company and its independent subsidiaries (TV-1, TV-2, national and edu-
 cational radio) previously had a monopoly over ground-based broadcasting, although
 a variety of commercial television channels are available via sattelite or cable. An
 independent commercial television channel with ground-based broadcasting rights
 started operations in March 1992 and commercial radio stations started to broadcast
 in the fall of 1993.
 Publications containing sensitive national security information, as well as film
 and television programs portraying excessive violence, are subject to censorship.
 Commercial video tapes are also censored (and possibly banned) if they contain
 scenes of excessive violence. The National Board of Swedish Film Censors monitors
 both films and videos slated for distribution. The current Cultural Affairs Minister
 has attempted to abolish the Film Censor Board, but opposition in the Swedish Par-
 liament has stalled those efforts.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Swedes exercise these free-
 doms without restraint. Public demonstrations require a police permit, for which ap-
 plications are routinely approved. In 1993, in an attempt to stop annual right-wing,
 racist violence on November 30, "Karl XII Day," the police and courts initially
 banned all demonstrations. The Cultural Affairs Minister intervened in the name
 of free speech, however, and reinstated that right so long as protestors remained
 stationary. A massive police effort made this year's demonstrations the most peace-
 able in many years.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a
 state Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but persons not wishing to sup-
 port the state church with their tax money may request (and easily receive) suspen-
 sion of the church tax. All other denominations and faiths are freely observed. Par-
 ents have full freedom to teach their children religious practices of their choice.
 
 
 1069
 d. 'eedom of Movement Within the Count, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 partion.-Freedm of movement within and from the country and voluntary repa-
 triation are guaranteed to citizens by law and respected in practice. Refugees, dis-
 placed persons, and others seeking political asylum are on the whole generously
 treated. Under the Terrorist Act as amended in 1991, foreiger with suspected links
 to terrorist organizations and whose deportations cannot be effected, may be re-
 quired to report regularly to police authorities, but there are no travel restrictions,
 and each ase must be reviewed by the courts on a regular basis-at least every
 3 years.
 During 1993, an increasing number of illegal immigrants, particularly from the
 former Yugoslavia, caused the Government to begin actively searching for and de-
 porting such refugees, leading many to "go underground" to avoid deportation. The
 Government has come under some degree of criticim for such actions. A police raid
 on a convent which had declared itself a "sanctuary" for illegal immigrants shocked
 many Swedes, particularly since children were present but no change in govern-
 mentplicy was foreseen as a result of the negative publicity.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political life within a represent-
 ative, multiparty, parliamentary system. The 349 seats in the unicameral Par-
 liament are divided proportionally among the 7 political parties represented. A
 party must win a min'um of 4 percent of the votes cast to enter Parliament. Only
 citizens may be elected to the Parliament. There is universal suffrage beginning at
 _age 18. p proximately 85 percent of eligible voters participated in the 1991 election.
 Voting takes place by secret ballot. Aliens who have been legal residents for at least
 3 years have the right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 Women participate actively in government and the political process, accounting
 for one-third of the members of Parliament. A Women s Party was formed in Octo-
 ber 1992 to offer an alternative to those who claim that women a issues are not ade-
 quately addressed by the established parties.
 There are no de jure or de facto barriers to participation by the indigenous Sanmi,
 otherwise known as Lapps whose civil and poltical rghts are fully protected. There
 are no Sami members of Parliament, but they are present in leaership positions
 within other centers of power, such as the beards of labor unions.
 Section 4. Government Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Aleged Violations of Human Rights
 Active private organizations monitor issues such as the impact of comprehensive
 social legislation and the condition of the indigenous Sami population. Ombudsmen
 serve as official governmental monitors of individual rights m Sweden and are effec-
 tive both in making citizens aware of their rights and in publicizing and correcting
 abuse of state authority. Government agencies are in close contact with a variety
 of local and international groups working in Sweden and abroad to improve human
 rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Basic economic, social, and cultural needs for the entire population are thoroughly
 met by the state without discrimination in the form of social welfare and medical
 services, benefits to families, pensions, and disability and unemployment insurance.
 Women.-Although there is no institutionalized job discrimination based on sex,
 surveys show that women are underrepresented in higher paying jobs, particularly
 in business, and often receive less pay for equal work. Institutonalized efforts to
 extend equality between the sexes continued in 1993. Sweden's largest oitical
 paty, the Social Democrats, decided that half of all party nominations at allpoliti-
 cal levels would go to women. Possibly due to the recession and the "last hiren, rst
 fired" discrimination experienced by women, the percentage of women in the work
 force employed full-time fell in 1993 for the first time in the postwar period, to 75.9
 percent.
 Employers are required to base hirig decisions on merit and to pursue actively
 the goal of equality. A public official [the Equality Ombudsman] investigates com-
 plaints of sex dismination in the labor market. However, in 1993 the Ombudsman
 received little attention and is perceived to have made little progress. Most cases
 reported to her were withdrawn before completion due to some resolution having
 been reached between the parties or a decision bythe complainant to withdraw the
 case. Sexual harassment isprhibited by law. The issue of sexual harassment at
 work received continued high attention izn 1993. Several work placs started pro-
 grams to prevent such practices.
 
 
 1070
 
 Rape and abuse of women continued to receive a great deal of attention. Laws
 protect abused women from having their abusers discover their whereabouts or con-
 tact them. In a few cases, women have been helped to obtain new identities and
 homes. In 1992 the Government decided to provide bodyguards for women in ex-
 treme danger of being assaulted by former male companions. Those in slightly less
 danger have been provided with electronic alarms that can summon the police,
 methods which the women report have significantly improved their quality of life
 and sense of security. The abusers typically are prosecuted and sentenced to jail
 terms or psychiatric treatment. Both national and local governments support vol-
 untary groups that provide shelter and help to abused women. The number of re-
 ported rapes, some 1,400 yearly, has remained at approximately the same level
 since 1989.
 Children.-The Government is strongly committed to protecting children's rights
 and welfare. Swedish law prohibitsparents or other caretakers from abusing hil-
 dren either mentally or physically. Parents, teachers and other adults are subject
 to prosecution if they physically punish a child. Chifdren have the right to report
 such abuses to the police; on some occasions parents have been found guilty of phys-
 ical abuse in a court of law. The usual sentence has been a fine, combined with
 counselling and monitoring of the family by social workers. If the situation war-
 rants, children may be removed from the home and placed in foster care. However,
 because of a strong legal emphasis on parental rights, it is extremely rare for such
 children to be adopted officially by their foster families or others. As in the past sev-
 eral years, the number of cases of reported abuse in 1993 rose by approximately 25
 percent. Swedish experts attribute virtually all of the increase to a rise in reporting
 of abuse rather than to a rise in abusive behavior. The Government allocates funds
 to independent organizations involved with children's rights. During 1993 a Child
 Ombudsman was appointed, taking office in July.
 lndigneous Peop es.-Some 17,000 Sami (Lapps) live in Sweden. While there are
 no formal obstacles to their participation in the political process, they tend to ad-
 dress their specific interests through various organizations earmarked for Sami such
 as the National Association of Swedish Sami which was organized in 1918. A Sami
 "parliament", the "Sametinget," was formed in 1993, consisting of 31 members.
 Eleven different Sami parties are represented in the Sametinget, which is to con-
 vene four times a year and have consultative responsibilities to the Government.
 A law permitting non-Sami to hunt on designated reindeer pastures went into ef-
 fect during 1993. Several Sami protested with hunger demonstrations. Yet another
 law permitting non-Sami to fish in lakes previously reserved for the Sami is sched-
 uled to go into effect by January 1994. A suspension of that law, and the abolition
 of the new hunting law, is on the new Sametinget's agenda.
 National RaciallEthnic Minoritie.-There were a number of incidents of anti-
 foreigner acts in 1993, some violent. Most of the incidents involved clashes between
 groups of ethnic Swedish and non-Swedish youths. At least a dozen immigrants
 were physically assaulted, and several immigrant businesses and homes were
 burned or damaged. Threats of such violence are more common and appear to be
 increasing. For example, in one case a Greek restaurant in a small coastal town
 closed after repeated threats and harassment by local youths and complaints by
 neighbors that the restaurant was "un-Swedish. Also, the Talinas Refugee Camp
 in northern Sweden, which houses some 600 refugees from the former Yugoslavia
 and Somalia, saw a wave of nighttime attacks, including burning crosses, smashed
 windows, and an ultimately unsucessful arson attempt on one of the camp's apart-
 ment buildings. In August a mosque was firebombed and completely destroyed. The
 perpetrators received prison terms ranging from a few months to 2 years. As noted
 above, the infamous "laser man" (so called because he used a laser sight to hunt
 down immigrants) also was convicted and is to be sentenced early in 1994 pending
 further psychiatric examination.
 The Government decided in 1993 to move responsibility for processing refugees to
 the local level. All municipalities will be required to accept a certain number of refu-
 gees and provide for their needs. A few such entitites have declared they will not
 accept refugees, but the matter has not been tested as the largest number of refu-
 gees, primarily from Bosnia, is not anticipated until 1994. Although violent acts
 such as those described above are anathema to the overwhelming majority of
 Swedes, attitudes in general towards asylum seekers contined to sour. Refugees are
 resented in some quarters because they were perceived to receive too-generous bene-
 fits (such as immediate placement in apartments and extensive financial support)
 in a time of recession.
 The Government, particularly the present Cultural Minister, is making efforts to
 change these attitudes. The Government intervened in November, for instance, to
 overturn a decision by the Immigration Department to deny asylum to several Rus-
 
 
 1071
 sian Jews. The Government also supports groups which work against racism and
 anti-immigrant sentiments. Perhaps the most effective is the "5-to-12" movement
 (taking its name from the "atomic clock"), founded by the parents of a teenage gI
 who on her own began organizing weekly anti-racist vigils in her hometown. Wen
 their daughter was killed by an Eritrian immigrant, her parents channeled their
 sorrow into making the vigils a nationwide event, to occur on the December 5 at
 5-to--12 in the evening. The King and Queen joined this year's vigils. Swedish
 schools provide education and information designed to counter racist tendencies.
 The Government and key politicians, including the Prime Minister, issued strong
 statements about Sweden's history of tolerance and its need to continue in that tra-
 dition regardless of the economic downturn.
 The Government runs special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life
 and culture [including 240 hours of free Swedish-language instruction]. Immigrants
 still complained about difficulties in finding professional employment. The Govern-
 ment continued its efforts to translate and evaluate diplomas from foreign countries
 to facilitate the hiring of foreign nationals with documented professional skills, with
 several new nationalities added to the approved list. Unemployment figures for im-
 migrants in general were considerably higher than for native-born Swedes.
 People with Disabilities.-Disabled persons are provided with extra help to be able
 to live as normal a life as possible in their own homes, as well as assistance in pur-
 suing a career or holding a job. Regulations for new buildings require that they be
 fully accessible. However, this requirement has not been extended to existing public
 buildings.
 Section 6. Workers Rights
 a. The Right of Assoeation.-Workers have the right to associate freely and to
 strike. A la e m~jorit of the working population, including career military person-
 nel, police officers, andciianger        icials, belong to trade unions. unions
 conduct their activities with complete independence from the Government and polit-
 ical parties, although the Confederation of Labor Unions (LO), the largest federa-
 tion, has been allied for many years with the Social Democratic Party. Swedish
 trade unions are free to affiliate internationally and are active in a broad range of
 international trade union organizations. Laws forbid retribution against legal strik-
 ers. On the other hand, illegal strikers (i.e., wildcat strikers or a strike action that
 recklessly and clearly endangers health or safety) can be fined by labor courts. Only
 a few minor strikes took place in 1993, most of them settled uickly. The longest
 strike during the year was that of the electricians which lasted about a month.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coectively.-Workers are free to organize
 and bargain cllectively. The traditional form of cllective bargaining throug h na-
 tional framework a ements between central organizations of workers and employ-
 ers, followed by industry- and factory-level agrements on details, was challenged
 by the Swedish Employers' Confederation, SAP. In 1993, after a two-year wage sta-
 bilization agreement expired, a new national agreement with small wage increases
 was signed for the manufacturing industry. As structured, the settlement rep-
 resented a step toward the decentralization of the wage formation process, as fa-
 vored by business. At the same time, labor welcomed the conclusion of a national-
 level agreement with a modest wage increase instead of threatened wage cuts.
 Swedish law fully protects workers from antiunion discrimination and provides so-
 phisticated and effective mechanisms for resolving disputes and complats.Dis-
 putes concerning violations of labor laws are in the vast majority of cases solved by
 inrmal discussions between the involved parties. Should a settlement not be
 reached, a Labor Court tries cases of general interest for guidance and interpreta-
 tion of the law, and its rulings in turn are followed by other courts. Employers gen-
 erally accept the unions' partnership role; there were no known cases of firing an
 employee for union activities in 1993.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Fored or compulsory labor, which
 does not exist, is prohibited by law which is enforced by the police and public pros-
 ecutors.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children.--Compulsory 9-year education ends
 at age 16, and full-time employment is normally permitted at that age under super-
 vision of local municipal or community authorities. Those under age 18 may work
 only during daytime and under a foreman's supervision. During summer and vaca-
 tion periods, children as young as 13 may be hired for part-time work or light "sum-
 mer jobs" for periods of 5 days or less. It is rare for people under 15 to be employed
 except by familsy members. Violations are few, and enforcement-by police and pub-
 lic prosecutors, with the assistance of the unions-is onsidered good.
 
 
 1072
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which typically have been observed
 even at non-union establishments. Even the lowestpaid workers are able to main-
 tain a decent standard of living for themselves andtheir families because of sub-
 stantial assistance available from social welfare entitlements. The standard legal
 work week is 40 hours or less. The amount of permissible overtime is also regulated,
 as are rest periods. Since 1991, Sweden's vacation law has guaranteed all employees
 a minimum of 5 weeks plus 2 days of paid annual leave, and many labor contracts
 provide more. During 1993 however, the minimum leave was reduced by 2 days
 through negotiations with the unions. Occupational health and safety rules, set by
 the government-appointed National Board of Occupational Health and Safety in con-
 sultation with employer and union representatives, are closely observed. Trained
 trade union stewards and safety ombudsmen monitor observance of regulations gov-
 erning working conditions. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-threat-
 ening activity immediately and to call for a labor inspector. The courts have upheld
 this authority.
