 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty,
 parliamentary democracy. The King is Chief of State. All
 executive authority is vested in the Cabinet, which is formed
 through direct parliamentary elections every 3 years and
 consists of the Prime Minister (Head of Government) and some
 20 ministers. The Social Democratic Party, Sweden's'largest,
 retained power in the September 1988 elections.
 The police, all security organizations, and the armed forces
 are controlled by and responsive to the civilian authorities
 and, with very few exceptions, are scrupulous in their
 protection of human rights. Either the Government, the
 judicial system, the Parliament, or an ombudsman investigates
 thoroughly all allegations of human rights violations.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of businesses are privately owned.
 Swedes are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament but with full autonomy, investigate private
 complaints of alleged abuses of authority by officials and
 prescribe corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that underlies
 Sweden's active support of international efforts to improve
 human rights observance. The human rights situation was
 largely unchanged in 1990. Some human rights organizations,
 such as the Swedish section of Amnesty International, again
 complained about human rights violations, particularly with
 reference to refugees seeking asylum who ire rejected'at the
 border. There were also continued complaints about individual
 Kurds who have been found deportable as suspected terrorists.
 Since they face death penalties or other severe punishment if
 returned to their country of origin, they have not-been
 deported. Instead, these Kurds were restricted to their
 resident municipality and were not free to travel in Sweden.
 The travel restrictions have now been lifted for all but one
 of the Kurds. Some human rights groups protested the-
 Government's decision to return two Soviet hijackers to the
 Soviet Union for trial. Subsequently, a third Soviet hijacker
 was tried in Sweden, with the court deciding that he would not
 be deported after serving his 4-year prison term.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. A Kurdish woman was killed
 by a letter bomb, in a case in which political motives
 unrelated to Sweden were involved.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 Swedish authorities do not occur.
 
 
 1275
 
 SWEDEN
 c. Torture and.Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment ot
 Punishment
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and such prohibitions are
 respected by Swedish authorities. Occasional accusations
 against individual policemen of excessive use of force in
 connection with arrests are carefully investigated and have
 not produced evidence of a systematic problem. After some of
 these investigations, police officers have been suspended or
 subjected to other disciplinary actions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous
 may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may
 be held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court may order detentio> for up to
 a-months, with judicial review every 2 weeks. Arrest is
 public and by warrant. Legislation in 1989 shortened-the time
 between detention and arraignment from 5 days to 48 hours. It
 continues to be criticize&, particularly by-.prosecutars who
 claim that the shortness of time in which they have to- make a
 decision has led to an increase in arraignments. In
 particularly difficult cases, the time between arrest and the
 first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours. Bail does
 not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to
 destroy evidence are released to await trial. By law, Swedish
 citizens may not be deported. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often deported at the conclusion of their prison'terms, unless
 they risk execution or other severe-punishment at home.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to effective
 counsel. Since 1983,. however, budget cutbacks have restricted
 the availability of public defenders to cases where the
 maximum penalty could be a prison sentence- of 6 months or
 more. Convicted persons in most instances may appeal to a
 court of appeals and, in some cases, also to the Supreme
 Court. There-are no military courts in peacetime.
 f- Arbitrary Interference witr Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The law-provides assurance- against such arbitrary interference.
 Home searches are limited to investigations of crimes
 punishable by at least 2 year's imprisonment, such as murder,
 robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason.
 Search warrants are granted only on the- basis of well-founded
 suspicion. Wiretaps are permitted only in cases involving -
 narcotics or national security. Searches and wiretaps normally
 require court approval. When the time factor is critical, or
 when a life is believed to- be in immediate danger, the ranking
 police officer may approve these measures.
 In connection with the investigation of the 19860rhurder of
 Prime Minister Olof Palme, Swedish security police were
 charged with using illegal wiretaps against some Kurdish
 suspects. The high police officials involved are standing
 trial for this offense. Much of the testimony is being taken
 in closed session for national security.reasons.
 
 
 1276
 SWEDEN
 Debate continues about whether any wiretapping should be
 allowed. The number of legal wiretaps has averaged about 200
 cases per year since 1986. There is no indication that
 telephone monitoring is done arbitrarily.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Newspapers and periodicals
 are for the most part privately owned. Government subsidies
 to daily, low-circulation newspapers, regardless of political
 affiliation, assure the expression of differing opinions.
 Broadcasting in Sweden operates under a state concession,
 which gives the Swedish broadcasting company and its
 independent subsidiaries (National Radio, TV-I, TV-2, and
 Educational Radio) a monopoly over terrestrial broadcasting.
 The two public television channels are meeting increasing
 competition from a variety of commercial satellite television
 channels available via satellite dish or cable.
 Publicationg containing sensitive national security
 information, as well as film and television programs
 portraying excessive violence, are subj-ect to censorship.
 Commercial video tapes are also screened and censored or
 banned if they contain scenes of unacceptable violence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require police permits, which are routinely
 approved.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach their
 children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriatipn
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated,-though long waits
 and denial of asylum requests from applicants not-meeting
 internationally agreed criteria have-become common.
 Travel restrictions that had been imposed, on certain Kurds,
 because of their links to terrorist organizations, have been
 lifted by the Government for all but one of the Kurds involved.
 Those Kurds released from "commune arrest" in 1990 are now
 free to move about in Sweden, but they still must report to
 the police on a regular basis. The last Kurd under travel
 restrictions is currently in prison for having committed
 ordinary crimes. All the Kurds involved had been found to be
 deportable. However, it had been legally impossible to deport
 them because they faced possible execution or other severe
 penalties in their home countries. Thus, by administrative
 order in compliance with Swedish law, the Government had
 restricted the Kurds' movement to their respective communities
 of residence.
 
 
 1277
 
 SWEDEN
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. The 349 seats in the unicameral Parliament are
 divided proportionally among the 6 political parties currently
 represented. A party must win a minimum of 4 percent of the
 votes to enter Parliament. There is universal suffrage above
 the age of 18. Approximately 85 percent of eligible voters
 participated in. the 1988 election. Voting takes place by
 secret ballot. Aliens who have been legal residents for at
 least 3 years have the right to vote and run, for office in
 municipal elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regardinq International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, and they are effective- both in
 making citizens aware of their rights and publicizing and
 correctingabuse of state authority. Active private
 organizations monitor issues such as the impact on individuals
 of comprehensive social legislation an' the condition of the
 native Lapp population. Government agencies are in close
 contact with a variety of local and international groups
 working in Sweden and abroad to improve human rights
 observance. State-supported Stockholm University offers
 instruction in making human-rights complaints to bodies such
 as the European Commission of Humarr Rights.
 In 1990 Sweden was criticized by the European Commission of
 Human Rights in two cases for violations of Chapter 6 of the.
 European Convention on Human Rights, which covers the right to
 impartial and public trial. Both catses involved pre-19&8
 complaints about difficulties in contesting local authorities'
 administrative decisions. A law- passed in 19a8 gave persons
 increased rights to appeal decisions by government agencies.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race., Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status-
 Basic human- needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits-to families, pensions, and
 disability and unemployment insurance. The Government runs
 programs to help immigrants- adjust to Swedish life and culture
 (including- 240 hours of paid language instruction-.
 Two of Sweden's 284 municipalities have refused to permit
 refugees to settle in them. Both the Government and the-
 political parties have tried to persuade these communities to
 change their attitude. In a local referendum in connection
 with the 1988 elections, one municipality voted by a majority
 of 70 percent to exclude refugees. The mayor of that town was
 expelled from his party, the Center Party. While there were
 some expressions of hostile sentiments toward immigrants in
 1990, polls showed that a majority of Swedes have a positive
 attitude toward refugees.
 Certain refugee groups, particularly from the Middle East,
 continue to complain that their relatives have difficulties in
 obtaining nonimmigrant visas to Sweden. Sweden has been
 restrictive in allowing such visits since many of the visitors
 
 
 1278
 SWEDEN
 file for asylum upon arrival to Sweden. Jewish organizations
 have protested that Sweden is too restrictive in allowing
 Soviet Jews to settle in Sweden. Large groups of Romanian
 refugees were turned back during 1990.
 The Government supports groups working against racism.
 Swedish schools seek to provide education and information
 designed to counter racist tendencies. In 1986 the Government
 appointed a special ombudsman to deal with complaints of
 racism and discrimination; as a result, the number of civil
 and criminal complaints increased. The Government continues
 to study the February 1989- report by a government commission,
 which recommended that Sweden adopt more forceful legislation
 against racism.
 Many immigrants have complained that they have difficulties in
 finding professional employment. The Government has tried to
 find ways to evaluate and translate diplomas from foreign
 countries to facilitate the hiring of foreign nationals with
 documented professional skills.
 A 1988 law aims at promoting equality, between the- sexes in
 five general areas: in the labor market, in education, in
 families, in the economy, and in society. Institutionalized
 efforts to advance equality between the sexes continue.
 Employers are required to base hiring decisions on merit and
 to pursue actively the goal of equality. A public ombudsman,
 called the Equality Ombudsman, investigates complaints of sex
 discrimination in the labor market. A report by the Equality
 Ombudsman, published- in 1990, showed that women are still
 underrepresented in executive positions. According to the
 report, this is particularly true in private business, with
 very few women sitting on boards of directors or holding top
 managerial jobs.
 Abuse against women is a matter that has received a great deal
 of attention by the Government. Studies have been conducted
 to survey the Cause and pattern of rapes and other forms of
 abuse. An increase in street rapes in 19'88 was the reason for
 one of the studies, but-the rape rate did not decrease in
 199-0. There continued to be a disproportionate number of
 foreign nationals among convicted rapists. Researchers,
 however, believe that one cause for this may be that rapes
 perpetrated by foreign nationals are reported more frequently
 than those committed by Swedes.
 In recent years, many old laws have been amended and new laws
 added to protect abused women from having their abusers find
 out their whereabouts or contact them. In a few cases, women
 have been helped to obtain new identities and homes. Both
 national and local governments support voluntary groups that
 provide shelter and help to abused women. The Government
 continues to study whether the increase in reported rapes and
 abuse of women is an actual increase or a reflection of
 improved awareness by women of their rights. Men who rape or
 abuse women are provided rehabilitative treatment.
 Section 6 Workers Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. A
 large majority of the working population, including career
 military personnel, police officers, and civilian government
 officials, belong to trade unions. Unions conduct their
 
 
 1279
 SWEDEN
 activities with complete independence from the Government, and
 many freely affiliate with international organizations.
 Several strikes took place in 1990, some of them wildcat
 strikes. Most were in the private sector, protesting slow
 wage negotiations or the low level of wage increases.
 Compromises on wage increases were usually quickly reached.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers are free to organize and bargain collectively.
 Collective bargaihing is carried out in the form of national
 framework agreements between central organizations of workers'
 and employers, followed up by industry and plant-level
 agreements on details. The Swedish Employers' Confederation
 pulled out of the 1990-centralized wage negotiations, leading
 to an increased focus on collective bargaining at the
 enterprise level.
 Swedish law fully protects workers from antiunion
 discrimination and provides sophisticated and effective
 mechanisms for resolving disputes and complaints. There are
 no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited in law and does not
 exist in Sweden.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children.
 Compulsory education ends at age 16, and full-time employment
 is normally permitted at that age under the supervision of
 local municipal or community authorities. Young people under
 18 years of age may work only during daytime and under a
 foreman's supervision. During the summer and in vacation
 periods, children as young as 13- years of age may be hired for
 part-time work or light "summer j-obs" for periods of 5 days or
 less, although it is- rare for young- people under k5 years of
 age to find & fob except with family members. Spot checks
 carried out during the summer by the Confederation of Eabor
 Unions CLO) showed that there were a few cases where young
 persons worked alone or late at night. In other cases,
 employers paid unacceptably low wages or lacked proper
 insurance coverage. Matters of this nature are mostly solved
 through direct mediation with the union. If a settlement is
 not reached, a local court or the labor court can try the
 case. Violations are few, and enforcement is considered good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no minimum wage law. Wages are set by collective
 bargaining contracts, which typically have been observed even
 at nonunion establishments. Even the lowest paid workers,
 earning between $9-10 per hour, are able to maintain a decent
 standard of living. A designated and trained trade union
 steward monitors observance of the regulations governing
 working conditions. '
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours, or less. The amount
 of permissible overtime is also regulated, as are rest
 periods. Sweden has a vacation law which guarantees all
 employees a minimum of 5 weeks' paid annual leave. A gradual
 increase to 6 weeks' annual leave will take effect during the
 1990's., starting with 2 extra days in 1991.
 
 
 1280
 SWEDEN
 Occupational health and safety legislation is closely observed.
 Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-threatening
 activity immediately and call for a labor inspector. The
 Swedish courts have upheld this authority. The Swedish
 authorities compiled a list of the 400,000 most dangerous jobs
 that cause long-term health problems and started a program in
 the fall of 1990 to improve the situation for those employees.
 A fund of about $3 billion was created to finance improvement
 measures.
 
 
 1281
