 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is Chief of
 State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet,
 which is formed through direct parliamentary elections every
 3 years and consists of a Prime Minister (head of government)
 and some 20 Ministers. The 349 seats in the unicameral
 Parliament are divided proportionally among the 5 political
 parties currently represented. The Social Democratic Party,
 Sweden's largest, returned to power in the September 1982
 elections after 6 years in opposition.
 Sweden is an advanced, industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned.
 Fundamental political freedoms and human rights are guaranteed
 by the Constitution and protected by the Government. Respect
 for human rights, at home and abroad, is a basic social value
 that underlies Sweden's active support of international
 efforts to enhance human rights observance.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament with full autonomy, investigate private complaints
 of alleged abuse of authority by officials and stipulate
 corrective action, if required.
 The human rights situation remained commendably stable in
 1984. Active efforts to counter any manifestation of
 anti-immigrant sentiment continue. There have been occasional
 accusations of police brutality. Complaints by individuals
 against Sweden to the European Commission on Human Rights have
 increased, perhaps encouraged by the European Court's first
 conviction of Sweden in 1982 on a property case.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. During 1984, a Kurdish
 immigrant in Sweden was killed by a Kurdish assassin believed
 sent to Sweden for that purpose. Swedish authorities regard
 this as a serious development and have arrested and sought to
 arrest those connected with the alleged terrorist
 organization. The Government minimizes the potential for
 terrorism through (A) cooperation with Interpol, (B) refusal
 of visas to known terrorists or persons with terrorist
 connections, (C) border control by immigration and customs
 authorities, and (D) surveillance of foreign persons who
 appear to be spying on refugee groups in the country.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abduction, secret arrests, or
 clandestine detention by Swedish authorities.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment.
 Legal prohibition of these abuses is respected by Swedish
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 70
 
 
 1096
 SWEDEN
 authorities. Occasional accusations against individual
 policemen of excessive use of force in connection with arrests
 are carefully investigated and have not produced evidence of a
 systematic problem.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are rigorously
 observed. Persons disturbing the public order or considered
 dangerous may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal
 suspects may be held no longer than 12 hours without formal
 charges. If a person files for bankruptcy and refuses to
 cooperate with the official investigation, a court can order
 detention for up to 3 months (with judicial review every 2
 weeks). Arrest is open and by warrant. Bail does not exist,
 but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to destroy
 evidence are released to await trial. By law, Swedish
 citizens cannot be expelled from the country. Convicted
 foreign criminals are often expelled at the conclusion of
 their prison terms, unless they risk execution or other severe
 punishment at home.
 In October 1984, the European Court judged that the length of
 time which can elapse between arrest and initial court
 appearance violated the European Convention on Human Rights.
 The case in question concerned an individual held 15 days
 before receiving a court hearing. The Swedish Government,
 expecting the decision, has directed the government commission
 appointed to study this issue to develop a model law which
 will reflect the European Convention's demand that a maximum
 of 5 days elapse from time of arrest to initial court
 hearing. The commission's recommendation is expected in 1985.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law.   The judiciary functions freely and
 independently, and every citizen has the right to effective
 counsel. There are no military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is guaranteed by law. During
 1984, citizen complaints prompted a government ombudsman to
 put a stop to aerial photography and surveillance by tax
 authorities trying to detect undeclared assets. Home searches
 are limited to investigations of crimes punishable 1y at least
 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape, arson,
 sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Wiretapping is
 permitted only in cases involving narcotics or military
 security. Searches and wiretaps normally require court
 approval. When the time factor is critical, or when life is
 believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police officer
 can approve these measures. Warrants are granted only after
 deliberation and only on the basis of well-founded suspicion.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, assure
 the airing of differing opinions. Publication of national
 
 
 1097
 SWEDEN
 security information and excessive violence in films and
 television are subject to censorship. Radio and television
 broadcasting are a government monopoly, while newspapers and
 periodicals are for the most part privately owned and
 published.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without undue restraint.
 Public demonstrations require a police permit, for which
 applications are routinely approved. Practical concerns
 occasionally require restrictions on time and place of such
 gatherings. Workers are free to organize and have the right
 to strike. A large majority of the working population belongs
 to trade unions, including career military personnel and
 civilian government officials. Unions and trade associations
 conduct their activities with complete independence from the
 Government and pursue intensive international contacts.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Marginal net immigration continues. Sweden maintains a quota
 for admission of refugees; displaced persons and others
 seeking political asylum are generously treated irrespective
 of quotas. Immigration to Sweden consists of roughly equal
 numbers of Nordics and non-Nordics. There is free immigration
 for the former. Family reunification accounts for the
 majority of non-Nordic arrivals.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of 4
 percent of the votes cast. The Social Democratic Party
 governed Sweden alone or in coalition from 1932 to 1976. Four
 non-Socialist governments held power from 1976 until the
 Social Democrats' electoral win in 1982. There is universal
 suffrage over age 18. Although voting is not compulsory, over
 90 percent of eligible voters usually participate in national
 elections. Aliens who have been legal residents for at least
 3 years have the right to vote and run for office in municipal
 elections. There has been periodic public discussion about
 extending this right to national elections.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-government investigation of Alleged violations
 of Human Rights
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuse of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 
 
 1098
 SWEDEN
 legislation and the condition of the native Lapp population.
 Sweden works energetically within the United Nations and other
 international organizations to promote observance of human
 rights. Government agencies are in close contact with Amnesty
 International, the Red Cross, church organizations, and a
 variety of other private groups working in Sweden and abroad
 for the same purposes. State-supported Stockholm University
 offers instruction in making human rights complaints to bodies
 such as the European Commission on Human Rights.
 Amnesty International in 1984 did not report on Sweden;
 Freedom House called Sweden 'free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sweden's per capital gross national product was $14,039 in
 1983. Life expectancy at birth is 76.9 years, and the infant
 mortality rate is 6.94 per 1,000 live births. Virtually the
 entire population is schooled and literate, with no
 discrepancy between males and females. Basic human needs for
 the entire population are thoroughly met without
 discrimination. The state provides social welfare and medical
 services, benefits to families, pensions, and disability and
 unemployment insurance. The taxation system is designed to
 even the distribution of wealth among all segments of the
 population. Unemployment (over 3 percent of the work force)
 is at a record high and constitutes a key governmental concern.
 Institutionalized efforts continue to extend equality between
 the sexes through equal employment opportunity, legal
 protection of the right to equal pay for equal work, and
 public education to break down sexual stereotypes. A public
 ombudsman, called the Equality Ombudsman, investigates
 complaints of sex discrimination in the labor market, because
 employers are required to base hiring decisions on merit and
 to pursue actively the goal of equality.
 Government practice and popular attitudes encourage a wide
 variety of cultural expression, both from native Swedes and
 immigrants. The latter enjoy the same welfare benefits and
 egal protection as citizens. The Swedish Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction) and
 encourages the press to promote acceptance of immigrants by
 the Swedish public at large.
 
 
 1099
