 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty, parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, exercises
 executive authority. The judiciary is independent of the Government.
 The Government effectively controls the police, all security organizations, and the
 armed forces.
 Sweden has an advanced industrial economy, mainly market-based, and a high
 standard of living, with extensive social services.
 Ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full autonomy, investigate the
 few complaints of alleged abuses by authorities, and prescribe corrective action if
 required. The human rights situation has continued to be favorable.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. isappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. There
 have been occasional accusations of excessive use of force by police in arrests, but
 thorough investigations have not produced evidence of a systematic problem. Typi-
 cally, police officers found guilty of abuse have been suspended or otherwise dis-
 ciplined. During 1994 a few police trainees were found unsuitable for the work and
 were dismissed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Government carefully observes the
 laws protecting persons arrested or detained.
 Arrests are public and by warrant. The police must lodge charges within 6 hours
 against persons detained for disturbing the public order or considered dangerous,
 and within 12 hours against those detained on other grounds. The law requires ar-
 raignment within 48 h~ours of arrest. The time between arrest and the first court
 hearing ma be extended to 96 hours for detainees considered dangerous, likely to
 destroy evidence, or likely to flee, but this occurs very rarely. Other than such sus-
 pects, detainees are routinely released pending trial, although bail as such does not
 exist. If a person files for bnruptcy and refusea to cooperate with the official in-
 
 
 976
 vestigation, a court may order detention for up to 3 months, with judicial review
 every 2 weeks.
 The Government does not impose exile.
 Convicted foreign criminals are often deported at the conclusion of their prison
 terms, unless they risk execution or other severe punishment in their home country.
 ,. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is free of governmental interference.
 'The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public trial by a court of
 law, and the Government respects this provision. The accused have the right to coin-
 /- petent counsel, but the Government provides public defenders to indigents only in
 cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of six months or more.
 Convicted persons have the right of appeal in most instances.
 There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 limits home searches to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' im-
 prisnment, such as murder, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, or trea-
 son. The authorities respect this provision. Normally, police must obtain court ap-
 proval for a search or wiretap; however, a senior police officer may approve a search
 if time is a critical factor or there appears to be a threat to life. A parliamentary
 committee each year reviews all monitoring of telephones, faxes, or computers.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press, and the Government respects these provisions. Most newspapers and
 periodicals are privately owned. The Government subsidizes daily newspapers, re-
 gardless of political affiliation. Broadcasters operate under a state concession. Until
 recently the State had a monopoly over ground-based broadcasting, but there are
 now a variety of commercial television channels (a ground-based one and several via
 satellite or cable) and several commercial radio stations.
 The Government may censor publications containing national security informa-
 tion. A quasi-governmental body excises graphic violence from films, television pro-
 grams, and videos.
 Academic freedom is fully respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government does not restrict
 this. A police permit is required for public demonstrations, but the authorities rou-
 tinely grant this, with rare exceptions to prevent clashes between adversarial
 groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government does not hamper the teaching or practice of any faith. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but the Government routinely grants
 any request by a taxpayer for exemption from the Church Tax.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for free movement within, from, and back to the coun-
 try, and the Government respects these rights.
 Foreigners with suspected links to terrorist organizations may be required to re-
 port regularly to police authorities, but can travel freely; each such case must be
 reviewed by the courts at least every 3 years.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees, and does not
 expel those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 In 1993 the Government denied asylum to a Peruvian, and put her on an aircraft
 headed for Peru even though, according to Amnesty International (Al), she faced se-
 vere persecution there; the aircraft made a scheduled stop in the Netherlands, and
 she obtained asylum there. AI criticized the Swedish Government for this case in
 its report covering 1993.
 The Government has continued to tighten its requirements for asylum seekers to
 prove reasonable fear of persecution in their homeland, although these requirements
 remain liberal. One well-known case involves a soldier from the former Yugoslavia
 who said he deserted rather than carry out orders to commit atrocities; after exten-
 sive publicity, the Government delayed his deportation for further examination.
 The Government delayed deportation of a great many other illegal immigrants,
 on humanitarian grounds in most cases. In April it granted a one-time amnesty cov-
 ering some 22,000 illegal immigrants from Bosnia who had children of minor age
 and who had been in Sweden since January 1993.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides ways and means for citizens to change the Government.
 Elections to the 349-member unicameral Parliament are held every 4 years. Suf-
 fra e is universal for citizens at least 18 years old, and balloting is secret.
 Women participate actively in the political process and government. They account
 for 41 percent of the members of Par ament and half of the Cabinet. The governing
 Social 'Democratic Party pledged to place women in half of all political appoint-
 ments, and by year's end had largely done so.
 Section 4. Government Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private organizations actively monitor issues such as the impact of social
 legislation and the condition of the indigenous Sami population. Official ombudsmen
 publicize abuses of state authority, and initiate actions to rectify them. Government
 agencies are in close contact with a variety of local and international groups work-
 ing in Sweden and abroad to improve human rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and the Government
 respects this provision.
 Women.-The law requires employers to treat men and women alike in hiring,
 promotion, and pay. A public official the Equality Ombudsman, investigates com-
 plaints of sex discrimination in the labor market; in July she was granted authority
 to visit all places of work to check on implementation of equality measures. Women
 may also pursue complaints through the courts. A third option, and by far the one
 most chosen, is to submit the complaint to the labor union for mediation with the
 employer. A  oat all gains in women's rights took place through consensus and
 labor negotiations, with relatively little resort to legislation.
 Despite  the   available  remedies,  surveys  show   that  women    remain
 underrepresented in higher-paying jobs, their salaries averaging only 72 percent of
 men's (a decrease from a high near 80 percent only a decade ago). Part of this de-
 crease reflects cuts in social-sector jobs, where women are overrepresented. Also,
 under the tight economic conditions in recent years, unions have been less willing
 to pursue claims of pay discrimination. Fewer than a dozen women in 1994 chose
 to seek redress through the courts when their unions refused to take up their com-
 plaints. Women submit hundreds of complaints to the Ombudsman each year (260
 in 1992-latest data), but almost all of these complaints are either resolved or
 dropped before the Ombudsman takes action.
 The law prohibits sexual harassment, and in this regard, too, women may take
 complaints to the Equality Ombudsman, the courts, or their unions.
 Nearly 18,000 cases of assault against women over age 15 were reported to police
 in 1993 (latest data), a rise of 2,000 from 1992. Most involved spousal abuse, and
 in some three-quarters of all cases the perpetrator was an acquaintance of the vic-
 tim. Abuse of women occurs especially often within the immigrant community. In
 one controversial case, in which a Palestinian Christian immigrant killed his daugh-
 ter for marrying a Moslem, the court convicted him of manslaughter rather than
 murder because of his cultural background; but a higher court overturned the deci-
 sion, convicting the father of murder and lengthening his sentence accordingly.
 The law provides for measures to protect abused women from having their abus-
 ers discover their whereabouts or contact them. In some cases the authorities have
 helped women obtain new identities and homes. In 1994 the Government provided
 electronic alarms or bodyguards for women in extreme danger of assault. Both the
 national and local governments support voluntary groups that provide shelter and
 other assistance to abused women. The authorities strive to apprehend and pros-
 ecute abusers. Typically, the sentence for abuse is a prison term or psychiatric treat-
 ment.
 The number of reported rapes, some 1,400 yearly, has remained at approximately
 the same level since 1989. There is no legal differentiation between spousal and
 nonspousalrape.
 Children.-Although indications are that child abuse is not common, the public
 and the authorities are concerned by data indicating it has been on the rise. The
 number of reports of abuse of children under the age of 15 years rose significantly
 in 1993 (latest data), to 3,300 from 2,700 in 1992. To some extent this probably re-
 flects an increased willingness to report abuse, but child advocates fear it largely
 reflects an actual rise due to the strains imposed on families by the worsening eco-
 nomic situation.
 
 
 978
 The law prohibits parents or other caretakers from abusing children mentally or
 physicaly in any way. Parents, teachers, and other adults are subject to prosecution
 if     p ysically punish a child in any way, including slapping or spanking. Chil-
 dren have the right to report such abuses to the police.The authorities respect these
 laws, and have prosecuted some parents for abuses. The usual sentence is a fine
 combined with counseling and monitoring by social workers; but if the situation
 warrants, children may be removed from the home and placed in foster care. Foster
 children are virtually never allowed to be adopted, even in cases where the parents
 are seen as unfit or seek no contact with the child; critics charge that this policy
 places the rights of biological parents over the needs of children for care by caring
 families.
 The Government allocates funds to private organizations concerned with chil-
 dren's rights. In 1993 it appointed an Ombudsman for Children. During her first
 year she focused mainly on the Government's adherence to international agree-
 ments, and found only one case meriting criticism, that of a 17-year-old who was
 given an 18-month prison term for robbery.
 Indigenous Peoples.--Some 17,000 Samis (Lapps) are among Sweden's 8.5 million
 inhabitants. In 1994 a Sami parliamentary body, the Sametinget, was formed, it is
 to convene four times a year, and is to serve as a consultative body to the Govern-
 ment.
 Also in 1994, Samis staged protest demonstrations against a 1993 law permitting
 others to hunt on designated reindeer pastures, and demonstrations against a 1994
 law permitting others to fish in lakes previously reserved for Samis.
 Samis also complain that in their localities they often encounter discrimination
 against them in housing and employment, and that the Government is not doing
 enough to combat this.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There continued to be scattered acts against
 minorities, some involving violence. Most involved clashes between ethnic Swedish
 and non-Swedish youths. At least a dozen immigrants were physically assaulted,
 and several businesses and homes were burned or otherwise damaged. The Govern-
 ment vigorously investigated and prosecuted such crimes, although in many clashes
 between youth gangs, both sides seem to have been at fault. Most cases resulted
 in conviction and prison terms, unless the offender was a minor.
 In 1993 the Government shifted responsibility for processing refugees to the local
 level, requiring every municipality to accept a proportional number of refugees and
 provide or their needs. A few municipalities continued to refuse to do so, on the
 grounds that they lack adequate resources. By year's end their resistance had not
 yet been put to a test.
 People With Disabilities.-Regulations for new buildings require that they be fully
 accessible to disabled persons. However, there is no such requirement for existing
 public buildings, and many are not accessible to unaided disabled persons. The law
 prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities. The Government provides
 disabled persons with assistance aimed at allowing them to live as normal a life as
 possible, preferably outside an institutional setting. This includes educational assist-
 ance, such as provision of personal tutors or aides, at all stages from pre-kinder-
 garten day care to university studies; assistance within the workplace, such as pro-
 vision of a personal aide or improvement of the workplace's accessibility to wheel-
 chairs; and provision of services such as home care or group living.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides for freedom of workers to associate
 and to strike. The Government respects these provisions. Some 87 percent of the
 work force belong to trade unions, including career military personnel, police offi-
 cers, and civilian government officials. Unions are independent of the Government
 and political parties, although the largest federation of unions has been allied for
 many years with the largest political party.
 Laws forbid retribution against legal strikers. Only a few minor strikes took place
 in 1994, and most of them were settled quickly.
 Unions freely affiliate internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and to bargain collectively.
 Labor and mangement, each represented by a central organization, periodically
 negotiate framework agreements which are followed by industry- and factory-level
 agreements on details.
 The law fully protects workers from antiunion discrimination and provides effec-
 tive mechanisms for resolving complaints. Almost all complaints are settled infor-
 mally. If informal discussions fail, the issue goes to a labor court, whose ruling on
 
 
 it sets a precedent to be followed by other courts. Cases of an employer firing an
 employee for union activities are very rare; in 1994 there were none.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or cor-
 pulsory labor, and the authorities effectively enforce this ban.
 d.Minimum Age of Employment of Children.-Compulsory 9-year education ends
 at age 16, and fall-time employment is normally permitted at that age under super-
 vision of local authorities. Employees under age 18 may work only during daytime
 and under a foreman's supervision. During summers and other vacation periods,
 children as young as 13 may be hired for part-time or light work, with no more than
 a 5-day workweek. Police and public prosecutors effectively enforce the restrictions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which usually are observed also
 by nonunion establishments. Even the lowest-paid workers are able to maintain a
 decent standard of living for themselves and their families because substantial as-
 sistance is available from social welfare entitlements.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours or less. Overtime and rest periods are regu-
 lated partly by law and partly by collective bargaining agreements. The law stipu-
 lates that for workers not covered by a labor agreement, the limit for overtime is
 200 hours a year, although exceptions may be granted for key employees; some col-
 lective bargaining agreements put the limit at 150 hours. The law requires a rest
 period after 5 hours of work, but does not stipulate a minimum duration; in practice
 it is usually at least 30 minutes. The law also calls for all employees to have a mini-
 mum of 5 weeks of paid annual leave; many labor contracts provide more.
 Occupational health and safety rules are set by a government-appointed board
 and monitored by trained union stewards, safety ombudsmen, and, occasionally, gov-
 ernment inspectors. The ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-threatening ac-
 tivity immediately and to call in a labor inspector.
