 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is Chief of
 State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet,
 which is formed through direct parliamentary elections every
 3 years and consists of a Prime Minister (head of government)
 and some 20 ministers. The 349 seats in the unicameral
 parliament are divided proportionally among the 5 political
 parties currently represented. The Social Democratic Party,
 Sweden's largest, was returned to power in the September 1985
 elections, though with a reduced parliamentary plurality.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament and possessing full autonomy, investigate private
 complaints of alleged abuse of authority by officials and
 stipulate corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that
 underlies Sweden's active support of international efforts to
 improve human rights observance. The human rights situation
 was largely unchanged in 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. The murder of Prime
 Minister Olof Palme has not been resolved, however, and the
 motive for his assassination is still unknown. During 1986
 several Kurds residing in Sweden were murdered. The only case
 that has been solved revealed that the murder was an act of
 political revenge arranged by the Kurdish Communist Party.
 The Government minimizes the potential for terrorism through
 cooperation with Interpol, refusal of visas to known
 terrorists or persons with terrorist connections, border
 control by immigration and customs authorities, and
 surveillance of foreign persons who appear to be spying on
 refugee groups in the country.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, or clandestine detention by Swedish
 authorities does not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment.
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and such prohibitions are
 respected by the authorities. Occasional accusations made
 against individual policemen for alleged excessive use of
 force in connection with arrests are carefully investigated
 and have not produced evidence of a systematic problem.
 Prison conditions are generally good.
 
 
 1031
 SWEDEN
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous
 may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may
 be held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court can order detention for up to
 3 months (with judicial review every 2 weeks). Arrest is open
 and by warrant. Bail does not exist, but suspects not
 considered dangerous or likely to destroy evidence are
 released to await trial. By law, Swedish citizens cannot be
 expelled from the country. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often expelled at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless
 they risk execution or other severe punishment at home.
 Severe criticism was directed at policemen who detained a
 Chilean refugee for 3 days without providing him a
 Spanish-speaking interpreter. He had no means of communicating
 with the police due to the language barrier, and his two small
 children were left alone in the meantime. The Government is
 presently looking into how such incidents can be avoided in
 the future.
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist in Sweden.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to effective
 counsel, although budget cutbacks since 1983 have restricted
 the availability of public defenders to cases where the
 maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or
 more. There are no military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from such interference is guaranteed by law. Home
 searches are limited to investigations of crimes punishable by
 at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape,
 arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Wiretapping is
 permitted only in cases involving narcotics or national
 security. Searches and wiretaps normally require court
 approval. When the time factor is critical, or when life is
 believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police officer
 can approve these measures. Search warrants are granted only
 after deliberation and only on the basis of well-founded
 suspicion.
 Human rights groups in Sweden expressed concern about the
 increased number of wiretappings. In 1980 the number of
 persons subjected to wiretapping was 220, while in 1984 the
 figure increased to 414. As a result of the Palme murder,
 some observers are concerned that the figure will increase
 further. There is no indication, however, that telephone
 monitoring is done arbitrarily.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, assure
 
 
 1032
 SWEDEN
 the expression of differing opinions. Publication of
 sensitive national security information and excessive violence
 in films and television are subject to censorship. Commercial
 video tapes will soon be screened and stopped as well if they
 contain scenes of unacceptable violence. Radio and television
 broadcasting are a government monopoly, while newspapers and
 periodicals are for the most-part privately owned and
 published.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved.
 Workers are free to organize and have the right to strike.
 A large majority of the working population belongs to trade
 unions, including career military personnel and civilian
 government officials. Unions and trade associations conduct
 their activities with complete independence from the
 Government and pursue intensive international contacts.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths may
 be freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach their
 children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated, though long waits
 and denial of asylum requests from applicants not meeting
 internationally agreed criteria are becoming common.
 The arrival of more asylum-seekers, many undocumented, from
 the Middle East has posed a humanitarian problem. Long delays
 in deciding asylum cases and the return of asylum-seekers to
 Lebanon, Turkey, and Poland prompted protests from immigrants
 and human rights groups in Sweden during the year. Denials of
 entry at the border to alleged refugees have also aroused
 criticism by the same groups.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of 4
 percent of the votes cast. There is universal suffrage over
 age 18. Although voting is not compulsory, nearly 90 percent
 of eligible voters participated in the 1985 elections. Aliens
 who have been legal residents for at least 3 years have the
 right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 There has been periodic public discussion about extending this
 right to national elections.
 
 
 1033
 SWEDEN
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuse of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 legislation and the condition of the native Lapp population.
 Government agencies are in close contact with Amnesty
 International, the Red Cross, church organizations, and a
 variety of other private groups working in Sweden and abroad
 to improve human rights observance. State-supported Stockholm
 University offers instruction in making human rights complaints
 to bodies such as the European Commission on Human Rights.
 The United Nations Human Rights Commission in October 1985
 studied Sweden. The commission commented upon the fact that
 Sweden lacks forceful legislation against racism. Sweden's
 answer was that such legislation would not be compatible with
 its Constitution which guarantees full freedom of speech and
 the right to form organizations.
 In July 1986, the European Commission for Human Rights
 criticized Sweden for a violation of human rights. The case
 involved a man whose house had been taken 9 years before by
 the local authorities while waiting for the completion of the
 city plan. The following week the local authorities allowed
 the man to buy his house back.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1986 the Government appointed a special ombudsman to deal
 with complaints of racism or discrimination. Civil and
 criminal penalties for discrimination will be increased.
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and
 disability and unemployment insurance. The Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction).
 Institutionalized efforts continue to extend equality between
 the sexes through equal employment opportunity, legal
 protection of the right to equal pay for equal work, and
 public education to break down sexual stereotypes. A public
 ombudsman, called the equality ombudsman, investigates
 complaints of sex discrimination in the labor market.
 Employers are required to base hiring decisions on merit and
 to pursue actively the goal of equality.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Sweden rigorously upholds international standards regarding
 working conditions, child labor, and occupational safety and
 health. At each work site there is a designated ombudsman to
 monitor observance of these regulations. Full-time employment
 is permitted beginning at age 16, but those under age 18 may
 work only during daytime and under a foreman's supervision.
 Those age 13 can be hired for part-time work or light summer
 job work for periods of 5 days or less. There have been no
 reported abuses of these rules.
 
 
 1034
