 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is Chief of
 State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet,
 which is formed through direct parliamentary elections every 3
 years and consists of a Prime Minister (head of government)
 and some 20 ministers. The 349 seats in the unicameral
 Parliament are divided proportionally among the 5 political
 parties currently represented. The Social Democratic Party,
 Sweden's largest, was returned to power in the September 1985
 elections, though with a reduced parliamentary plurality.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament
 with full autonomy, investigate private complaints of alleged
 abuse of authority by officials and stipulate corrective
 action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that
 underlies Sweden's active support of international efforts to
 improve human rights observance. The human rights situation
 was largely unchanged in 1987, but some human rights
 organizations, such as the Swedish section of Amnesty
 International, have complained about human rights violations,
 particularly with respect to refugees seeking asylum who are
 denied entry at the border: The same organization also
 accused the Government of "passivity" and urged that the
 Government publish an annual review of human rights observance
 throughout the world. There have also been complaints about
 the treatment of individual Kurds in connection with the
 ongoing hunt for the murderer of former Prime Minister Olof
 Palme.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. The murder of Prime
 Minister Olof Palme in 1986 has still not been resolved,
 however, and the motive for his assassination is unknown. The
 Government minimizes the potential for terrorism through
 cooperation with Interpol, refusal of visas to known
 terrorists or persons with terrorist connections, border
 control by immigration and customs authorities, and
 surveillance of foreign persons who appear to be spying on
 refugee groups in the country.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, or clandestine detention by Swedish
 authorities does not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment.
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, a prohibition respected by
 Swedish authorities. Occasional accusations against individual
 
 
 1024
 SWEDEN
 policemen for excessive use of force in making arrests are
 .carefully investigated, and those investigations have not
 produced evidence of a systematic problem. During 1987 there
 were two cases when detained persons died in a police cell.
 So far, however, no proof has been presented that the deaths
 were caused by excessive use of force. Prison conditions are
 generally good.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous
 may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may
 be held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 pers6n files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court can'order detention for up to
 3 months (with judicial review every 2 weeks). Arrest is open
 and by warrant. Legislation is under way to shorten the time
 between arrest and arraignment before a magistrate which
 presently is set at 5 days but occasionally has taken longer,
 particularly during weekends and holidays. The new
 legislation will require weekend and holiday duty for courts.
 Bail does not exist, but Swedish suspects not considered
 dangerous or likely to destroy evidence are released to await
 trial. Foreigners are usually not released before trial nor
 granted weekend furloughs from jail, as are many Swedish
 offenders; the rationale is that they might flee the country.
 Convicted foreign criminals are often expelled at the
 conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution
 or other severe punishment at home. By law, Swedish citizens
 cannot be expelled from the country.
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist in Sweden.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to effective counsel,
 although budget cutbacks since 1983 have restricted the
 availability of public defenders to cases where the maximum
 penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or more. The
 Swedish judiciary system was criticized abroad in 1987,
 particularly in Great Britain. A British officer was found
 guilty of having smuggled 110 pounds of hashish into Sweden
 and was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment. The complaint
 from Britain was that Swedish courts are permitted to accept
 hearsay testimony from witnesses. There are no military
 courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is guaranteed by law. Home
 searches are limited to investigations of crimes punishable by
 at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape,
 arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. There are no
 undue restrictions on marriage or child rearing in Sweden.
 Wiretaps are permitted only in cases involving narcotics or
 national security. Searches and wiretaps normally require
 court approval. When time is critical, or when life is
 believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police officer
 can approve these measures. Attempts to limit such police
 
 
 1025
 SWEDEN
 authority are under way. Search warrants are granted only
 after deliberation and only on the basis of well-founded
 suspicion.
 Human rights groups in Sweden have expressed concern about the
 increased number of wiretaps. Although in 1980 the number of
 persons subjected to wiretaps was 220, in 1984 the figure had
 increased to 414. There is no indication, however, that
 telephone monitoring is done arbitrarily. As a result of the
 Palme murder investigation, a few instances have been reported
 of police officers on their own initiative bugging the homes
 of suspects, even though this is against Swedish law.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, assure
 the expression of differing opinions. Publication of
 sensitive national security information and excessive violence
 in films and television are subject to censorship. Commercial
 video tapes will soon be screened and censored as well if they
 contain scenes of unacceptable violence. Radio and television
 broadcasting is a government monopoly, while newspapers and
 periodicals are for the most part privately owned and
 published.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved.
 Workers are free to organize and have the right to strike. A
 large majority of the working population belongs to a trade
 union, including career military personnel and civilian
 government officials. Unions and trade associations conduct
 their activities with complete independence from the
 Government and pursue international contacts intensively.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach religious
 practices of their choice to their children.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated, though long waits
 and denial of asylum requests from applicants not meeting
 internationally agreed criteria are becoming common.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of 4
 percent of the votes cast. There is universal suffrage over
 
 
 1026
 SWEDEN
 age 18. Although voting is not compulsory, nearly 90 percent
 of eligible voters participated in the 1985 elections. Aliens
 who have been legal residents for at least 3 years have the
 right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 There has been periodic public discussion about extending this
 right to national elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuse of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 legislation and the condition of the Lapp population.
 Government agencies are in close contact with Amnesty
 International, the Red Cross, church organizations, and a
 variety of other private groups working in Sweden and abroad
 to improve human rights observance. State-supported Stockholm
 University offers instruction in making human rights complaints
 to bodies such as the European Commission on Human Rights.
 The United Nations Human Rights Commission in October 1985
 reviewed Sweden's report on compliance with the International
 Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Committee
 commented that Sweden lacks forceful legislation against
 racism, Sweden responded that such legislation would not be
 compatible with the Swedish Constitution which guarantees full
 freedom of speech and the right to form organizations.
 However, a government commission was established to
 investigate ways of curbing racist groups, such as the tiny,
 ultranationalist Sweden Party.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In 1986 the Government appointed a special ombudsman to deal
 with complaints of racism or discrimination. By 1989 the
 discrimination ombudsman will be required to submit a report
 intended to form the basis for proposed legislation leading to
 more effective prosecution and increased penalties for various
 expressions of racism or discrimination. The ombudsman's
 office is looking into issues such as allegations of
 discrimination against immigrants in employment and housing.
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and
 disability an~ unemployment insurance. The Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction).
 Six of Sweden's 284 municipalities have voted to refuse
 settlement to refugees. Both the Government and the political
 parties'are trying to persuade them to change their attitude.
 Institutionalized efforts continue to extend equality between
 the sexes through equal employment opportunity, legal
 protection of the right to equal pay for equal work, and
 public education to break down sexual stereotypes. A public
 ombudsman, called the equality ombudsman, investigates
 complaints of sex discrimination in the labor market.
 Employers are required to base hiring decisions on-merit and
 to pursue actively the goal of equality.
 
 
 1027
 SWEDEN
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Sweden rigorously upholds international standards regarding
 working conditions, child labor, and occupational safety and
 health. At each work site there is a designated ombudsman to
 monitor observance of these regulations. Full-time employment
 is permitted beginning at age 16, but those under 18 may work
 only during daytime and under a foreman's supervision.
 Thirteen-year olds can be hired for part-time work or light
 "summer job" work for periods of 5 days or less. There have
 been no reported abuses of these rules.
 
 
 1028
