 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is Chief of
 State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet,
 which is formed through direct parliamentary elections every
 3 years and consists of a Prime Minister (head of government)
 and some 20 ministers. The 349 seats in the unicameral
 Parliament are divided proportionally among the 5 political
 parties currently represented. The Social Democratic Party,
 Sweden's largest, returned to power in the September 1985
 elections, though with a reduced parliamentary plurality.
 Fundamental political freedoms and human rights are guaranteed
 by the Constitution and protected by the Government.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament with full autonomy, investigate private complaints
 of alleged abuse of authority by officials and stipulate
 corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights, at home and abroad, is a basic
 social value that underlies Sweden's active support of
 international efforts to enhance human rights observance. The
 human rights situation remained stable in 1985. The arrival
 of more asylum-seekers, many undocumented, from the Middle
 East has posed a humanitarian problem. Sweden observes
 international conventions in granting asylum and refugee
 status, but long delays in deciding asylum cases and the
 return of asylum-seekers to Lebanon and Turkey have prompted
 protests from immigrants and human rights groups in Sweden
 during 1985.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. Political killings carried
 out in Sweden during 1985 stemmed from non-Swedish conflicts.
 A former Iraqi diplomat who had requested asylum in Sweden was
 murdered. Swedish authorities have actively sought the
 suspects, but the case remains unsolved. The murder and
 attempted murder of two Kurdish political activists in Sweden
 in 1985 also appeared to have political motives. Swedish.
 authorities minimize the potential for terrorism through (A)
 cooperation with Interpol, (B) refusal of visas to known
 terrorists or persons with terrorist connections, (C) border
 control by immigration and customs authorities, and (D)
 surveillance of foreign persons who appear to be spying on
 refugee groups in the country.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of abduction, secret arrests, or
 clandestine detention by Swedish authorities.
 
 
 1097
 SWEDEN
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and such prohibitions are
 respected by Swedish authorities. Occasional accusations
 against individual policemen of excessive use of force in
 connection with arrests are carefully investigated and have
 not produced evidence of a systematic problem.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous
 may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may
 be held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court can order detention for up to
 3 months (with judicial review every 2 weeks). Arrest is open
 and by warrant. Bail does not exist, but suspects not
 considered dangerous or likely to destroy evidence are
 released to await trial. By law, Swedish citizens cannot be
 expelled. However, convicted criminals who are not Swedish
 citizens are often expelled at the conclusion of their prison
 terms, unless they risk execution or other severe punishment
 at home.
 In October 1984, the European Court decided in a case
 involving Sweden that the length of time which can elapse
 between arrest and initial court appearance violated the
 European Convention on Human Rights. This case concerned an
 individual held 15 days before receiving a court hearing. A
 government commission has recommended additional courts to
 assure hearings within 5 days and supervised release pending a
 hearing in certain cases. These recommendations are expected
 to be acted on during 1986.
 There is no forced labor in Sweden.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law.  The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to counsel, although
 budget cutbacks since 1983 have restricted the availability of
 public defenders to cases where the maximum penalty could be a
 prison sentence of 6 months or more. There are no military
 courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is guaranteed by law. During
 1984, citizen complaints prompted a government ombudsman to
 put a stop to aerial photography and surveillance by tax
 authorities trying to detect undeclared assets. Home searches
 are limited to investigations of crimes punishable by at least
 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape, arson,
 sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Wiretapping is
 permitted only in cases involving narcotics or military
 security. Searches and wiretaps normally require court
 approval. When the time factor is critical, or when life is
 believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police officer
 can approve these measures. Search warrants are granted only
 after deliberation and on the basis of well-founded suspicion.
 
 
 1098
 
 SWEDEN
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, assure
 the expression of differing opinions. Publication of
 sensitive national security information and excessive violence
 in films and television are subject to censorship. National
 state-owned radio and television channels are operated by an
 irdependent board and management and present news in a
 nonpartisan manner. Emerging cable television and local
 public-access radio stations provide further opportunities for
 the airing of diverse views. Newspapers and periodicals are
 for the most part privately owned and published. One man who
 distributed a pro-Nazi publication has been convicted under an
 existing statute proscribing "incitement against ethnic
 groups."
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without undue restraint.
 Public demonstrations require a police permit, for which
 applications are routinely approved. An eception in the
 interest of public order, however, was a neo-Nazi group which
 was denied a permit to demonstrate in the vicinity of the
 labor unions' traditional May Day marches in 1985, since the
 police feared there could be violent confrontations.
 Workers are free to organize and have the right to strike. A
 large majority of the working population belongs to trade
 unions, including career military personnel and civilian
 government officials. Unions and trade associations conduct
 their activities with complete independence from the
 Government and pursue extensive international contacts.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed.,
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated, though long waits
 and denial of asylum requests from applicants not meeting
 internationally agreed criteria are becoming common.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of
 4 percent of the votes cast. There is universal suffrage over
 age 18. Although voting is not compulsory, 90 percent of
 eligible voters participated in the 1985 elections. Aliens
 who have been legal residents for at least 3 years have the
 right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 
 
 1099
 SWEDEN
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuse of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 legislation and the condition of the native Sami (Lapp)
 population. Sweden works energetically within the United
 Nations and other international organizations to promote
 observance of human rights. Government agencies are in close
 contact with Amnesty International, the Red Cross, church
 organizations, and a variety of other private groups working
 in Sweden and abroad for the same purposes. State-supported
 Stockholm University offers instruction in making human rights
 complaints to bodies such as the European Commission on Human
 Rights.
 Amnesty International in 1985 did not report on Sweden;
 Freedom House called Sweden "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Sweden had a population of 8,348,000 in 1985, and its per
 capita gross national product was $12,470 in 1984. The
 taxation system is designed to even the distribution of wealth
 among all segments of the population. Open unemployment
 (under 3 percent of the workforce) has fallen over recent
 years, while "hidden" unemployment stays stubbornly high,
 making unemployment, despite the low open rate, a key
 government concern.
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The state provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and
 disability and unemployment insurance. Life expectancy at
 birth is 77.7 years, and the infant mortality rate is 6.6 per
 1,000 live births. Virtually the entire population is
 schooled and literate, with no educational discrimination
 between males and females.
 Sweden rigorously upholds international standards regarding
 working conditions, child labor, and occupational safety and
 health. At each work site there is a designated ombudsman to
 monitor observance of these regulations. Full-time employment
 is permitted beginning at age 16, and those under 18 may work
 only during daytime and under a foreman's supervision. Those
 between 13 and 16 years of age may be hired for part-time work
 or light summer jobs for periods of 5 days or less. There
 have been no reported abuses of these rules.
 Institutionalized efforts continue to extend equality between
 the sexes through equal employment opportunity, legal
 protection of the right to equal pay for equal work, and
 public education to break down sexual stereotypes. A public
 ombudsman, called the Equality Ombudsman, investigates
 complaints of sex discrimination in the labor market.
 Employers are required to base hiring decisions on merit and
 to pursue actively the goal of equality.
 Government practice and popular attitudes encourage a wide
 variety of cultural expression, both from native Swedes and
 
 
 1100
 SWEDEN
 immigrants. The latter enjoy the same welfare benefits and
 legal protection as citizens. The Swedish Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction).
 The Government recently announced that it intends to appoint a
 special ombudsman to deal with complaints of racism or
 -discrimination. Civil and criminal penalties for
 discrimination will be increased.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1101
