 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty,
 parliamentary democracy. The King is Chief of State. All
 executive authority is vested in the Cabinet, which is formed
 through direct parliamentary elections every 3 years and
 consists of the Prime Minister (Head of Government) and some 20
 ministers. The Social Democratic Party, Sweden's largest, lost
 power in the September 1991 elections and was replaced by a
 minority non-Socialist coalition government.
 The police, all security organizations, and the armed forces are
 controlled by and responsive to the civilian authorities and,
 with very few exceptions, are scrupulous in their protection of
 human rights. Either the Government, the judicial system, the
 Parliament, or an ombudsman investigates thoroughly all
 allegations of human rights violations.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high standard
 of living, extensive social services, and a mixed economy. Over
 90 percent of businesses are privately owned.
 Swedes are entirely free to express their political preferences,
 pursue individual interests, and seek legal resolution of
 disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full
 autonomy, investigate private complaints of alleged abuses of
 authority by officials and prescribe corrective action, if
 required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that underlies
 Sweden's active support of international efforts to improve
 human rights observance. The human rights situation was largely
 unchanged in 1991, except for the elimination of the
 controversial provision for "communal arrest" under the Terrorism
 Act (see Section 2.d.). Some human rights organizations again
 alleged human rights violations, particularly with reference to
 refugees seeking asylum who were rejected at the border.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or by domestic
 opposition groups does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by Swedish
 authorities do not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect
 such prohibitions. Occasional accusations against individual
 policemen of excessive use of force in connection with arrests
 are carefully investigated and have not produced evidence of any
 systematic problem. After some of these investigations, police
 officers have been suspended or subjected to other disciplinary
 actions.
 
 
 1237
 SWEDEN
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous may
 be held- for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may be
 held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court may order detention for up to 3
 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks. Arrest is public
 and bywarrant. Legislation in 1988 shortened the time between
 detention and arraignment from 5 days to 48 hours. In
 particularly difficult cases, the time between arrest and the
 first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours. Bail does not
 exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to
 destroy evidence are released to await trial. By law, Swedish
 citizens may not-be deported. Convicted foreign criminals are
 often deported at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless
 they risk execution or other severe punishment at home.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to effective counsel,
 though since 1983 budget cutbacks have restricted the
 availability of public defenders to cases where the maximum
 penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or more.
 Convicted persons in most instances may appeal to a court of
 appeals, and in some cases also to the Supreme Court. There are
 no military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The law provides assurance against such arbitrary interference.
 Home searches are limited to investigations of crimes punishable
 by at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery,
 rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. Search
 warrants are granted only on the basis of well-founded
 suspicion. Wiretaps are permitted only in cases involving
 narcotics or national security. Searches and wiretaps normally
 require court approval. When the time factor is critical, or
 when life is believed to be in immediate dangbr, the ranking
 police officer may approve these measures.
 In connection with the investigation of the 1986 murder of Prime
 Minister Olof Palme, Swedish security police were charged with
 using illegal wiretaps against'some Kurdish suspects. Police
 officials involved were brought to trial for this offense.
 Three lower ranking police officers were found not guilty in
 1991. Other higher ranking officials who were convicted'are
 appealing their verdicts. Debate continues about whether any
 wiretapping should be allowed. The number of legal wiretaps has
 remained steady at about 200 cases per year. There is no
 indication that telephone monitoring is done arbitrarily, and
 the vast majority of such cases involve serious narcotics crimes.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Newspapers and periodicals
 are for the most part privately owned. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, help
 assure a plurality of views. Broadcasting in Sweden operates
 
 
 1238
 SWEDEN
 under a state concession. The Swedish Broadcasting Company and
 its independent subsidiaries (TV-I, TV-2, national and
 educational radio) have had a monopoly over terrestrial
 broadcasting. In 1991 the Government decided to permit the
 establishment of an independent commercial television channel.
 A variety of commercial satellite television channels are also
 available via satellite antenna or cable.
 Publications containing sensitive national security information,
 film and television programs portraying excessive violence, and
 publications and broadcasts advocating racist views may be
 subject to censorship. Commercial video tapes are also screened
 and censored or banned if they contain scenes of excessive
 violence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran Church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach their
 children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed to citizens by law and respected in
 practice. Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking
 political asylum are on the whole generously treated, though
 long waits and denial of asylum requests from applicants not
 meeting internationally agreed criteria have become common.
 Changes in Sweden's Terrorism Act, effective July 1, 1991,
 eliminated the controversial provision of communal arrest.
 Communal arrest allowed authorities to limit the movement within
 Sweden of foreigners with suspected links to terrorist
 organizations, who were judged deportable under the Terrorism
 Act but could not be deported under other provisions of Swedish
 law because they faced death or serious punishment in their home
 countries. Under the amended Terrorism Act, foreign suspects
 may still be required to report regularly to police authorities,
 but there are no travel restrictions, and each case must be
 reviewed by the courts on a regular basis, at least every 3
 years. Communal arrest was lifted in 1991 for the last member
 of a group of Kurdish suspects affected by this provision of the
 law. Their deportation orders were also rescinded.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political life
 within a representative, multiparty parliamentary system. The
 349 seats in the unicameral Parliament are divided proportionally
 among the 7 political parties currently represented. A party
 must win a minimum of 4 percent of the votes cast to enter
 Parliament. There is universal suffrage beginning at age 18.
 Approximately 85 percent of eligible voters participated in the
 1991 elections. Voting takes plaoe by secret ballot. Aliens
 
 
 1239
 SWEDEN
 who have been legal residents for at least 3 years have the
 right to vote and run for office in municipal elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of individual
 rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens aware of
 their rights and publicizing and correcting abuse of state
 authority. Active private organizations monitor issues such as
 the impact on individuals of comprehensive social legislation
 and the condition of the native Lapp population. Government
 agencies are in close contact with a variety of local and
 international groups working in Sweden and abroad to improve
 human rights observance. State-supported Stockholm University
 offers instruction in making human rights complaints to bodies
 such-as the European Commission of HumanRights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and disability
 and unemployment insurance. The Government runs special programs
 to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and culture (including
 240 hours of paid Swedish language instruction).
 Two of Sweden's 284 municipalities continue to refuse to permit
 refugees to--settle in them. Both the Government and the
 politicalparties have tried to persuade these communities to
 change their attitude. There were some incidents of anti-
 immigrant sentiment during 1991, including one killing, and a
 few individual politicians took anti-immigration positions
 during the election campaign.
 Certain refugee groups, particularly'from the Middle East,
 continue to complain that their relatives have difficulties in
 obtaining nonimmigrant visas to Sweden.. Sweden has been
 restrictivein allowing such visits since many of the visitors
 file for asylum upon arrival in Sweden. Large groups of ethnic
 Turkish Bulgarians and Polish Gypsies were turned back during
 1991 because they did not meet recognized political refugee
 criteria.
 The Government supports groups working against racism. Swedish
 schools seek to provide education and information designed to
 cpunter. racist tendencies. There is 4 special ombudsman to deal
 with complaints of racism and discrimination. The Government
 continues to stuidy the February.1989 government commission
 report recommending that Sweden adopt more forceful legislation
 against racism. All seven political parties in Parliament
 support a new antiracism movement recently established
 nationwide.
 Many immigrants have complained that they have difficulties in
 finding professional employment. The Government is trying to
 find ways to evaluate and translate diplomas from foreign
 countries to facilitate the hiring of foreign nationals with
 documented professional skills.
 Institutionalized efforts to extend equality between the sexes
 continue. Employers are required to base hiring decisions on
 merit and to pursue actively the goal of equality. A public
 
 
 1240
 SWEDEN
 ombudsman, called the Equality Ombudsman, investigates complaints
 of sex discrimination in the labor market.
 Rape and abuse against women continue to receive a great deal of
 attention by the Government. There are laws to protect abused
 women from having their abusers discover their whereabouts or
 contact them. In a few cases, women have been helped to obtain
 new identities and homes. Both national and local governments
 support voluntary groups that provide shelter and help to abused
 women. Men who rape or abuse women are provided rehabilitative
 treatment. The number of reported rapes, some 1,400 yearly, has
 remained at approximately the same level since 1989.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. A
 large majority of the working population, including career
 military personnel, police officers, and civilian government
 officials, belongs to trade unions. Unions conduct their
 activities with complete independence from the Government and
 political parties although the Confederation of Labor Unions
 (LO), the largest federation, has been allied for many years
 with the Social Democratic Party. Swedish trade unions are free
 to affiliate internationally and are active in a broad range of
 international trade union organizations.
 Several strikes took place in 1991, some of them wildcat
 strikes. Most were in the private sector, protesting a general
 wage restraint agreement. Accommodations were reached in almost
 all instances.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers are free to organize and bargain collectively.
 Collective bargaining is carried out in the form of national
 framework agreements between central organizations of workers
 and employers, followed by industry and plant-level agreements
 on details. The Government set up an independent commission for
 the 1991 wage negotiations with the task of curbing wage
 increases and cooling the overheated economy. The commission
 was successful in reaching agreement with the bulk of unions for
 virtually no increase in wages. Swedish law fully protects
 workers from antiunion discrimination and provides sophisticated
 and effective mechanisms for resolving disputes and complaints.
 Disputes concerning violations of labor laws are in the vast
 majority of cases solved by informal discussions between the
 involved parties. Should a settlement not be possible, there is
 a labor court that tries cases of general interest for guidance
 and interpretation of the law, and its rulings in turn are
 followed by other courts. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor, which does not exist, is prohibited
 in law, and this prohibition is enforced by the police and
 public prosecutors.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Compulsory 9-year education ends at age 16, and full-time
 employment is normally permitted at that age under supervision
 of local municipal or community authorities. Those under age 18
 may work only during daytime and under a foreman's supervision.
 
 
 1241
 SWEDEN
 During the summer and in vacation periods, children as young as
 13 may be hired for.part-time work or light "summer jobs" for
 periods of 5 days or less, although it is rare for people under
 15 to find a job except with family members. Violations are
 few, and enforcement is considered good. These regulations are
 enforced by police and public prosecutors, with the assistance
 of the unions.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no national minimum wage law. Wages are set by
 collective bargaining contracts, which typically have been
 observed even by nonunion establishments. Even the lowest paid.
 workes are able to maintain a decent standard of living because
 there is substantial help available from social welfare
 entitlements.
 The standard'legal workweek is 40 hours, or less. The amount of
 permissible overtime is also regulated, as are rest periods. A
 government plan gradually to increase annual leave to 6 weeks
 was shelved, but 2 extra days were added during 1991. Thus,
 Sweden's vacation law now guarantees all employees a minimum of
 5 weeks and 2 days of paid annual leave, and many labor contracts
 provide more. A designated and trained trade union steward
 monitors observance of regulations governing working conditions.
 Occupational health and'safety rules set by the government-
 appointed National Board of Occupational Health and Safety in
 consultation with employer and union representatives are closely
 observed. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop life-
 threatening activity immediately and call for a labor inspector.
 The courts have upheld this authority. The authorities have
 compiled a list of the 400,000 most dangerous jobs that cause
 long-term health problems and started a program in the fall of
 1990 to improve the situation for those employees. A fund of
 about $3 billion exists to finance improvement measures.
 
 
 1242
