 SWEDEN
 Fundamental political freedoms and human rights of
 Swedish citizens are guaranteed by the Constitution.
 Sweden occupies a prominent position in international
 efforts to enhance human rights. In the United
 Nations, it has been active in support of initiatives
 against torture, campaigned for measures to ensure
 religious tolerance and proposed the outlawing of
 capital punishment. Sweden has ratified the two
 International Covenants and the Optional Protocol to
 the Covenant on Civil and Political Liberties and is a
 party to the European Convention on Human Rights.
 In the North/South dialogue, Sweden has been in the
 forefront of industrialized countries in arguing for
 major resource transfer by means of grant aid to the
 least developed nations. Its aid program, at one
 percent of the Gross National Product, is proportion-
 ately far larger than that of the United States.
 The comprehensive system of human rights which exists
 in Sweden exists by government design. The Government
 and a cross section of Swedes from right to left con-
 sider the protection of human rights a cornerstone of
 Swedish society. Swedish ombudsmen, appointed by
 Parliament and with full autonomy, are charged with
 the investigation of complaints of private persons
 that their rights have been violated.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 
 (492)
 
 
 493
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in
 practice. Sweden prides itself on a prison system
 which is among the most progressive in the world.
 Periodic home visits for prisoners are a unique
 feature of the system.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Guarantees with respect to the integrity of the person
 are scrupulously heeded.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Swedish Constitution forbids deprivation of
 liberty without public trial by a court of law.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by law
 and-respected in practice.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Sweden has been a world leader since the 1930s in
 policies to meet basic needs such as food, shelter,
 health care and education. Social welfare policy
 includes provision of health and medical services,
 welfare services, various family benefits, pensions,
 and disability and unemployment insurance. Per capita
 gross national product in Sweden is above that in the
 United States and wealth is more evenly distributed
 among all segments of the population.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Swedes enjoy freedom of thought, speech, press, re-
 ligion and assembly.
 
 
 494
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement within and from the coun-
 try.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The country has a long history of orderly democratic
 political life in which all citizens and certain foreign
 residents fully participate. Labor is completely free
 to organize and the Labor movement is highly developed
 and the backbone of Sweden's largest political party.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No question of an independent, outside investigation
 of alleged human rights violations in Sweden has been
 posed. With regard to pertinent third countries,
 Sweden supports the principle of independent outside
 investigations.
 
 
