 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, exercises
 executive authority. The judiciary is independent of the Government.
 The Government effectively controls the police, all security organizations, and the
 armed forces.
 Sweden has an advanced industrial economy, mainly market-based, and a high
 standard of living, with extensive social welfare services. More than 90 percent of
 businesses are privately owned.
 Human rights are deeply respected and widely protected. Swedes are entirely free
 to express their political preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal res-
 olution of disputes. The Parliament, police, or an ombudsman investigate thoroughly
 all allegations of human rights violations, including the occasional allegation of po-
 lice misconduct. Sweden's ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full
 autonomy, have the power to investigate any private complaints of alleged abuses
 by authorities and to prescribe corrective action if required. Sweden has one of the
 world's most equal distributions of income, but wage levels for women still lag be-
 hind those for men. There are occasional incidents of violence against minorities.
 The Government, political parties, and youth organizations have active programs to
 promote tolerance and combat racism. The Government has established programs
 to deal with violence against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. On December 5, based upon evidence provided by new
 witnesses, prosecutors requested a new trial for Cari Gustav Christer Pettersson,
 the man who was convicted of assassinating Prime Minister Olof Palme on February
 28, 1986, but was later freed on appeal. The Supreme Court is expected to decide
 by early 1998 whether or not to order a new trial.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Derading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. There
 are occasional reports of the use of excessive force by police in arrests, but thorough
 investigations have not produced evidence of a systemic problem. Typically, police
 officers found guilty of abuse have been suspended or otherwise disciplined. Such
 disciplinary actions numbered less than a dozen nationwide and usually involved of-
 icers-in-tralning found unfit for permanent duty.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrests are public and~by warrant. The
 police must lodge charges within 6-hours agalnst persons detained for disturbing the
 public order or considered dangerous, an within 12 hours against those detained
 on other grounds. The law requires arraignment within 48 hours. The time between
 arrest and the first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours for detanees consid-
 ered dangerous, likely to destroy evidence, or likely to flee. In cases involving more
 than one individual and in the case of foreigners, courts can and do order continued
 detention for 2 weeks at a time while police are investigating. Such detentions can
 be protracted, particularly in drug cases. Other than suchndangerous suspects, de-
 tainees are routinely released pending trial. Bail as such does not exist. If a person
 files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the official investigation, a court
 may order detention for up to 3 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks.
 The Government does not impose exile.
 Convicted foreign criminals who are not  rmanent residents often are deported
 at the conclusion of their prison terms, unlss they risk execution or other severe
 punishment in their home country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without a public trial by a court of law, and the Government respects this provision.
 The judiciary is free of governmental interference. The accused have the right to
 competent counsel, but the Government provides public defenders to indigents only
 in cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or
 more. Convicted persons have the right of appeal in most instances.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 limits home searches to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' im-
 prisonment, such as murder, possession of narcotics, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage,
 
 
 1309
 counterfeiting, or treason. The authorities respect this provision. Normally, police
 must obtain court approval for a search or a wiretap. However, a senior police offi-
 cial may approve a search if time is a critical factor or the case involves a threat
 to life. A parliamentary committee each year reviews all monitoring of telephones,
 facsimile (fax), or computers. In June the Minister of Justice proposed that police
 be allowed to use wiretaps when investigating serious crimes. A special Ministry of
 Justice working group is scheduled to submit a report on this proposal in April
 1998.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government respects these provisions in practice. Most news-
 papers and periodicals are privately owned. The Government subsidizes daily news-
 papers regardless of political affiliation. Broadcasters operate under a state conces-
 sion. Untila few years ago the State had a monoply over ground-based broadcast-
 ing, but a variety of commercial television channels (one ground-based, and several
 via satellite or cable) and several commercial radio stations now exist.
 The Government may censor publications containing national security informa-
 tion. A quasi-governmental body excises extremely graphic violence from films, tele-
 vision programs, and videos.
 Criticism of child pornography was widespread, and the debate on the legality of
 ownership of pornographic material continues. The Minister of Justice proposed leg-
 islation in December to outlaw ownership of child -pornography. Although regarded
 by many as a limitation of the Freedom of the Press Act, the proposal reportedly
 has sufficient support to pass Parliament; no action was taken by year's end. It is
 already illegal to publish or distribute such material. In 1996 Sweden hosted the
 United Nations Conference on the Sexual Exploitation of Children. The Queen has
 emerged as a strong and popular advocate of children's rights and opponent of child
 pornography.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government respects these
 rights in practice. Police require a permit for public demonstrations. However, the
 authorities routinely grant such permits, with rare exceptions to prevent clashes be-
 tween antagonistic groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government does not hamper the teaching or practice of any faith.
 Sweden has maintained a state (Lutheran) church for several hundred years, sup-
 ported by a general "Church Tax" (although the Government routinely grants any
 request by a taxpayer for exemption from that tax). After decades of discussion,
 however, in 1995 the Church of Sweden and the Government agreed to a formal sep-
 aration. This reform will not become effective until the year 2000, and the Church
 will still receive some state support. As of 1996, citizens were no longer automati-
 cally members of the state church at birth. Sweden is tolerant of the diverse reli-
 gions practiced there, including the Mormon faith and Scientology.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, IEmigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for free movement within, from, and returning to the
 country, and the Government respects these rights in practice. Foreigners with sus-
 pected links to terrorist organizations may be required to report regularly to police
 authorities, but may travel freely within Sweden. Courts must review the reporting
 requirement for each case at least once every 3 years.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The Govern-
 ment provides first asylum. Sweden has adopted an increasingly restrictive asylum
 policy. The Government has sent some asylum seekers back to "safe" countries
 through which they arrived in Sweden. The number of applications for asylum or
 residence permits dropped to an 11-year low of 5,753 in 1996, down from 9,047 in
 1995. Sweden approved 4,800 residence applications during 1996, of which 15 per-
 cent were from refugees, and granted 2,550 individuals some form of protection.
 Nearly 11 percent of Sweden's population is foreign-born. The number of refugees
 increased by 65 percent compared with 1996. A total of 9,520 asylum seekers, ap-
 proximately 3,000 of them Kurdish refugees from Iraq, arrived duringthe year.
 There is an ongoing debate over the plight of asylum seekers who have submitted
 applications that are considered "manifestly unfounded," those coming to Sweden
 through a "safe third country," and those whose applications remain under consider-
 ation for unduly long periods of time, in some cases as long as 9 years. There have
 also been complaints of exceedingly accelerated procedures and inadequate legal
 safeguards for some asylum seekers, e.g., asylum seekers who were deported within
 
 
 1310
 72 hours of arrival and did not receive access to lawyers. A broad interpretation of
 what constitutes a "safe third country" permits the return of applicants to a third
 country without consideration of whether that country has an asylum policy under
 which the applicant might be admitted. Asylum seekers are occasionally detained
 upon arrival in Sweden and, when awaiting deportation after a negative decision
 on their claim, in cases where the authorities fear flight to avoid deportation. Deten-
 tion facilities are clean, comfortable, and relatively unrestricted. On occasion, when
 no other facility is available, asylum seekers are detained in remand prisons.
 In 1996, 55,391 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina remained in Sweden, while
 380 emigrated back to Bosnia. In total, Sweden has accepted over 100,000 refugees
 from the former Yugoslavia. The Government provides funds for Bosnians to travel
 to their homeland in order to determine if they wish to be repatriated. The Govern-
 ment, in hopes of raising that figure in 1997, increased financial incentives to re-
 turn.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides ways and means for citizens to change the Government.
 Elections to the 349-member unicameral Parliament are held every 4 years. Suf-
 frage is universal for citizens 18 years and older, with secret balloting. Noncitizen
 residents have the right to participate in local (city and county) elections.
 Women participate actively in the political process and Government. They cur-
 rently compose 43 percent of the Parliament and half of the Cabinet. The governing
 Social Democratic Party largely has held to its pledge to place women in half of all
 political appointments at all levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private organizations actively monitor issues such as the impact of social
 legislation, anti-immigrant or racist activities, and the condition of the indigenous
 Sami population. The official ombudsmen also publicize abuses of state authority
 and have the right to initiate actions to rectify such abuses. Government agencies
 are in close contact with a variety of local and international groups working in Swe-
 den and abroad to improve human rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 . cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and the Government
 respects this prevision.
 Women.-Nearly 20,000 reported cases of assault against women took place in
 1996, an increase of 1,400 over 1995. Most involved spousal abuse. In three-quarters
 of the assaults, the perpetrator was an acquaintance of the victim. Reprtea abuse
 against women occurs disproportionately in immigrant communities.
 The law provides complainants protection from contact with their abusers, if so
 desired. In some cases the authorities help women obtain new identities and homes.
 Since 1994 the Government has provided electronic alarms or bodyguards for
 women in extreme danger of assault. Both national and local overnments provide
 monetary support to "volunteer groups that provide shelter and other assistance to
 abused women. The authorities strive to apprehend and prosecute abusers. Typi-
 cally, the sentence for abuse is a prison term or psychiatric treatment. However,
 women complained about short sentences and early release of offenders.
 The number of reported rapes rose by more than 20 percent to 2,600 in 1996 from
 2,100 in 1995. In 1994 the number dropped somewhat to 1,800. Women's groups be-
 lieve the increase in recent years is partly an effect of increased willingness to re-
 port rape (including spousal or "date" rape), but cannot rule out the possibility of
 a real increase resulting from worsened economic and social conditions. The law
 does not differentiate between spousal and nonspousal rape.
 On December 11, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that it would grant
 funds to the Foundation Women's Forum (FWF) for a project to prevent trafficking
 in women. The initial aim of the project is to identify and make a survey of vol-
 untary organizations, authorities, and existing networks that work to prevent traf-
 ficking and to support and rehabilitate the victims. The survey is to cover European
 Union members and the FWF is to report the results of the project's initial stage
 to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs by June 30, 1998. There is no evidence of orga-
 nized or large-scale trafficking in women taking place in Sweden.
 The law prohibits sexual harassment. As with other forms of discrimination,
 women, may take complaints to the Equality Ombudsman in the Labor Ministry,
 the courts, or to their unions. The Minister of Labor has planned to focus on increas-
 ing employers' responsibility to intervene in sexual harassment cases. A Govern-
 
 
 1311
 ment investigation recommended that employers who do not intervene against har-
 assment at work should, for example, be obliged to pay damages to the victim.
 The Deputy Labor Minister Ulrika Messing has the overall lead in the Govern-
 ment for equality issues, which app  to women and men equally. All government
 investigations and decisions must te equality considerations into account. Stock-
 holm University's professor Dr. Ageta Stark is charged with the education of top
 public sector figures on matters of equality. The Social and Justice Ministries are
 deeply involved as well, especially concerning combating violence against women.
 In 1997 journalistic investigations focused Swedish and international attention on
 Sweden's pre-1976 practice of forced sterilization. The majority of those sterilized
 were either mentally or physically disabled. Swedes had known for years that such
 operations took place under pre-World War II legislation. Between 1934 and 1976,
 62,000 forced sterilizations were carried out, 95 percent of them on women. In Sop-
 tember, the Government a ppointed a commission of academics and legal and medi-
 cal experts to investigate the broad legal, socio-medical, and historic circumstances
 of the sterilizations. The ommission, Which is expeted to onclude its inquiry by
 July 1, 1999, is to give priority to the question of damages to victims and will also
 look into the pssible existence of other categories of victims. Since the 1980's, the
 Government has received 38 claims for compensation; the Government has provided
 compensation in 16 instances, noting formal errors committed in these cases. Indi-
 vidual ministers expressed regret and astonishment over the practice and how long
 it continued.
 A study conducted by the U.N. Development Program (UNDP) in preparation for
 the U.N. Conference on Women gave Sweden the highest ranking on equality for
 women, with salaries averaging only 70 percent of men's. The law requires employ-
 ers to treat men and women alike in hiring, promotion, and pay, including equal
 pay for comparable work. The Equality Ombudsman, a public official, investigates
 complaints of gender discrimination in the labor market. Women may also pursue
 complaints through the courts. A third option, and by far the most common, involves
 settling allegations using the employee's labor union as mediator. In 1996 129
 women and 15 men registered gender discrimination cases with the Equality Om-
 budsman, of which 95 involved women claiming salary discrimination. Of the total,
 only 2 of the cases were eventually taken to court, 22 were solved by mediation, 26
 were recalled, and 68 were either dropped because of the statute of limitations or
 insufficient substance, or resolved privately.
 As a result, women increasingly have begun. to turn to the courts in cases of indi-
 vidual discrimination. Women initiated several test cases of the "equal pay for com-
 parable work" clause in 1995, with at least one court decision in their favor in 1996.
 This court case is widely expected to be precedent setting.
 Children.-Nine years of basic schooling are compulsory and are provided to all
 children at state expense (including transportation, books, and lunches). Municipali-
 ties are responsible for operating day care centers and pre-schools for children with
 working parents which are also open to others as space permits (many children
 begin  11-time pre-school at 1 year of age). There are also state-subsidized family
 day care centers and "open" pre-schools (for part- or full-time attendance on an non-
 enrollmentldrop-in basis) as well as leisure centers for after-school activities. Par-
 ents are provided with a government allowance worth approximately $ 1,000 per
 year for each child under 16 years of age. Families with children can obtain a
 means-tested housing allowance. Children with certain severe disabilities have the
 right to a personal assistant. State-funded dental care is provided for children up
 to 19 years of age. Ninety-nine percent of all expectant mothers receive prenatal
 care and visit well-baby clinics. Infant mortality rtes are extremely low (4.8 deaths
 per 1,000 in the first year of life). Hospital care is state-funded for children under
 16 years of age. Since 1993 Sweden has had a Children's Ombudsman to safeguard
 children's interests and rights. The Ombudsman also ensures that Sweden lives up
 to its obligations under the United Nations international Convention on the Rights
 of the Child. A nongovernmental organization, Children's Rights in Society, offers
 counseling to troubled youngsters.
 The Government allocates funds to private organizations concerned with chil-
 dren's rights. Sweden remains active internationally in efforts to prevent child
 abuse. In 1997 the Queen established a charity cam aign, "Children of the World,"
 to raise funds for sexually abused children in the Balics, rehabilitation of child sol-
 diers in Liberia, and Mozambique's street children.
 Although child abuse appears relatively uncommon, the public and authorities re-
 main concerned by consistent data indicating an increase over the past several
 years. The number of reported cases for children under the age of 15 rose to 5,205
 in 1995 from 4,400 in 1994. The first quarter of 1997, however, saw a decline in
 the number of cases to approximately 1,000. Many children's rights advocates be-
 
 
 1312
 lieve this change reflects a true increase (as opposed to increased incidence of re-
 porting) due to the strains imposed on families ,by the difficult economic situation.
 The law prohibits parents -r other caretakers from abusing children mentally or
 in sny way. Parents teachers, and other adults are subject to prosecution
 * if they physically punish a child, including slapping or spanking.-Children have the
 right to report such abuses. to the polie. The authorities, respect these laws, and
   the. usual sentence is a fine ombined with counseling and monitoring by social
 workers. If the situation warrants, however, authorities may remove children from
 the home~and place theni in foster care. However, foster parents virtually never re-
 ceive permission to adopt long-term foster children, even mncases-where the parents
 are seen as unfit or seek no contact with the child. Critics charge that this policy
 places the rights of biological parents over the needs of children or security in per-
 manent family situations.
 People With Disabilities.-The, law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities. The Government provides disabled persons-with assistance aimed at al-
 -lowing them to live as normal a life as- possible, preferably outside an institutional
 setting This includes educational aid, such as provision of personal tutors or assist-
 ants at all stages- from day care to university studies, as well as assistance in the
 workplace, such as-prvision of a personal aide or improvement of the workplace's
 accessibility to wheelchairs.' It also encompasses services such as home.care or group
 living. Regulations for new buildings require full accessibility, but the .Government
 has na such-requirement.for existing public buildings. As a result, many buildings
 remain inaccessible to disabled persons.
 Indigenous People.-Sweden counts at least 17,000 Sami (formerly known as
 Lapps) among-its 8.85 million inhabitants (Sarni organizations place that number
 somewhat higher, 25,000 to 30,000). In 1994 Sweden was the last of the Nordic
 countries-to .allow formation of a Sametinget, or Sarni Parliament, as- an advisory
 body to the Government. Under the current Government, Sami issues fall under the
 Ministry of Agriculture.
 The Sarni continue a protracted struggle for recognition as an indigenous people
 under a-variety of international agreements, such as International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO> Convention 169. Historically, the Government has resisted granting the
 Sami such rights. For instance, Sami childrenhad no right to education in their na-
 tive language until provision of such education to immigrant children forced the
 Government to-grant Sami at least equal treatment. As a result of such education,
 -northern Sami dialects have. enjoyed a recent renaissance. Sami dialects in the
 - southern portions of traditional Sami lands, however, now may have too few native
 -speakers to survive as living languages.
 Late in 1994 the Government removed from the Sai the right to control hunting
 and fishing activities, on Sami village lands, permitting instead totally unlimited
 hunting and fishing activity on all- government property. Sami leaders continued to
 protest this change in 1997.
 Although some Sai state that they face discrimination in housing and employ-
 ment on an individual basis, particularly in the southern mountain regions, the
 Government does not condone such discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.-For many years the Government has supported the activi-
 ties of groups working -to combat anti-Semitism. Two synagogues were vandalized
 in 1997.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.--Scattered acts of violence or harassment
 against minorities continue, usually from "skinheads" with neo-Nazi sympathies. Al-
 though the Government does not compile national statistics on such acts, one news-
 paper counted over 100 violent incidents with racist overtones in a recent year. Most
 violent incidents involved assault on lone immigrants by teenage skinheads. In
 1996, an Arab-American on a visit to his sister in Sweden was attacked and se-
 verely beaten by skinheads.
 Most estimates place the number of active neo-Nazis at less than 2,000, and there
 appears to be little popular support for their activities or sentiments. Many Swedes
 doubt whether such youth actually embrace neo-Nazi ideology, and the Government
 supports activities by volunteer groups working against racism. The Government in-
 vestigates and prosecutes race-related crimes, although in many clashes between
 Swedish and immigrant youth gangs, authorities judge beth sides as at fault. In a
 1996 case involving a 17-year old sentenced to 100 days community service for wear-
 ing neo-Nazi badges, the Supreme Court ruled that it can be illegal to wear
 xenophobic symbols or racist paraphernalia.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The work force is 82.5 percent unionized. Career
 military personnel, police officers, and civilian government officials, as well as pri-
 
 
 1313
 vate sector workers in both manufacturing and service industries, are organized.
 Most business owners belong to counterpart employer organizations.
 Unions and employer organizations operate independently of the Government and
 political parties (although the largest federation of unions has always been linked
 with the largest political party, the Social Democrats). The law protects the freedom
 of workers to associate and to strike, as well as for employers to organize and to
 conduct lockouts. Within limits protecting the public's immediate health and secu-
 rity, public employees also enjoy the right to strike. These laws are fully respected
 and are not challenged.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international bodies. They are affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and European Trade
 Union Confederation among others.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Management-labor coopera-
 tion tends to be excellent and nonconfrontational. Labor and management, each rep-
 resented by a national organization by sector (for example, retailers and engineering
 industries), negotiate framework agreements every 2 to 3 years. More detailed com-
 pany-level agreements put such framework agreements into effect at the local level.
 Framework agreements entered into force in 1996, with most valid until 1998. A
 series of agreements involving smaller numbers of employers were concluded in the
 spring with very little conflict. In contrast with the recent past, most agreements
 with labor unions now provide for a degree of individualized pay, including merit
 bonuses.
 The law provides both workers and employers with effective mechanisms for re-
 solving complaints. The vast majority of complaints are resolved informally. Cases
 of an employer firing an employee for union activities are virtually unheard of; there
 were no reports of such cases in 1997. There were few strikes, approximately two
 per month, most of which involved fewer than 10 persons and minimal days lost,
 with one notable exception. In March 5,500 newspaper distributors went on strike
 for 2 days before their concerns were resolved.
 In March the employers' association and unions representing 800,000 manufactur-
 ing employees reached an agreement on steps to prevent strikes and lockouts, such
 as requiring serious wage negotiations to start 3 months before a collective agree-
 ment expires and appointing a mediator if an agreement has not been reached after
 2 months.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and the authorities effectively enforce this ban. The law prohibits
 forced and bonded labor by children and the Government enforces this prohibition
 effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and the Government enforces this pro-
 hibition effectively (see Section 6.c.). Compulsory nine-year education ends at age
 16, and the law permits full-time employment at that age under supervision of local
 authorities. Employees under age 18 may work only during daytime and under su-
 pervision. During summer and other vacation periods, children as young as 13 years
 may work part-time or in "light" work with parental permission. Union representa-
 tives, police, and public prosecutors effectively enforce this restriction. Sweden ac-
 tively supports efforts to protect and improve children's rights. In September Swe-
 den hosted a preparatory conference to the October International Conference on.
 Child Labor held i Norway. In addition, the Government has earmarked about $8
 million of its aid budget to help fight child labor in impoverished countries.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor.There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which nonunion establishments
 usually observe as well. Even the lowest paid workers can maintain a decent stand-
 ard of living for themselves and their families through substantial benefits (such as
 housing or day care support) provided by social welfare entitlement programs. How-
 ever, cutbacks in these programs have made it harder for some workers to make
 ends meet, particularly for low-paid single women with children.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours or less. Both the law and collective bargain-
 ing agreements regulate overtime and rest periods. For workers not covered by a
 labor agreement, the law stipulates a limit for overtime at 200 hours a year, al-
 though exceptions may be granted for key employees with union approval; some col-
 lective bargaining agreements put the limit at 150 hours. The law requires a rest
 period after 5 hours of work but does not stipulate a minimum duration; in practice
 it is usually 30 minutes. The law also provides all employees with a minimum of
 5 weeks of paid annual leave; labor contracts often provide more, particularly for
 higher ranking private sector employees and older public service workers. In 1997
 Sweden passed a new labor law making it easier for employers to hire workers for
 
 
 1314
 limited periods, as well as empowering local unions to agree to exceptions to last-
 in, first-out laws.
 Occupational health and safety rules are set by a government-appointed board
 and monitored by trained union stewards, safety ombudsmen, and, occasionally, gov-
 ernment inspectors. These standards are very high, making workplaces both safe
 and healthy. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop unsafe activity imme-
 diately andto call in an inspector. An individual also has the right to halt work
 in dangerous situations in order to consult a supervisor or safety representative.
