 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, exercises
 executive authority. The judiciary is independent of the Government.
 The Government effectively controls the police, all security organizations, and the
 armed forces.
 Sweden has an advanced industrial economy, mainly market-based, and a high
 standard of living, with extensive social welfare services. More than 90 percent of
 businesses are privately owned.
 Human rights are deeply respected and widely protected. Swedes are entirely free
 to express their political preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal res-
 olution of disputes. The Parliament, police, or an ombudsman investigate thoroughly
 all allegations of human rights violations, including the occasional allegation of po-
 lice misconduct. Sweden's ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full
 autonomy, have the power to investigate any private complaints of alleged abuses
 by authorities and to prescribe corrective action if required. Sweden has one of the
 world's most equal distributions of income, but women still struggle towards reach-
 ing the same wage levels as men. There is some societal violence against minorities.
 The Government has established programs to deal with violence against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial KIlling.-Ther were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. Occa-
 sional accusations of force by police in arrests do occur, but thorough investigations
 have not produced evidence of a systematic problem. Typically, police officers found
 guilty of abuse have been suspended or otherwise disciplined. Such disciplinary ac-
 tions numbered less than a dozen nationwide and usually involved officers-in-train-
 ing found unfit for permanent duty.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrests are public and by warrant. The
 police must ledge charges within 6 hours against persons detained for disturbing the
 public order or considered dangerous, andwithin 12 hours against those detained
 on other grounds. The law requires arraignment within 48 hours. The time between
 arrest and the fit court hearing may be extended to 96 hours for detainees consid-
 ered dangerous, likely to dfstroy evidence, or likely to flee, but this occurs very rare-
 ly. Other than such dangerous suspects, detainees are routinely released pending
 trial. Bail as such does not exist. If a person fies for bankruptcy and refuses to c-
 operate with the official investigation, a court may order detention for up to 3
 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks.
 The Government does not impose exile.
 Convicted foreign criminals who are not permanent residents often are deported
 at the conclusion of their prison terms, ualess they risk execution or other severe
 punishment in their home country.
 e. Denial t Fair Public TriaLy-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without a public trial by a court of law, and the Government respects this provision.
 The judiciary is free of governmental interference. The accused have the right to
 competent counsel, but the Government provides public defenders to indigents only
 in cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or
 more. Convicted persons have the right of appeal in most instances.
 There were no reports oft political prisoners.
 f. Arbitra  ference With Privac    Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 limits home searches to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' im-
 prisument, such as murder, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, or trea-
 son. The authorities respect this provision. Normally, police must obtain court ap-
 proval for a search or a wiretap; however, a senior police official may approve a
 search if time is a critical factor or the case involves a threat to life. A paroamen-
 tary committee each year reviews all monitoring of telephones, facsimile (fax), or
 computers.
 
 
 1042
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government respects these provisions in practice. Most news-
 papers and periodicals are privately owned. The Government subsidizes daily news-
 papers, regardless of political affiliation. Broadcasters operate under a state conces-
 sion. Until a few years ago the State had a monopoly over ground-based broadcast-
 ing, but a variety of commercial television channels (one ground-based, and several
 via satellite or cable) and several commercial radio stations now exist.
 The Government may censor publications containing national security informa-
 tion. A quasi-governmental body excises extremely graphc violence from films, tele-
 vision programs, and videos.
 Whether or not possession of child pornography should be criminalized became a
 highly charged issue during 1995. Some citizens consider this to be a free-speech
 issue, others an issue of children's rights. Excepting child pornogaphy from Swe-
 den's strong free speech guarantees will require an amendment of the Constitution,
 according to most legal scholars. The Parliament held preliminary hearings on the
 issue, but any such amendment cannot take effect until 1998, after a new par-
 liamentary election.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government respects these
 rights in practice. Police require a permit for public demonstrations, but the authori-
 ties routinely grant such permits, with rare exceptions to prevent clashes between
 adversarial groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government does not hamper the teaching or practice of any faith.
 Sweden has maintained a state (Lutheran) church for several hundred years, sup-
 ported by a general "Church Tax (although the Government routinely grants any
 request by a taxpayer for exemption from that tax). After decades of discussion,
 however, in 1995 the Church of Sweden and the Government agreed to a formal sep-
 aration. This reform will not become effective until the year 2000, and the Church
 will still receive some state support. Nevertheless, beginning in 1996 citizens will
 no longer automatically become members of the state church at birth.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for free movement within, from, and returning to the
 country, and the Government respects these rights in practice. Foreigners with sus-
 pected links to terrorist organizations may be required to report regularly to police
 authorities, but can travel freely within Sweden. Courts must review the reporting
 requirement for each case at least once every 3 years.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees, and does not
 expel those having what the Government considers a valid claim to refugee status.
 On some occasions, the Government has granted permission to stay for humani-
 tarian reasons even when a refugee (often a minor) does not meet normal standards
 for refugee status. Those standards are relatively generous, although the European
 Court of Justice did ask Sweden to re-examine one case involving deportation of two
 Kurdish families. As of late 1995, the Government had not put that decision into
 effect. A similarly controversial case, involving a Sri Lankan family which initially
 entered Sweden under diplomatic status, also remains pending.
 Sweden granted temporary residence to approximately 5,000 Bosnians who ini-
 tially entered Sweden on Croatian passports, after a public uprear (including an ad
 hoc "sanctuary" movement) ensued when Sweden in March deported several bus-
 loads of "Bosnian-Croatians" to Croatia. The Government cited the escalating con-
 flict in Croatia as the reason for halting the deportations. The period of temporary
 residence was scheduled to expire late in 1995, with the future status of these
 Besnians remaining uncertain. Sweden has accepted over 100,000 refugees from the
 former Yugoslavia.
 The Government placed a visa requirement on visitors from Cuba on January 1,
 1995, resulting in a rush of several hundred Cuban asylum seekers in the last
 weeks of December 1994. Approximately 1,500 Cubans applied for alum in 1994,
 and in 1995, approximately 600 of those received asylum status. Of the remainder,
 at least 100 had been deported or voluntarily returned to Cuba by the end of 1995;
 the other cases remain under considration or have entered the appeals process. The
 Government observed international standards in determining whether applicants
 had a well-fonndd fear of persecution.
 
 
 1043
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides ways and means for citizens to change the Government.
 Elections to the 349-member unicameral Parliament are held every 4 years. Suf-
 frage is universal for citizens 18 years and older, with secret balloting. Noncitizen
 residents have the right to participate in local (city and county) elections.
 Women participate actively in the political process and Government. They cur-
 rently compose 41 percent of the Parliament and half of the Cabinet. The governing
 Social Democratic Party largely has held to its pledge to place women in half of a
 political appointments at all levels.
 Section 4. Government Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private organizations actively monitor issues such as the impact of social
 legislation, anti-immigrant or racist activities, and the condition of the indigenous
 Sami population. The official ombudsmen also publicize abuses of state authority
 and have the right to initiate actions to rectiy such abuses. Government agencies
 are in close contact with a variety of local and international groups working in Swe-
 den and abroad to improve human rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and the Government
 respects this provision.
 Women.-Nearly 18,600 cases of assault against women took place in 1994 (the
 last year statistics are available), an increase of 600 over 1993. Most involved spous-
 al abuse. In three-quarters of the assaults, the perpetrator was an acquaintance of
 the victim. Reported abuse against women occurs disproportionately in immigrant
 communities.
 The law provides complainants protection from contact with their abusers, if so
 desired. In some cases the authorities help women obtain new identities and homes.
 Since 1994 the Government has provided electronic alarms or bodyguards for
 women in extreme danger of assault. Both national and local governments provide
 monetary support to volunteer groups that provide shelter and other assistance to
 abused women. The authorities strive to apprehend and prosecute abusers. Typi-
 cally, the sentence for abuse is a prison term or psychiatric treatment.
 e number of rapes (not available for the 1994 report) rose sharply in 1993, from
 approximately 1,400 to over 2,100. In 1994, the number droppedsomewhat, to
 1,800. Women's groups believe the increase in recent years is partly an effect of in-
 creased willingness to report rape (including spousal or "date" rape), but cannot rule
 out the possibility of a real increase resulting from worsened economic and social
 conditions. The law does not differentiate between spousal and nonspousal rape.
 A study conducted by the U.N. Development Progam (UNDP) in preparation for
 the U.N. Conference on Women gave Sweden the higheat ranking on equality for
 women. The law requires employers to treat men and women alike in hiring, pro-
 motion, and pay, including equal pay for comparable work. The equality ombuds-
 man, a public official, investigates complaints of gender discrimination in the labor
 market. Women may also pursue complaints through the courts. A third option and
 by far the most common, involves settling allegations using the employee's labor
 union as mediator. Virtually all gains in the status of women have occurred through
 such negotiations, with relatively little resort to legislation or legal decisions.
 Despite the available remedies, surveys show that women remain under-rep-
 resented in higher-paying jobs, with salaries averaging only 72 percent of men's, a
 decrease from a high of 80 percent only a decade ago. This decrease largely reflects
 recent substantial cuts in social-sector jobs, where women comprise the vast major-
 ity of the workforc. In addition, tight economic conditions in recent years have
 made unions less willing to pursue claims of pay discrimination. Women submit
 hundreds of complaints to the equality Ombudsman each year, but almost all of
 these complaints are either resolved or dropped before the ombusman takes action.
 As a result, women increasingly have begun to turn to the courts in cases of indi-
 vidual discrimination. Women initiated several test cases of the "equal pay for com-
 parable work" clause in 1995, with decisions expected in 1996.
 The law prohibits sexual harassment. As with other forms of discrimination,
 women may take complaints to the equality ombudsman, the courts, or to their
 unions.
 Children.-The Government allocates funds to private organizations concerned
 with children's rights, and also supports a special ombudsman for children. The Om-
 budsman has focussed her work on ensuring adherence to the U.N. Convention on
 
 
 1044
 
 the Rights of the Child, which Sweden was among the first countries in the world
 to ratify.
 Although child abuse appears relatively uncommon, the public and authorities re-
 main concerned by consistent data indicating an increase over the past several
 years. The number of reported cases, for children under the age of 15, rose signifi-
 cantly in 1994, to 4,400 from 3,300 in 1993. Many children's rights advocates believe
 this change reflects a true increase (as opposed to increased incidence of reporting)
 due to the strains imposed on families by the difficult economic situation.
 The law prohibits parents or other caretakers from abusing children mentally or
 phy calyin any way. Parents teachers, and other adults are subject to prosecution
 if they physically punishachid, including slappingor spanking. Children have the
 right to report such abuses to the police. The authorities respect these laws, and
 the usual sentence is a fine combined with counseling and monitoring by social
 workers. If the situation warrants, however, .authorities may remove children from
 the home and place them in foster care. However, foster parents virtually never re-
 cive permission to adopt long-term foster children, even m cases where the parents
 are seen as unfit or seek no contact with the child. Critics chae that this policy
 places the rights of biological parents over the needs of children for security in per-
 manent family situations.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities. The Government provides disabled persons with assistance aimed at al-
 lowing them to live as normal a life as possible, preferably outside an institutional
 setting. This includes educational aid, such as provision of persona tutors or assist-
 ants at all stages from day care to university studies, as well as assistance in the
 workplace, such as provision of a personal aide or improvement of the workplace's
 accessibility to wheelchairs. It also encompasses services such as home care or group
 ling. Regulations for new buildings require full acssibiity, but the Government
 has no such requirement for existing public buildings. As a result, many buildings
 remain inaccessible to disabled persons.
 Indigenous People.-Sweden counts at least 17,000 Sami (Lapps) among its 8.6
 million inhabitants (Sami organizations place that number somewhat higher, be-
 tweeen               n       n   was the last of the Nordic countries to allow
 formation of a Samtinget, or Sai Parliament, as an advisory body to the Govern-
 ment. Under the current Government, Sand issues fall under the Ministry of Agri-
 culture.
 The Sami continue a protracted struggle for recognition as an indigenous people
 under a variety of international agreements, such as International Labor Organiza-
 tion (al) Convention 169. Historically, the Government has resisted granting Sami
 such rights. For instance, Sami children had no right to education in their native
 language until rovision of such education to immigrant children forced the Govern-
 ment to grant wami at least equal treatment. As a result of such education, north-
 ern Sami dialects have enjoyed a recent renaissance. Sani dialects in the southern
 portions of traditional Sanmi lands, however, now may have too few native speakers
 to survive as living languages.
 Late in 1994, Sthe Government removed from Sami the right to control hunting
 and fishing actitivtes on Sami village lands, permitting instead totally unlimited
 hunting and fhing activity on all government property. In 1995 Sami leaders
 strongly protested this change as well as an additional law permitting hunting far
 earlier than before, and several confrontations occurred.
 Although some Sami state that they face discrimination in housing and employ-
 ment on an individual basis, particularly in the southern mountain regions, the
 Government does not condone such discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.--Some synagogues received bomb threats, and neo-Nazi
 groups carried out acts of desecration against several Jewish cemeteries. The Gov-
 ernment supports activities by volunteer groups working against anti-Semitism.
 Moslem mosques also received a number of threats.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Scattered acts of violence or harassment
 against minorities continue, usually from skinhead groups with e-Nazi ties. Al-
 though the Government does not compile national statistics on such acts, 1 news-
 p aper counted over 100 violent incidents with racist overtones (most involving neo-
 Nazis) in a recent year. Two resulted in death, one an African aslum seeker
 stabbed to death, and the other a 14-year-old son of imgrants brutally beaten by
 four teenage skinheads, and then drowned after several hours of torture. Most of
 the other incidents also involved assault on lone immigrants by  gups of teenage
 sk'iheads, but actions against military facilities to steal weapons als occurred.
 Nevertheless, most estimates place the number of active neo-Nazis at less than
 2,000, and few appear to support their activities or sentiments. Many Swedes doubt
 whether such youth actually embrace neo-Nazi ideology, and the Government sup-
 
 
 1045
 ports activities by volunteer groups working against racism. The Government inves-
 tigates and prosecutes race-related crimes, although in many clashes between Swed-
 ish and immigrant youth gangs, authorities judge both sides as at fault. In the mur-
 der of the 14-year-old noted above, the judges, defense aed prosecution all received
 criticism for not drawing attention to the Nazi sympathies of the perpetrators, who
 forced their victim to say Nazi slogans before murdering him. The chief prosecutor
 himself criticized the legal system late in 1995 for not vigorously pursuing this and
 other instances where discrimination against minorities is a motivating factor in
 crimes.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The work force is 87 percent unionized. Career mili-
 tary personnel, police officers, and civilian government officials, as well as private
 sector workers in both manufacturing and service industries, are organized. Most
 business owners belong to counterpart employer organizations.
 Unions and empiloyer organizations operate independently of the Government and
 political parties (Fla ough the largest federation of unions has always been linked
 with the largest political party, the Social Democrats). The law protects the freedom
 of workers to associate and to strike, as well as for employers to organize and to
 conduct lockouts. Within limits protecting the public's immediate health and secu-
 rity, public employees also enjoy the right to strike. These laws are fully respected
 and are not challenged.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international bodies. They are affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and European Trade
 Union Confederation among others.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Labor and management, each
 represented by a national organization by sector (for example, retailers and engi-
 neering industries), negotiate framework agreements every 2 to 3 years. More d-
 tailed company-level agreements put such framework agreements into effect at the
 local level.
 The collective bargaining agreements covering virtually all public and private sec-
 tor workers expired; but new agreements are being concluded with a minimum of
 disruption to the economy. Of the few job actions in 1995 involving si _g ificant num-
 bers of employees, all came to settlement relatively quickly. This included strikes
 or lockouts involving retail workers, airline pilots, and municipal workers, as well
 as an overtime ban by metal workers.
 The law provides both workers and employers with effective mechanisms for re-
 solving complaints. The vast majority of complaints are resolved informally. If infor-
 mal discussions fail, the issue goes to a labor court, whose ruling sets a precedent
 to be followed by employers and unions. Cases of an employer firing an employee
 for union activities are virtually unheard of; no cases occurred in 1995. Several wild-
 cat or illegal strikes took place in 1995, but at a very small, local level and with
 quick resolution.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and the authorities effectively enforce this ban.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children.-Compulsory 9-year education ends
 at age 16, and the law permits full-time employment at that age under supervision
 of local authorities. Employees under age 18 may work only during daytime and
 under supervision. During summer and other vacation periods, children as young
 as 13 may work part time or in "light" work with parental permission. Union rep-
 resentatives, police and public prosecutors effectively enforce this restriction.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which nonunion establishments
 usually observe as well. Even the lowest paid workers can maintain a decent stand-
 ard of living for themselves and their families through substantial benefits (such as
 housing or ay care support) provided by social welfare entitlement programs. How-
 ever, cutbacks in these programs have made it harder for some workers to make
 ends meet, particularly for low-paid single women with children.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours or less. Both the law and collective bargain-
 ing agreements regulate overtime and rest periods. For workers not covered by a
 labor agreement, the law stipulates a limit for overtime at 200 hours a year, al-
 though exceptions may be granted for key employees with union approval; some col-
 lective bargaining agreements put the limit at 150 hours. The law requires a rest
 period after 5 hours of work, but does not stipulate a minimum duration; in practice
 it is usually 30 minutes. The law also provides all employees with a minimum of
 5 weeks of paid annual leave; labor contracts often provide more, particularly for
 higher ranking private sector employees and older public service workers.
 
 
 1046
 
 Occupational health and safety rules are set by a government-appointed board
 and monitored by trained union stewards, safety ombudsmen, and, occasionally, gov-
 ernment inspectors. These standards are very high, making workplaces both safe
 and healthy. Safbty ombudsmen have the authority to stop unsafe activity imme-
 diately and to call in an inspector. An individual also has the right to halt work
 in dangerous situations in order to consult a supervisor or safety representative.
