 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional'monarchy and a multiparty parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, exercises
 executive authority. The judiciary is independent of the Government.
 The Government effectively controls the police, all security organizations, and the
 armed forces.
 Sweden has an advanced industrial economy, mainly market-based, and a high
 standard of living, with extensive social welfare services. More than 90 percent of
 businesses are privately owned.
 The Government generally respects human rights and the law and judiciary pro-
 vide effective means of dealing with individual instances of abuse. The Parliament,
 police, or an ombudsman investigate thoroughly all allegations of human rights vio-
 lations, including the occasional allegation of police misconduct. Ombudsmen, who
 are appointed by the Parliament but with full autonomy, have the power to inves-
 tigate any private complaints of alleged abuses by authorities and to prescribe cor-
 rective action if required. The country has one of the world's most equal distribu-
 tions of income, but wage levels for women still lag behind those for men. The Gov-
 ernment has longstanding programs to deal with violence against women and abuse
 of children. There are occasional incidents of violence against minorities. The Gov-
 ernment, political parties, and youth organizations have active programs to promote
 tolerance and combat racism.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 During the year, accusations were made that a man who died in police custody
 in 1995 may have been a victim of excessive use of force by the police. Five autop-
 sies have been performed and the matter remains under investigation. New action
 in the case of assassinated Prime Minister Olof Palme, anticipated in 1997, did not
 take place. In the opinion of the Supreme Court, the case remains closed.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of poitically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. There
 are occasional reports of the use of excessive force by police in arrests, but thorough
 investigations have not produced evidence of a systemic problem. Typically, police
 officers found guilty of abuse have been suspended or otherwise disciplined. Be-
 tween January 1997 and June 1998, there were 12 cases of disciplinary or criminal
 sanctions against police charged with excessive use of force.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrests are public and by warrant. The
 police must lodge charges within 6 hours against persons detained for disturbing the
 public order or considered dangerous, and within 12 hours against those detained
 on other grounds. The law requires arraignment within 48 hours. The time between
 arrest and the first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours for detainees consid-
 ered dangerous, likely to destroy evidence, or likely to flee. In cases involving more
 than one individual and in the case of foreigners, courts can and do order continued
 detention for 2 weeks at a time while police are investigating. Such detentions can
 be protracted, particularly in drug cases. Other than such dangerous suspects, de-
 tainees are routinely released pending trial. Bail as such does not exist. If a person
 
 
 1522
 
 files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the official investigation, a court
 may order detention for up to 3 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks.
 The Government does not impose exile.
 Convicted foreign criminals who are not permanent residents often are deported
 at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution or other severe
 punishment in their home country
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without a public trial by a court of law, and the Government respects this provision.
 The judiciary is free of governmental interference. The accused have the right to
 competent counsel, but the Government provides public defenders to indigents only
 in cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or
 more. Convicted persons have the right of appeal in most instances.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 limits home searches to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' im-
 prisonment, such as murder, possession of narcotics, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage,
 counterfeiting, or treason. The authorities respect this provision. Normally, police
 must obtain court approval for a search or a wiretap. However, a senior police offi-
 cial may approve a search if time is a critical factor or the case involves a threat
 to life. A parliamentary committee each year reviews all monitoring of telephones,
 facsimile (fax) machines, or computers. In 1997 the Minister of Justice proposed
 that police be allowed to use wiretaps when investigating serious crimes. A special
 Ministry of Justice working group submitted a report on this proposal in April. The
 report is being reviewed by authorities.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government respects these provisions in practice. Most news-
 papers and periodicals are privately owned. The Government subsidizes daily news-
 papers, regardless of political affiliation. Broadcasters operate under a state conces-
 sion. Until a few years ago, the State had a monopoly over ground-based broadcast-
 ing, but a variety of commercial television channels (one ground-based, and several
 via satellite or cable) and several commercial radio stations now exist.
 The Government may censor publications containing national security informa-
 tion. A quasi-governmental body excises extremely graphic violence from films, tele-
 vision programs, and videos.
 Criticism of child pornography was widespread, and the debate on the legality of
 ownership of pornographic material continued. In May Parliament passed a law to
 criminalize possession and all handling of child pornography. The law is scheduled
 to go into effect on January 1, 1999. (The law excludes serious research or journal-
 ism from the prohibition). It is already illegal to publish or distribute such material.
 The Queen remains a strong and popular advocate of children's rights and opponent
 of child pornography.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government respects these
 rights in practice. Police require a permit for public demonstrations. However, the
 authorities routinely grant such permits, with rare exceptions to prevent clashes be-
 tween antagonistic groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government does not hamper the teaching or practice of any faith.
 The country has maintained a state (Lutheran) church for several hundred years,
 supported by a general "Church Tax" (although the Government routinely grants
 any request by a taxpayer for exemption from that tax). However, after decades of
 discussion in 1995 the Church of Sweden and the Government agreed to a formal
 separation. This reform will not become effective until the year 2000, and the
 Church will still receive some state support. As of 1996, citizens were no longer
 automatically members of the state church at birth. Sweden is tolerant of the di-
 verse religions practiced there, including the Mormon faith and Scientology.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and e-
 patriation.-The law provides for free movement within, from, and returning to the
 country, and the Government respects these rights in practice. Foreigners with sus-
 pected links to terrorist organizations may be required to report regularly to police
 authorities, but may travel freely within the country. Courts must review the re-
 porting requirement for each case at least once every 3 years.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Government provides first asylum. In keeping with international agreements, the
 
 
 1523
 
 Government now reviews applications for asylum more thoroughly than was the
 practice previously. The Government has sent some asylum seekers back to "safe"
 countries from which they entered. The number of applications for asylum or resi-
 dence permits increased in 1997 to 9,623 (from 5,763 in 1996). In 1995 the figure
 was 9,047. Through August 8,159 persons sought asylum, most of them Kurdish ref-
 ugees from Iraq and persons from the former Yugoslavia. The Government approved
 8,416 applications in 1997; 6,367 of these were for humanitarian reasons (usually
 family reunification) and 733 for individuals requiring protection. Nearly 11 percent
 of the country's population is foreign-born.
 There is an ongoing debate over the plight of asylum seekers who have submitted
 applications that are considered "manifestly unfounded," those coming to the coun-
 try through a "safe third country," and those whose applications remain under con-
 sideration for unduly long periods.of time. Because of the appeals process in the
 courts, cases can extend for many years. There also have been complaints of exceed-
 ingly accelerated procedures and inadequate legal safeguards for some asylum seek-
 ers, e.g., asylum seekers who were deported within 72 hours of arrival and did not
 receive access to lawyers. Most of these cases involve persons who have already
 sought asylum in Denmark, Norwegians who entered Sweden asking for asylum, or
 documented criminals. Some nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) maintain that
 Swedish asylum procedures lack rules that would guide the conduct of authorities
 to ensure legal protection for asylum seekers. The procedures accord great discretion
 to individuals in decisionmaking positions. According to the NGO's, the decision-
 makers use arbitrary, unspecified, and inconsistent criteria. A broad interpretation
 of what constitutes a "safe third country" permits the return of applicants to a third
 country. The Government is reviewing conditions in a number of countries that were
 previously considered to be "safe third countries." During the year the Government
 decreed that athletes and researchers who have lived for extended periods in the
 country can be granted permanent resident permits. The media gave prominent at-
 tention to an Iraqi doctor who, after having lived in Sweden for many years, was
 ordered deported. However, after determining that he might be subject to torture
 in Iraq, the decision was reversed. The Iraqi doctor also fell under the new ruling
 covering athletes and researchers.
 In 1997 the Government changed its rules on detention centers for asylum seek-
 ers. Previously, asylum seekers with deportation orders were detained to prevent
 flight. Under the new rules, detention centers cannot have their doors locked, even
 in the case of individuals awaiting deportation. Detention facilities are clean, com-
 fortable, and relatively unrestricted. On occasion, when no other facility is available,
 asylum seekers are detained in remand prisons.
 By year's end, there were 63,000 Tefugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina who had
 been granted residence permits, while 1,300 had returned to Bosnia. The country
 has accepted over 100,000 refugees -from the former Yugoslavia. The Government
 provides funds for Bosnians to travel to their homeland in-order to determine if they
 wish to be repatriated. The Government provides financial incentives for Bosnians
 willing to return, but there is no forced repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides ways and means for citizens to change the Government
 and citizens exercised this right most recently in September. Elections to the 349-
 member unicameral Parliament are held every 4 years. Suffrage is universal for citi-
 zens 18 years and older, with secret balloting. Noncitizen residents have the right
 to participate in local (city and county) elections.
 Women participate actively in the political process and Government. They cur-
 rently compose 43.6 percent of the Parliament and half of the Cabinet. The govern-
 ing Social Democratic Party largely has held to its pledge to place women in half
 of all political appointments at all levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private organizations actively monitor issues such as the impact of social
 legislation, anti-immigrant or racist activities, and the condition of the indigenous
 Sami population. The official ombudsmen also publicize abuses of state authority
 and have the right to initiate actions to rectify such abuses. Government agencies
 are in close contact with a variety of local and international groups working in the
 country and abroad to improve human rights observance.
 
 
 1524
 
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and the Government
 respects this provision.
 Women.-The Government has longstanding programs to deal with violence
 against women. There were 19,093 reported cases of assault against women in 1997,
 compared with 18,560 in 1996. Most involved spousal abuse. In three-quarters of the
 assaults, the perpetrator was an acquaintance of the victim. Reported abuse against
 women occurs disproportionately in immigrant communities.
 The law provides complainants protection from contact with their abusers, if so
 desired. In some cases, the authorities help women obtain new identities and homes.
 Since 1994 the Government has provided electronic alarms or bodyguards for
 women in extreme danger of assault. Both national and local governments provide
 monetary support to volunteer groups that provide shelter and other assistance to
 abused women. The authorities strive to apprehend and prosecute abusers. Typi-
 cally, the sentence for abuse is a prison term or psychiatric treatment. However,
 women complained about short sentences and early release of offenders.
 The number of reported rapes of persons over age 15 was 1,050 in 1997 and 1,034
 in 1996. The law does not differentiate between spousal and non-spousal rape.
 In December 1997, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that it would grant
 funds to the Foundation Women's Forum (FWF) for a project to prevent trafficking
 in women. The initial aim of the project is to identify and survey voluntary organi-
 zations, authorities, and existing networks that work to prevent trafficking and to
 support and rehabilitate the victims. The survey covered European Union (EU)
 members and the FWF reported the results of the project's initial stage to the Min-
 istry for Foreign Affairs. The survey indicated that there are very few organizations
 in the region that monitor trafficking, but that those opposed to prostitution recog-
 nize the need for greater efforts. There is evidence of increasing trafficking from the
 Baltics and Russia into Sweden. The FWF has applied for an EU grant to work on
 this problem.-
 The law prohibits sexual harassment. During the year, the law was amended to
 specify clearly employers' responsibility to prevent sexual harassment in the work-
 place and to formulate and post a specific policy for employees. Employers who do
 not intervene against harassment at work can be obliged to pay damages to the vic-
 tim. As with other forms of discrimination, women may take complaints to the
 Equality Ombudsman in the Labor Ministry, to the courts, or to their unions.
 Agriculture Minister Margareta Winberg has the overall lead in the Government
 for equality issues, which apply to women and men equally. All government inves-
 tigations and decisions must take equality considerations into account. Stockholm
 University professor Dr. Agneta Stark is the leading member of a team charged
 with the education of top public sector figures and their staffs on matters of equal-
 ity. The Social and Justice Ministries are deeply involved as well, especially con-
 cerning combating violence against women.
 In 1997 journalistic investigations focused Swedish and international attention on
 the country's pre-1976 practice of forced sterilization. The majority of those steri-
 lized were either mently or physically disabled. Swedes had known for years that
 such operations took place under pre-World War II legislation. Between 1934 and
 1976, 62,888 forced sterilizations were carried out, 95 percent of them on women.
 In 1997 the Government appointed a commission of academics and legal and medi-
 cal experts to investigate the broad legal, socio-medical, and historic circumstances
 of the sterilizations. The commission, which is expected to conclude its inquiry by
 July 1, 1999, is to give priority to the question of damages to victims and will also
 look into the possible existence of other categories of victims. Since the 1980's, the
 Government has received 130 claims for compensation; the Government has pro-
 vided compensation in 17 instances, noting formal errors committed in these cases.
 Each of the 17 persons compensated received approximately $6,333 (SEK 50,000).
 Individual ministers expressed regret and astonishment over the practice and how
 long it continued.
 In a new study conducted by the U.N. Development Program in 1998, Sweden re-
 ceived the highest ranking on equality for women, with salaries averaging about 78
 percent of men's. The law requires employers to treat men and women alike in hir-
 ing, promotion, and pay, including equal pay for comparable work. The Equality
 Ombudsman, a public official, investigates complaints of gender discrimination in
 the labor market. Women may also pursue complaints through the courts. A third
 option, and by far the most common, involves settling allegations using the employ-
 ee's labor union as mediator. In 1997 69 women and 16 men registered gender dis-
 crimination cases with the Equality Ombudsman. None of these cases appeared be-
 fore the courts in 1997. A total of 33 of the 85 cases involved women citing salary
 
 
 1525
 discrimination. Nine cases were settled by mediation, 30 were withdrawn and 10
 were dropped. The remainder are pending.
 Women initiated several test cases of the "equal pay for comparable work" clause.
 One case has been referred to the European Court and is widely expected to set a
 precedent. All employers with more than 10 employees must prepare an annual
 equality plan, including a survey of pay differences between male and female em-
 ployees. The equality ombudsman reviews these plans.
 Children.-Nine years of basic schooling are compulsory and are provided to all
 children at state expense (including transportation, books, and lunches). Municipali-
 ties are responsible for operating lay care centers and preschools for children with
 working parents which are also open to others as space permits (many children
 begin full-time preschool at 1 year of age). There are also state-subsidized family
 day care centers and "open" preschools (for part- or full-time attendance on an non-
 enrollment or drop-in basis) as well as leisure centers for after-school activities. Par-
 ents are provided with a government allowance worth approximately $1,000 per
 year for each child under 16 years of age. Families with children can obtain a
 means-tested housing allowance. Children with certain severe disabilities have the
 right to a personal assistant. State-funded dental care is provided for children up
 to 19 years of age. According to statistics, 99 percent of all expectant mothers re-
 ceive prenatal care and visit well-baby clinics. Infant mortality rates are extremely
 low (4.8 deaths per 1,000 in the first year of life). Hospital care is state-funded for
 children under 16 years of age. Since 1993 the country has had a Children's Om-
 budsman to safeguard children's interests and rights. The Ombudsman also ensures
 that the Government lives up to its obligations under the U.N. International Con-
 vention on the Rights of the Child. An NGO, Children's Rights in Society, offers
 counseling to troubled youngsters.
 The Government allocates funds to private organizations concerned with chil-
 dren's rights. Sweden remains active internationally in efforts to prevent child
 abuse. In 1997 the Queen established a charity campaign, "Children of the World,"
 to raise funds for sexually abused children in the Baltics, rehabilitation of child sol-
 diers in Liberia, and Mozambique's street children.
 Although the physical abuse of children appears relatively uncommon, the public
 and authorities remain concerned by consistent data indicating an increase over the
 past several years. The number of reported cases for children under the age of 15
 rose to 5,263 in 1997, up from 5,043 in 1996. The number of reported cases of sexual
 abuse of children under the age of 15 was 2,412 in 1997 and 2,418 in 1996. Many
 children's rights advocates believe that this change reflects a true increase (as op-
 posed to an increased incidence of reporting) due to the strains imposed on families
 by the difficult economic situation.
 The law prohibits parents or other caretakers from abusing children mentally or
 physically in any way. Parents, teachers, and other adults are subject to prosecution
 if they physically punish a child, including slapping or spanking. Children have the
 right to report such abuses to the police. The authorities respect these laws, and
 the usual sentence is a fine combined with counseling and monitoring by social
 workers. However, if the situation warrants authorities may remove children from
 the home and place them in foster care. Foster parents virtually never receive per-
 mission to adopt long-term foster children, even in cases where the parents are seen
 as unfit or seek no contact with the child. Critics charge that this policy places the
 rights of biological parents over the needs of children for security in permanent fam-
 ily situations.
 People With Disabilities.-While there is no specific law prohibiting discrimination
 against persons with disabilities, considerable efforts are made to ensure that the
 disabled enjoy equal opportunities. Legislation to address discrimination in the
 workplace is under consideration and is expected to be taken up by Parliament in
 early 1999. Since 1994, the country has had an ombudsman for disability issues.
 The Government provides disabled persons with assistance aimed at allowing them
 to live as normal a life as possible, preferably outside an institutional setting. This
 may include a personal assistant to the severely disabled starting in day care and
 continuing to the university level and at the workplace, plus improvement of the
 workplace's accessibility to wheelchairs. It also encompasses services such as home
 care or group living. Regulations for new buildings require full accessibility, but the
 Government has no such requirement for existing public buildings. Many buildings
 and some public transportation remain inaccessible to disabled persons. Compulsory
 education applies to all disabled children. Deaf children have the right to education
 in sign language.
 Indigenous People.-The country counts at least 17,000 Sami (formerly known as
 Lapps) among its 8.85 million inhabitants (Sami organizations place that number
 somewhat higher, 25,000 to 30,000). In 1994 Sweden was the last of the Nordic
 
 
 1526
 countries to allow formation of a Sametinget, or Sami Parliament, as an advisory
 body to the Government. Under the current Government, Sami issues fall under the
 Ministry of Agriculture.
 The Sami continue a protracted struggle for recognition as an indigenous people
 under a variety of international agreements, such as International Labor Organiza-
 tion Convention 169. Historically, the Government has resisted granting the Sami
 such rights. For instance, Sami children had no right to education in their native
 language until provision of such education to immigrant children forced the Govern-
 ment to grant Sami at least equal treatment. As a result of such education, north-
 ern Sami dialects have enjoyed a recent renaissance. However, Sami dialects in the
 southern portions of traditional Sami lands now may have too few native speakers
 to survive as living languages.
 Late in 1994, the Government removed from the Sami the right to control hunting
 and fishing activities on Sami village lands, permitting instead totally unlimited
 hunting and fishing activity on all government property. Sami leaders continued to
 protest this change during the year.
 Although some Sami state that they face discrimination in housing and employ-
 ment on an individual basis, particularly in the southern mountain regions, the
 Government does not condone such discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.-For many years the Government has supported the activi-
 ties of groups working to combat anti-Semitism.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Scattered acts of violence or harassment
 against minorities continued, usually from "skinheads" with neo-Nazi sympathies.
 Although the Government does not compile national statistics on such acts, in re-
 cent years there have been roughly 100 violent incidents with racist overtones annu-
 ally. Since 1994 persons arrested and charged for such attacks have received rel-
 atively harsh sentences. For example, during the year several participants in a rock
 concert featuring pro-Nazi songs received prison terms. Band and audience members
 had also been videotaped making Nazi salutes. In another instance, a person was
 sentenced to 2 months in prison after delivering a lecture advocating Nazi philoso-
 phy at a university in northern Sweden. The instructor who invited the lecturer was
 fired, released on probation, and fined.
 Most estimates place the number of active neo-Nazis at less than 2,000, and there
 appears to be little popular support for their activities or sentiments. Many Swedes
 doubt whether such youth actually embrace neo-Nazi ideology, and the Government
 supports activities by volunteer groups working against racism. The Government in-
 vestigates and prosecutes race-related crimes, although in many clashes between
 Swedish and immigrant youth gangs, authorities judge both sides as at fault. The
 Supreme Court has ruled that it can be illegal to wear xenophobic symbols or racist
 paraphernalia. Right-wing groups, which have and exercise the right to dem-
 onstrate, are not permitted to display signs and banners with provocative symbols
 at their rallies.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The work force is around 80 percent unionized. Ca-
 reer military personnel, police officers, and civilian government officials, as well as
 private sector workers in both manufacturing and service industries, are organized.
 Most business owners belong to counterpart employer organizations.
 Unions and employer organizations operate independently of the Government and
 political parties (although the largest federation of unions has always been linked
 with the largest political party, the Social Democrats). The law protects the freedom
 of workers to associate and to strike, as well as for employers to organize and to
 conduct lockouts. Within limits protecting the public's immediate health and secu-
 rity, public employees also enjoy the right to strike. These laws are fully respected
 and are not challenged.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international bodies. They are affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and European Trade
 Union Confederation among others.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Management-labor coopera-
 tion tends to be excellent and nonconfrontational. Labor and management, each rep-
 resented by a national organization by sector (for example, retailers and engineering
 industries), negotiate framework agreements every 2 to 3 years. More detailed com-
 pany-level agreements put such framework agreements into effect at the local level.
 New framework agreements were signed during the-year with most valid until 2001.
 In contrast with the recent past, most agreements with labor unions now provide
 for a degree of individualized pay, including merit bonuses.
 The law provides both workers and employers with effective mechanisms for re-
 solving complaints. The vast majority of complaints are resolved informally. Cases
 
 
 1527
 of an employer firing an employee for union activities are virtually unheard of; there
 were no reports of such cases during the year. In some instances, unions even de-
 mand collective agreements regardless of the views and union status of employees.
 The Government is studying ways to strengthen the system of public mediation.
 There were few strikes during the year, on an average of approximately one legal
 strike per month, usually involving only one individual and lasting 14 to 22 days.
 There were two wildcat strikes involving 10 to 40 persons that lasted about 10 to
 15 days.
 In 1997 12 employer associations and 8 unions representing 800,000 manufactur-
 ing employees reached an agreement on steps to prevent strikes and lockouts, such
 as requiring serious wage negotiations to start 3 months before a collective agree-
 ment expires and appointing a mediator if an agreement has not been reached after
 2 months. As a result of this agreement, wages increased during the year by 2.5
 to 3 percent following negotiations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and the authorities effectively enforce this ban. The law prohibits
 forced and bonded labor by children and the Government enforces this prohibition
 effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and the Government enforces this pro-
 hibition effectively (see Section 6.c.). Compulsory 9-year education ends at age 16,
 and the law permits full-time employment at that age under supervision of local au-
 thorities. Employees under age 18 may work only during the daytime and under su-
 pervision. During summer and other vacation periods, children as young as 13 years
 may work part-time or in "light" work with parental permission. Union representa-
 tives, police, and public prosecutors effectively enforce this restriction. The Govern-
 ment actively supports efforts to protect and improve children's rights. The Govern-
 ment has earmarked about $8 million of its aid budget to help fight child labor in
 impoverished countries.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which nonunion establishments
 usually observe as well. Even the lowest paid workers can maintain a decent stand-
 ard of living for themselves and their families through substantial benefits (such as
 housing or day care support) provided by social welfare entitlement programs. How-
 ever, cutbacks in these programs have made it harder for some workers to make
 ends meet, particularly for low-paid single women with children.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours or less. Both the law and collective bargain-
 ing agreements regulate overtime and rest periods. For workers not covered by a
 labor agreement, the law stipulates a limit for overtime at 200 hours a year, al-
 though exceptions may be granted for key employees with union approval; some col-
 lective bargaining agreements put the limit at 150 hours. The law requires a rest
 period after 5 hours of work but does not stipulate a minimum duration; in practice
 it is usually 30 minutes. The law also provides all employees with a minimum of
 5 weeks of paid annual leave; labor contracts often provide more, particularly for
 higher ranking private sector employees and older public service workers. In 1997
 the Government passed a new labor law making it easier for employers to hire
 workers for limited periods, as well as empowering local unions to agree to excep-
 tions to last-in, first-out laws.
 Occupational health and safety rules are set by a government-appointed board
 and monitored by trained union stewards, safety ombudsmen, and, occasionally, gov-
 ernment inspectors. These standards are very high, making workplaces both safe
 and healthy. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop unsafe activity imme-
 diately and to call in an inspector. An individual also has the right to halt work
 in dangerous situations in order to consult a supervisor or safety representative.
