 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy, whose King is Chief of
 State. All executive authority is vested in the Cabinet,
 which is formed through direct parliamentary elections every
 3 years and consists of the Prime Minister (head of
 government) and some 20 ministers. The 349 seats in the
 unicameral Parliament are divided proportionally among the 6
 political parties currently represented. The Social
 Democratic Party, Sweden's largest, retained power in the
 September elections. For the first time in 70 years, a new
 party, the Greens, secured enough votes to be represented in
 Parliament.
 Sweden is an advanced industrial democracy with a high
 standard of living, extensive social services, and a mixed
 economy. Over 90 percent of business is privately owned.
 Private persons are entirely free to express their political
 preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal
 resolution-of disputes. Ombudsmen, appointed by the
 Parliament wifth-full autonomy, investigate private complaints
 of alleged abuse of authority by officials and stipulate
 corrective action, if required.
 Respect for human rights is a basic social value that
 underlies Sweden's active support of international efforts to
 improve human rights observance. The human rights situation
 was largely unchanged in 1988, but some human rights
 organizations, such as the Swedish section of Amnesty
 International, complained about human rights violations,
 particularly with reference to refugees seeking asylum who
 were rejected at the border. The number of refugee children
 arriving alone in Sweden has increased, and there were
 complaints that the children are not resettled with families
 quickly enough, but instead are housed together in camps until
 their residence permits are issued. There have also been
 complaints about the treatment of individual Kurds in
 connection with the continuing search for the murderer of
 former Prime Minister Olof Palme.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or domestic
 opposition groups does not occur. The murder of Prime
 Minister Olof Palme in 1986 has still not been resolved,
 however, and the motive for his assassination is still
 unknown.
 b. Disappearance
 Abduction, secret arrests, and clandestine detention by
 Swedish authorities do not occur.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Swedish law prohibits these abuses, and such prohibitions are
 respected by Swedish authorities. Occasional accusations
 against individual policemen of excessive use of force in
 
 
 1189
 SWEDEN
 connection with arrests are carefully investigated and have
 not produced evidence of a systematic problem. During 1988
 there were two instances when temporarily detained persons
 died in police custody. So far, however, no proof has been
 presented that the deaths were caused by the police's
 employment of excessive force.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Statutory guarantees of individual liberty are observed.
 Persons disturbing the public order or considered dangerous
 may be held for 6 hours without charge. Criminal suspects may
 be held no longer than 12 hours without formal charges. If a
 person files for bankruptcy and refuses to cooperate with the
 official investigation, a court may order detention for up to
 3 months'(with judicial review every 2 weeks). Arrest is open
 and by warrant. New legislation took effect on July 1 to
 shorten the time between detention and arrest, which
 previously was set at 5 days. The time frame is now generally
 48 hours, and weekend and holiday courts have been set up. In
 extraordinarily difficult cases, the time between arrest and
 first court hearing may be extended to 96 hours. Bail does
 not exist, but suspects not considered dangerous or likely to
 destroy evidence are released to await trial. By law, Swedish
 citizens cannot be expelled from the country. Convicted
 foreign criminals are often expelled at the conclusion of
 their prison terms, unless they are'likely to face execution
 or other severe punishment at home.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty without public
 trial by a court of law. The judiciary functions freely and
 independently. The accused has the right to effective
 counsel, although budget cutbacks since 1983 have restricted
 the availability of public defenders to cases where the
 maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or more.
 There are no military courts in peacetime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Freedom from these offenses is guaranteed by law. Home
 searches are limited to investigations of crimes punishable by
 at least 2 years' imprisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape,
 arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, and treason. There are no
 undue restrictions on marriage or having children in Sweden.
 Wiretaps are permitted only in cases involving narcotics or
 national security. Searches and wiretaps normally require
 court approval. When the time factor is critical, or when
 life is believed to be in immediate danger, the ranking police
 officer can approve these measures. Limitations on such
 police decisions were introduced during 1988. Search warrants
 are granted only on the basis of well-founded suspicion.
 Human rights groups in Sweden have expressed concern about the
 increased number of wiretaps. In 1980 the number of persons
 subjected to wiretapping was 220; in 1984 the figure had
 increased to 414. Not counting wiretaps in connection with
 the Palme murder investigation, the number dropped to 213 in
 1986. There is no indication that telephone monitoring is
 
 
 1190
 SWEDEN
 done arbitrarily. A major political scandal developed, and
 the Minister of Justice was forced to resign, when a police
 officer connected with the Palme murder investigation was
 caught attempting to smuggle into the country advanced,
 illegal bugging devices apparently intended for use in a
 separate investigation of the Palme killing which did not have
 full government approval.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Swedes enjoy these freedoms fully. Government subsidies to
 daily newspapers, regardless of political affiliation, assure
 the expression of differing opinions. Publications containing
 sensitive national security information as well as excessive
 violence in films and television are subject to censorship.
 Commercial video tapes are also screened and banned if they
 contain scenes of unacceptable violence. Radio and television
 broadcasting are a government monopoly, while newspapers and
 periodicals are for the most part privately owned and
 published.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Swedes exercise these freedoms without restraint. Public
 demonstrations require a police permit, for which applications
 are routinely approved. Only one demonstration was denied
 during 1988 when conflicting Iranian groups wanted to
 demonstrate at the same time in the same place.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swedes have unimpaired religious freedom. There is a state
 Lutheran church, supported by public funds, but all faiths are
 freely observed. Parents have full freedom to teach their
 children religious practices of their choice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement within and from the country and voluntary
 repatriation are guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 Refugees, displaced persons, and others seeking political
 asylum are on the whole generously treated, though long
 waiting periods and denial of asylum requests from applicants
 not meeting internationally agreed criteria have become
 common. Freedom of movement has been restricted for certain
 Kurds, who were to be expelled after serving prison terms; it
 was legally impossible to do so, however, because they faced
 execution in their home country. Swedish authorities have
 classified these Kurds as terrorists and restricted their
 movements to their respective communities of residence.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Sweden has a long history of vigorous democratic political
 life within a representative, multiparty parliamentary
 system. To enter Parliament, a party must win a minimum of
 4 percent of the votes cast. There is universal suffrage
 above the age of 18. Although voting is not compulsory,
 approximately 85 percent of eligible voters participated in
 
 
 1191
 SWEDEN
 the 1988 elections. Aliens who have been legal residents for
 at least 3 years have the right to vote and run for office in
 municipal elections. There has been periodic public
 discussion about extending this right to national elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights-
 Ombudsmen serve as official governmental monitors of
 individual rights in Sweden, effective both in making citizens
 aware of their rights and publicizing and correcting abuses of
 state authority. Active private organizations monitor issues
 such as the impact on individuals of comprehensive social
 legislation and the condition of the native Lapp population.
 Government agencies are in close contact with Amnesty
 International, the Red Cross, church organizations, and a
 variety of other private groups working in Sweden and abroad
 to improve human rights observance. State-supported Stockholm
 University offers instruction in making human rights
 complaints to bodies such as the European Commission on Human
 Rights.
 In October 1985, the United Nations Human Rights Commission
 carried out a study on Sweden. The Commission commented upon
 the fact that Sweden lacks forceful legislation against
 racism. Sweden's answer was that such legislation would not
 be compatible with the Swedish Constitution, which guarantees
 full freedom of speech and the right to form organizations.
 However, a government commission was set up to study methods
 of stopping racist groups.
 In 1988 the European Commission for Human Rights criticized
 Sweden for a violation of human rights. The case involved a
 couple whose children had been taken away from them by the
 authorities since they were deemed unfit parents. The
 children had been placed in homes far away from their parents
 in order to prevent future contact. The authorities paid
 monetary compensation to the parents and allowed reunification
 of the family, after it appeared that the family's problems
 had been satisfactorily resolved.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Basic human needs for the entire population are thoroughly met
 without discrimination. The State provides social welfare and
 medical services, benefits to families, pensions, and
 disability and unemployment insurance. The Government runs
 special programs to help immigrants adjust to Swedish life and
 culture (including 240 hours of paid language instruction).
 Six of Sweden's 284 municipalities have refused to permit
 refugees to settle in them. Both the Government and the
 political parties have tried to persuade these communities to
 change their attitude. In a local referendum in September on
 whether or not to allow refugees to settle there, one
 municipality voted by 70 percent to exclude refugees. The
 mayor of that municipality faces exclusion from his party, the
 Center Party. But studies show that a majority of the Swedes
 have a positive attitude towards refugees.
 The Government supports groups working against racism.
 Swedish schools seek to provide education and information
 designed to counter racist tendencies. In 1986 the Government
 
 
 1192
 SWEDEN
 appointed a special ombudsman to deal with complaints of
 racism or discrimination. Civil and criminal complaints of
 racism or discrimination have increased.
 Institutionalized efforts to extend equality between the sexes
 have continued. A new law adopted in 1988 aims at promoting
 equality in five areas: in the labor market, in education,
 within families, women's role in the economy, and women's
 influence in society. A public ombudsman, called the equality
 ombudsman, investigates complaints of sex discrimination in
 the labor market. Employers are required to base hiring
 decisions on merit and to pursue actively the goal of equality.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to strike. A
 large majority of the working population, including career
 military personnel and civilian government officials, belongs
 to trade unions. Unions conduct their activities with
 complete independence from the Government and may freely
 affiliate with international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers are free to organize and bargain collectively. This
 right is applied and practiced uniformly throughout Sweden.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist in Sweden.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children
 In Sweden, compulsory education ends at age 16, and full-time
 employment is normally permitted at this age under supervision
 of local municipal or community authorities. Young people
 under 18 years old may work only during daytime and under a
 foreman's supervision. During the summer and in vacation
 periods, children as young as 13 years of age may be hired for
 part-time work or light "summer jobs" for periods of 5 days or
 less, although it is rare for young people under 15 years of
 age to find a job except with family members.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Although there is no minimum wage law, wages are set by
 collective bargaining contracts. Wage rates typically are
 observed even at nonunion establishments. Even the lowest
 paid workers are able to maintain a decent standard of
 living. A designated and trained trade union steward monitors
 observance of the regulations governing working conditions.
 Occupational health and safety rules are closely observed.
 Safety ombudsmen and safety committees are required by law in
 large enterprises. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to
 stop immediately life-threatening activity and call for a
 labor inspector. The Swedish courts have upheld this
 authority. The Swedish authorities are in the process of
 compiling a list of the 400,000 most dangerous jobs that cause
 long-term health problems, and trying to find ways to improve
 the situation for those employees.
 
 
 1193
