 SWEDEN
 Fundamental political freedoms and human rights of
 Swedish citizens are guaranteed by the Swedish consti-
 tution. Sweden occupies a prominent position in inter-
 national efforts to enhance human rights. In the UN,
 it has been active in support of initiatives against
 torture, campaigned for measures to ensure religious
 tolerance, and proposed the outlaw of capital punishment.
 Sweden has ratified the two U.N. International Covenants
 and the Optional Protocol of the Civil and Political
 Rights covenant, and is a party to the European Conven-
 tion on Human Rights. In the North/South dialogue
 Sweden has been in the forefront of industrialized
 countries in arguing for major resource transfer by
 means of grant aid to the least developed nations. Its
 own aid program at one percent GNP, is far larger than
 our own and equalled only by that of the Netherlands.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Freedom from torture is guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in prac-
 tice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Guarantees with respect to the integrity of the person
 are scrupulously heeded.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Swedish constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without public trial by a court of law.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Freedom from invasion of the home is guaranteed by law
 and respected in practice.
 (312)
 
 
 313
 2. Governmental -Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Sweden has been a world leader since the 1930's in
 policies to meet basic needs such as food, shelter,
 health care and education. Per capita gross national
 produce in Sweden is above that in the United States,
 and wealth is more evenly distributed among all segments
 of the population.
 The comprehensive system of human rights which exists
 in Sweden exists by government design. The govern-
 ment and a cross section of Swedes from right to left
 consider the protection of human rights a cornerstone
 of Swedish society. Where the edges are beginning to
 fray slightly, as in pressures against Mediterranean
 minorities, the Swedes recognize the problem. Swedish
 ombudsmen, appointed by Parliament and with full autonomy,
 are charged with the investigation of complaints of private
 citizens that their rights have been violated.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 Swedes enjoy freedom of thought, speech, press, religion
 and assembly.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement within and from the country.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The country has a long history of orderly democratic
 political life in which all citizens and certain
 foreign residents fully participate. The labor move-
 ment is completely free to organize, highly developed,
 and is the backbone of Sweden's largest political
 party, the Social Democrats.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Sweden's record is good enough that the question of an
 independent, outside investigation of alleged human
 rights violations has not, to date, been posed. The
 continued existence of a free, inquisitive press makes
 it unlikely that such investigations will be needed in
 the future. With regard to third countries, we believe
 that Sweden could support the principle of independent
 outside investigations.
 
 22-145 0 - 78 - 21
 
 
