 SWEDEN
 Sweden is a constitutional monarchy and a multiparty parliamentary democracy.
 The King is Chief of State. The Cabinet, headed by the Prime Minister, exercises
 executive authority. The judiciary is independent of the Government.
 The Government effectively controls the police, all security organizations, and the
 armed forces.
 Sweden has an advanced industrial economy, mainly market-based, and a high
 standard of living, with extensive social welfare services. More than 90 percent of
 businesses are privately owned.
 Human rights are deeply respected and widely protected. Swedes are entirely free
 to express their political preferences, pursue individual interests, and seek legal res-
 olution of disputes. The Parliament police, or an ombudsman investigate thoroughly
 all allegations of human rights violations, including the occasional allegation of po-
 lice misconduct. Sweden's ombudsmen, appointed by the Parliament but with full
 autonomy, hav e     power to investigate any private complaints of alleged abuses
 by authorities and to presribe corrective action if required. Sweden has one of the
 world's most equal distributions of income, but wage levels for women still la be-
 hind those for men. There are occasional incidents of violence against minorities.
 The Government, political parties, and youth organizations have active programs to
 
 
 1136
 promote tolerance and combat racism. The Government has established programs
 to deal with violence against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these abuses, and the authorities respect such prohibitions. There
 are occasional reporL of the use of excessive force by police in arrests, but thorough
 investigations have not produced evidence of a systematic problem. Typically, police
 officers found guilty of abuse have been suspended or otherwise disciplined. Such
 disciplinary actions numbered less than a dozen nationwide and usually involved of-
 ficers-in-training found unfit for permanent duty
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arrests are public and by warrant. The
 police must lodge charges within 6 hours against persons detained for disturbing the
 pubic order or considered dangerous, and within 12 hours against those detained
 on other gro und. The law requires arraignment within 48 hoursThe time between
 arrest and the firt court hearing may be extended to 96 hours for detainees consid-
 ered dangerous, likely to destroy evidence, or likely to flee, but this occurs very rare-
 ly. Other than such dangerous suspects, detainees are routinely released pending
 trial. Bail as such does not exist. If a person files for bankruptcy and refuses to co-
 operate with the official investigation, a court may order detention for up to 3
 months, with judicial review every 2 weeks.
 The Government does not impose exile.
 Convicted foreign criminals who are not permanent residents often are deported
 at the conclusion of their prison terms, unless they risk execution or other severe
 punishment in their home country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution forbids deprivation of liberty
 without a public trial by a court of law, and the Government respects this provision.
 The judiciary is free of governmental interference. The accused have the right to
 competent counsel, but the Government provides public defenders to indigents only
 in cases where the maximum penalty could be a prison sentence of 6 months or
 more. Convicted persons have the right of appeal in most instances.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitray Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.The law
 limits home searches to investigations of crimes punishable by at least 2 years' im-
 prisonment, such as murder, robbery, rape, arson, sabotage, counterfeiting, or trea-
 son. The authorities respect this prevision. Normally, police must obtain court ap-
 proval for a search or a wiretap. However, a senior police official may aprove a
 search if time is a critical factor or the case involves a threat to life. A parliamen-
 tary committee each year reviews all monitoring of telephones, facsimie (fax), or
 computers.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government respects these prvisions in practice. Most news-
 papers and periodicals are privately owned. The Government subsidizes daily news-
 papers, regardless of political affiliation. Broadcasters operate under a state conces-
 sion.   uia ew   ears ago the State had a monopoly over ground-based broadcast-
 ing, but a variety of commercial television channels (one ground-based, and several
 via satellite or cable) and several commercial radio stations now exist.
 The Government may censr publications containing national security informa-
 tion. A quasi-governmental body excises extremely graphic violence from films, tele-
 vision programs, and videos.
 Criticism of child pornography was widespread, and the debate over its legality
 continued in 1996. Sweden hosted the United Nations (U.N.) Conference on the Sex-
 ual Exploitation of Children. The Queen has emerged as a strong and popular advo-
 cate of children's rights and opponent of child poernography.
 Academic freedom is reseWted.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assciation.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government respects these
 rights in practice. Police require a permit for public demonstrations. However, the
 
 
 1137
 authorities routinely grant such permits, with rare exceptions to prevent clashes be-
 tween antagonistic groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government does not hamper the teaching or practice of any faith.
 Sweden has maintained a state (Lutheran) church for several hundred years, sup-
 ported by a general 'Church Tax' (although the Government routinely grants any
 request   ya t    ayer for exemption from that tax). Ater decades of discussion,
 however, mn 1995 the Church of Swedn and the Government agreed to a formal sep-
 artion. This reform will not become effective until the year 2000, and the Church
 will still receive some state support. Beginning in 1996 citizens are no longer auto-
 matically members of the state church at birth. Sweden is tolerant of the diverse
 religions practiced there, including the Mormon faith and Sientlogy.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for free movement within, from, and returning to the
 country, and the Government respects these rights in practice. Foreigners with sus-
 pected links to terrorist organizations ma be required to report regularly to police
 authorities, but ma travel freely within Sweden. Courts must review the reporting
 requirement for each case at least once every 3 years.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The Govern-
 ment provides first asylum. Sweden has adopted an incsingly restrictive asylum
 policy. The Government has sent som asylum seekers back to 'safe" countries
 through which they arrived in Sweden. The number of asylum applications dropped
 to a 10-year low of 10,000 in 1995, and 2,715 in the first half of 1996. There is an
 ongoing debate over the plight of asylum seekers who have submitted applications
 that are considered "manifestly unfounded," those coming to Sweden through a "safe
 third country," and those whose applications remain under consideration for unduly
 long periods of time in some cases as long as 9 years. There have also been com-
 plaints of exceedingly accelerated procedures and inadequate legal safeguards for
 some asylum seekers, e.g., asylum seekers who were deported within 72 hours of
 arrival and did not receive access to lawYers. A broad interpretation of what con-
 stitutes a 'safe third country" permits the return of applicants to a third countr
 without consideration of whether that country has an asylum policy under which
 the applicant might be admitted. Asylum seekers are occasionally detained upon ar-
 rival in Sweden and, when awaiting deportation after a negative decision on their
 claim, in cases where the authorities fear flight to avoid deportation. Detention fa-
 cilities are clean, comfortable, and relatively unrestricted. On occasion, when no
 other facility is available, asylum seekers are detained in remand prisons.
 Approximately 60,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina are living in Swe-
 den. The Government provides funds for Bosnians to travel to their homeland in
 order to determine if they wish to be repatriated. The long-term status of those
 choosing not to return is uncertain. Sweden has accepted over 100,000 refugees from
 the former Yugoslavia.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides ways and means for citizens to change the Government.
 Elections to the 349-member unicameral Parliament are held every 4 years. Suf-
 frage is universal for citizens 18 years and older, with secret balloting. Noncitizen
 residents have the right to participate in local (city and county) elections.
 Women participate actively in the political process and Government. They cur-
 rently compose 41 percent of the Parliament and half of the Cabinet. The governing
 Social Democratic Party largely has held to its pledge to place women in half of all
 political appointments at all levels.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private organizations actively monitor issues such as the impact of social
 legislation, anti-immigrant or racist activities, and the condition of th~e indigenous
 Sani population. The official ombudsmen also publicize abuses of state authority
 and have the right to initiate actions to rectify such abuses, Government agencies
 are in close contact with a variety of local and international groups working in Swe-
 den and abroad to improve human rights observance.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and the Government
 respects this provision.
 
 
 1138
 Women.-Nearly 18,600 cases of assault against women took place in 1994 (the
 last year for which statistics are available), an increase of 600 over 1993. Most in-
 volved spousal abuse. In three-quarters of the assaults, the perpetrator was an ac-
 .quaintance of the victim. Reported abuse against women occurs disproportionately
 in immigrant communities.
 The law provides complainants protection from contact with their abusers, if so
 desired. In some cases the authorities help women obtain new identities and homes.
 Since 1994 the Government has provided electronic alarms or bodyguards for
 women in extreme danger of assault. Both national and local governments provide
 monetary support to volunteer groups that provide shelter and other assistance to
 abused women. The authorities strive to apprehend and prosecute abusers. Typi-
 cally, the sentence for abuse is a prison term or psychiatric treatment.
 Te number of rapes rose sharply in 1993 (later figures are not available), from
 approximately 1,400 to over 2,100. In 1994 the number dropped somewhat to 1,800.
 Women    groups believe the increase in recent years is party an effect of increased
 willingness to report rape (including spousal or "date" rape), but cannot rule out the
 possibility of a real increase resulting from worsened economic and social conditions.
 The law des not differentiate between spousal and nonspousal rape.
 A study conducted by the U.N. Development Program (UNDP) in preparation for
 the U.N. Conference on Women gave Sweden the highest ranking on equality for
 women. The law requires employers to treat men and women alike in hiring, pro-
 motion, and pay, including equal pay for comparable work. The Equality Ombuds-
 man, a public official, investigates complaints of gender discrimination in the labor
 market. Women may also pursue complaints through the courts. A third option, and
 by far the most common, involves settling allegations using the employee's labor
 union as mediator. Virtually all gains in the status of women have occurred through
 such negotiations, with relatively little resort to legislation or legal decisions.
 Despite the available remedies, surveys show that women remain underrep-
 resented in higher paying jobs, with salaries averaging only 72 percent of men's, a
 decrease from a high of 80 percent a decade ago.Thsdecreaselargely reflects re-
 cent substantial cuts in social sector jobs, where women comprise the vast majority
 of the work force. In addition, tight economic conditions in recent years have made
 unions less willing to pursue cims of pay discrimination. Women submit hundreds
 of omplaints to the Equality Ombudsman each year, but almost all of these com-
 plaints are either resolved or dropped before the Ombudsman takes action.
 As a result, women increasingly have begun to turn to the courts in cases of indi-
 vidual discrimination. Women initiated several test cases of the "equal pay for com-
 parable work" clause in 1995, with at least one court decision in their favor in 1996.
 This court case is widely expected to be precedent setting.
 The law prohibits sexual harassment. As with other forms of discrimination,
 women may take complaints to the Equality Ombudsman, the courts, or to their
 unions.
 Children.-The Government allocates funds to private organizations concerned
 with children's rights and also supports a special ombudsman for children. The om-
 budsman has focused her work on ensuring adherence to the U.N. Convention on
 the Rights of the Child, which Sweden was among the first countries in the world
 to ratily.
 Although child abuse appears relatively uncommon, the public and authorities re-
 main concerned by consistent data indicating an increase over the past several
 years. The number of reported cases, for children under the age of 15, rose signifi-
 cantly in 1994, to 4,400 from 3,300 in 1993. Many children's rights advocates believe
 this change reflects a true increase (as opposed to increased incidence of reporting)
 due to the strains imposed on families by the difficult economic situation.
 The law prohibits parents or other caretakers from abusing children mentally or
 physically in any way. Parents teachers, and other adults are subject to prosecution
 if they physically punish a child, including slapping or spanking. Children have the
 right to report such abuses to the police. The authorities respect these laws, and
 the usual sentence is a fine combined with counseling and monito       by social
 workers. If the situation warrants, however, authorities may remove chidren from
 the home and place them in foster care. However, foster parents virtually never re-
 ceive permission to adopt long-term foster children, even in cases where the parents
 are seen as unfit or seek no contact with the child. Critics charge that this policy
 places the rights of biological parents over the needs of children for security in per-
 manent family situations.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities. The Government provides disabled persons with assistance aimed at al-
 lowing them to live as normal a life as possible, preferably outside an institutional
 setting. This includes educational aid, such as provision of personal tutors or assist-
 
 
 1139
 
 ants at all stages from day care to university studies, as well as assistance in the
 workplace, such as provision of a personal aide or improvement of the workplace's
 accessibility to wheelchairs. It also encompasses services such as home care or group
 living. Regulations for new buildings require full accessibility, but the Government
 has no such requirement for existing public buildings. As a result, many buildings
 remain inaccessible to disabled persons.
 Indigenous People.-Sweden counts at least 17,000 Sami (Lapps) among its 8.6
 million inhabitants (Sami organizations place that number somewhat higher, 25,000
 to 30,000). In 1994 Sweden was the last of the Nordic countries to allow formation
 of a Sametinget, or Sami Parliament, as an advisory body to the Government.
 Under the current Government, Sami issues fall under the Ministry of Agriculture.
 The Sami continue a protracted struggle for recognition as an indigenous people
 under a variety of international agreements, such as International Labor Orgamza-
 tion (ILO) Convention 169. Historically, the Government has resisted granting the
 Sami such rights. For instance, Sami children had no right to education in their na-
 tive language until provision of such education to immigrant children forced the
 Government to grant Sami at least equal treatment. As a result of such education,
 northern Sami dialects have enjoyed a recent renaissance. Sani dialects in the
 southern portions of traditional Sami lands, however, now may have too few native
 speakers to survive as living languages.
 Late in 1994 the Government removed from the Sami the right to control hunting
 and fishing activities on Sami village lands, permitting instead totally unlimited
 hunting and fishing activity on all government property. Sami leaders continued to
 protest this change in 1996.
 Although some Sand state that they face discrimination in housing and employ-
 ment on an individual basis, particularly in the southern mountain regions, the
 Government does not condone such discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.-Graffiti was painted on some synagogues in 1996. The Gov-
 ernment supports activities by volunteer roups working against anti-Semitism.
 National JRaciallEthnic Minorities.--Scattered acts of violence or harassment
 against minorities continue, usually from 'skinhead" groups with neo-Nazi ties. Al-
 though the Government does not compile national statistics on such acts, one news-
 paper counted over 100 violent incidents with racist overtones (most involving neo-
 Nazis) in a recent year. Most violent incidents involved assault on lone immigrants
 by teenage skinheads.
 Most estimates place the number of active neo-Nazis at less than 2,000, and there
 appears to be little popular support for their activities or sentiments. Many Swedes
 doubt whether such youth actually embrace neo-Nazi ideology, and the Government
 supports activities by volunteer groups working against racism. The Government in-
 vesti ates and prosecutes race-related crimes, although in many clashes between
 Swedih and immigrant youth gangs, authorities judge both sides as at fault. In one
 1996 case, an African man was murdered by a teenage Swede who was sentenced
 to 4 years' imprisonment despite his juvenile status. In a case involving a 17-year
 old sentenced to 100 days community service for wearing neo-Nazi badges, the Su-
 preme Court ruled that it can be illegal to wear xenophobic symbols or racist para-
 phernalia.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The work force is 87 percent unionized. Career mili-
 tary personnel, police officers, and civilian government officials, as well as private
 sector workers in both manufacturing and service industries, are organized. Most
 business owners belong to counterpart employer organizations.
 Unions and employer organizations operate independently of the Government and
 political parties (although the largest federation of unions has always been linked
 vith the largest political party, the Social Democrats). The law protects the freedom
 of workers to associate and to strike, as well as for employers to organize and to
 conduct lockouts. Within limits protecting the public's immediate health and secu-
 rity, public employees also enjoy the right to strike. These laws are fully respected
 and are not challenged.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international bodies. They are affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and European Trade
 Union Confederation among others.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Labor and management, each
 represente~by a national organization by sector (for example, retailers and engi-
 neering industries), negotiate framework agreements every 2 to 3 years. More de-
 tailed company-level agreements put such framework agreements into effect at the
 local level.
 
 
 1140
 
 Framework agreements entered into force in 1996, with most valid until 1998.
 The few conflicts that took place included a January strike by public sector nurses
 for significantly higher wages and a 6-day strike by journalists.
 The law provides both workers and employers with effective mechanisms for re-
 solving complaints. The vast majority of complaints are resolved informally. If infor-
 mal discussions fail, the issue goes to a labor court, whose ruling sets a precedent
 to be followed by employers and unions. Cases of an employer firing an employee
 for union activities are virtually unheard of; no cases occurred in 1996. Very few
 wildcat strikes took place in 1996, and only at a very small, local level and with
 quick resolution.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and the authorities effectively enforce this ban.
 d. Minimum Age of Employment of Children.--Compulsory 9-year education ends
 at age 16, and the law permits full-time employment at that age under supervision
 of local authorities. Employees under age 18 may work only during daytime and
 under supervision. During summer and other vacation periods, children as young
 as 13 years may work part-time or in "light" work with parental permission. Union
 representatives, police, and public prosecutors effectively enforce this restriction.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage law.
 Wages are set by collective bargaining contracts, which nonunion establisments
 usually observe as well. Even the lowest paid workers can maintain a decent stand-
 ard of living for themselves and their families through substantial benefits (such as
 housing or day care support) provided by social welfare entitlement programs. How-
 ever, cutbacks in these programs have made it harder for some workers to make
 ends meet, particularly for low-paid single women with children.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours or less. Both the law and collective barain-
 ing agreements regulate overtime and rest periods. For workers not covered by a
 labor agreement, the law stipulates a limit for overtime at 200 hours a year, al-
 though exceptions may be granted for key employees with union approval; some col-
 lective bargaining agreements put the limit at 150 hours. The law requires a rest
 period after 5 hours of work but does not stipulate a minimum duration; in practice
 it is usually 30 minutes. The law also provides all employees with a minimum of
 5 weeks of paid annual leave; labor contracts often provide more, particularly for
 higher rankmg private sector employees and older public service workers.
 Occupational health and safety rules are set by a government-appointed board
 and monitored by trained union stewards, safety ombudsmen, and, occasionally, gov-
 ernment inspectors. These standards are very high, making workplaces both safe
 and healthy. Safety ombudsmen have the authority to stop unsafe activity imme-
 diately and to call in an inspector. An individual also has the right to halt work
 in dangerous situations in order to consult a supervisor or safety representative.
