 SWAZILAND
 The Kingdom of Swaziland, a former British High Commission
 territory, became independent in 1968. The constitution
 provided for a popularly elected parliament and for the
 protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of the
 individual. On the grounds that the constitution had
 permitted the introduction of political practices incom-
 patible with the traditional Swazi way of reaching
 decisions, King Sobhuza II decreed its repeal in 1973.
 He assumed supreme power, governmental decisions there-
 after being made by King-in-Council; the Council comprised
 cabinet members appointed by him.
 A royal commission was appointed in 1973 to inquire into
 the fundamental principles upon which to base a new con-
 stitution that would harmonize the customary Swazi way of
 life with modern principles of constitutional and inter-
 national law. There has been no public report on the
 commission's progress. King Sobhuza continues to be vested
 with the country's executive authority. He rules through a
 cabinet he appoints, and he retains the right to withhold
 assent to bills passed by the parliament. The King's
 authority is limited in practice by a complex system of
 traditional rights and responsibilities which requires that
 the King exercise his authority in accordance with Swazi
 custom. Parliambnt was reopened in January 1979 with some
 members chosen through indirect election and others nomi-
 nated by the King.
 The judiciary is independent. Despite the absence of a
 constitution or other written legal safeguards, there has
 been no systematic disregard by the government of the
 rights of the person.
 1.    Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.    Torture
 There is no law which prohibits torture. There have been
 no allegations, however, that torture is practiced.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There is no evidence that persons in Swaziland, including
 political detainees, have been subjected to cruel, in-
 human, or degrading treatment or punishment. There have
 been no summary executions. The country's main prison
 includes facilities for teaching manual trades. The
 health care and diet in the prisons are approximately the
 same as those available to the general population.
 Prisoners are allowed visits from family members and from
 attorneys of their choice.
 c.    Disappearances
 Although the 1978 law authorizing detention provides that
 the fact of such detention shall be made public, no
 instance of detention under that law has been officially
 acknowledged until after the detained individuals have
 
 
 272
 -been released. Persons are secretly arrested and held
 incommunicado in rare instances in which they are believed
 to be material witnesses in a case under police investi-
 gation.
 d.    Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Under a 1938 law, persons can be arrested and held without
 charge for a "reasonable" period. A 1978 law permits the
 government to detain any individual for renewable periods
 of sixty days without charges. Detention is not subject to
 appeal to the courts, although it may be appealed directly
 to the King. The right to habeas corpus is provided in
 Swazi courts for all other prisoners. Swaziland has no
 known political prisoners at the present time. All 15
 prisoners who were being held in preventive detention
 (i.e., without charges) were released unconditionally on
 May 28, 1980.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law
 and is honored in practice. In "national" (traditional)
 courts, legal counsel is not allowed. However, in magis-
 trates' courts, which operate under Roman-Dutch law, a
 defendant is entitled to counsel at his own expense; the
 crown will provide defense counsel in capital cases.
 Counsel has free access to defendants within the limits of
 prison regulations. Except for detainees under the 1978
 law, defendants are made fully aware of the charges against
 them. They and their lawyers are generally able to inform
 themselves of the evidence on which the charges are based.
 The courts are independent of executive or military con-
 trol. There are no special courts to deal with security or
 political offences. Civilians are not tried by military
 courts.
 f.    Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is safeguarded by custom and is
 honored in practice. Swaziland law requires a warrant for
 the search of a home, or other premises, except when the
 purpose of the search would be defeated by delay in obtain-
 ing the warrant. There have been no allegations that gov-
 ernment officers illegally entered homes in 1980. There
 have been no allegations that the government practices
 bugging, demolition, or the sealing of doors and windows
 of homes.
 2.    Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Swaziland has a free-enterprise economy characterized by
 a division between the modern sector, which produces the
 majority of the country's wealth, and the traditional
 sector, which comprises over 70 percent of the population.
 Gross domestic product per capita is estimated to be $590.
 It has been estimated that 55 percent of the population
 earn less than $200 per year. The effects of this dispar-
 ity in income distribution are mitigated by the fact that
 approximately 60 percent of all rural households have at
 least one member employed in the modern sector. Agricul-
 
 
 273
 
 ture employs about 60 percent of the labor force. Un-
 employment is estimated at 5-10 percent of the labor force
 and is rising. The inflation rate is estimated to be
 15-17 percent annually. Swaziland's population growth rate
 of approximately 2.7 percent per year is placing strains on
 limited land resources and is contributing to the rising
 unemployment rate.
 About 60 percent of the land is held in trust by the King
 for the Swazi nation; this land is occupied primarily by
 traditional farmers. The other 40 percent is privately
 owned. The right to own property outside of Swazi nation
 land is guaranteed by law. The tax system is progressive,
 with the burden falling primarily on the small, modern
 sector; there is no sales tax, and the traditional sub-
 sistence sector is largely untaxed.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers from discrimi-
 nating between employees based on race, religion, sex,
 marital status, or political affiliation. It requires
 equal pay for equal work. There are also provisions cover-
 ing the employment of children, providing maternity leave
 for women employees and special provisions for domestic
 employees. Minimum wage legislation does not discriminate
 between men and women. Legally, women may not be discrimi-
 nated against in the job market, but in practice discrimi-
 nation takes place.
 Swaziland's development strategy has emphasized(ntil
 recentlylindustrialization and has thus contributed to the
 dual nature of the economy; now, increasing attention is
 being paid to ensuring an equitable, distribution of the
 nation's resources. The Third National Development Plan
 (1978/79 - 1982/83) assigns high priority to the following:
 (1) increasing agricultural production by six percent annu-
 ally and extending the rurhl development areas program to
 cover 60 percent of farmers on Swazi nation land; (2) ex-
 panding education and training programs to meet the
 country's manpower and employment needs; (3) increasing the
 quality, quantity and distribution of preventive health
 services; and (4) expanding coverage of family planning
 services to reduce the population growth rate. The 1980/81
 budget devotes a slightly higher percentage of total re-
 sources to ministries concerned with basic human needs than
 to the previous year's budget. Housing policies have
 tended to stress quality over quantity, leaving major needs
 for shelter unmet in both rural and urban areas.
 Swaziland's adult literacy rate is 65 percent and its
 primary school enrollment ratio is 75 percent of school-
 age children. Standards are low and are declining because
 emphasis is on quantity at the expense of quality. How-
 ever, the Swazi government has sponsored several projects
 to improve the primary school curriculum. The educational
 system does not discriminate against women, and women
 attend school in roughly the same proportions as men,
 except in the higher age/education levels. Only during
 the last ten years have women been afforded equal access
 at primary and secondary levels.
 
 
 274
 life expectancy is 46 years and infant mortality is 156
 per 1,000 live births. Swaziland has 58 doctors and 467
 registered nurses, or one doctor per 9,500 people and one
 nurse per 1,200 persons. Sixty-five percent of the popu-
 lation has access to adequate medical care. Health care
 is provided through a system of government hospitals and
 clinics and by high-standard medical installations operated
 by private companies and religious missions. Only 33 per-
 cent of the population has access to piped, potable water,
 and only about 37 percent has access to some type of toilet
 facility.
 The ability of Swazi women to deal with the problems of a
 developing society is hampered by both legal and cultural
 constraints. Traditional values are a major influence on
 the role of women in Swazi society. Women are not legally
 equal to men and a married woman is virtually a legal minor.
 She is not responsible for contracts she signs, and she
 cannot own real property or inherit property under normal
 circumstances. She must obtain her husband's permission
 to make a loan, to leave the country and often to take a
 job. In cases of divorce, a woman has no right to the
 custody of her children, although she may have to care for
 them with no support from their father. A small and slowly
 growing number of women are participating in social, eco-
 nomic, and political life outside their traditional fields
 of teaching, nursing and clerical work.
 An independent three-man commission was established in
 late 1979 by the Prime Minister to investigate corruption
 in government; however, the commission's mandate was
 recently restricted, and the commission has stopped work.
 Government corruption is not believed to have been a
 serious obstacle to the fulfillment of basic human needs.
 3.    Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.    Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech is not guaranteed by law. Comment
 critical of the government is permitted in the parliament
 and in traditional Swazi councils and to a limited degree
 in the media, which practices self-censorship. During the
 last year, parliament has increasingly been willing to
 serve as a forum for examination and criticism of govern-
 ment policies. There have been fewer restrictions on the
 freedom of the press. The government proscribes publica-
 tions it deems prejudicial to the interests of defense,
 public safety and order, public morality, and public health.
 Except for material that the Swazis deem obscene or
 communist-oriented, the local and international press
 circulate freely in Swaziland.
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973, provides that
 no meetings of a political nature and no processions or
 demonstrations shall be held in any public place except
 with the written consent of the Commissioner of Police.
 The Swaziland National Association of Teachers was dis-
 solved following a government determination in 1977 that
 it was engaging in political activity. Writers and
 journalists who were denied permission in late 1979 to
 meet and discuss the formation of a social association
 have made no further attempt to form an association.
 
 
 275
 
 The Industrial Relations Act of 1980, a modern and detailed
 piece of legislation, guarantees the right to organize to
 employees and employers, It also establishes negotiating
 machinery and a disputes procedure. Employers may not
 discriminate against union members. Employees may strike
 and picket.
 Although there is no law on the subject, Swaziland is
 traditionally hospitable to all religious beliefs; no
 religious group has been persecuted or harassed. There
 is no state religion, and religious affiliation offers no
 advantage or disadvantage.
 b.    Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Freedom of travel within the country is guaranteed by
 custom and is respected in practice. Movement outside
 southern Africa, whether for travel or emigration, re-
 quires possession of a passport, which the government
 denies if it deems the applicant's proposed travel to be
 prejudicial to its interests or if the applicant has no
 apparent means of support for the proposed period of
 absence from Swaziland. Passport fees are not excessive.
 The right of return is granted to all Swazi passport
 holders. However, it is almost universally denied to
 refugees who leave Swaziland on United Nations travel
 documents, contrary to the United Nations Refugee Conven-
 tion and Protocol of which Swaziland is a signator.
 Refugee and asylum policy is governed by the refugee
 control order of 1978. There are about 5,000 refugees
 from the Republic of South Africa residing in Swaziland.
 The majority of these have been resettled in rural areas,
 but a small percentage are living in the country's two
 urban areas. Small numbers of South African refugees
 transit Swaziland on their way to third countries.
 Refugees are adequately treated. Swazis have not sought
 refuge in other countries in significant numbers.
 In 1980 Swaziland signed an agreement with Mozambique
 which violates the United Nations Refugee Convention by
 providing for forced repatriation of refugees. Under this
 agreement sixty-eight Mozambican refugees have been repa-
 triated and three refugees have been sent back to Swazi-
 land. All three were convicted of contravening the
 Immigration Act and given light sentences. One South
 African refugee (an African National Congress EANC]
 member) and a child were killed in two separate bomb blasts
 on June 4. The bombings are generally believed to have been
 carried out by South Africans in retaliation for the attack
 on South Africa's synthetic fuel producing complex (SASOL)
 by ANC members operating out of Swaziland.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Swaziland is a traditional monarchy in which political
 parties are outlawed. There is no organized opposition
 to the government. All citizens may vote in the indirect
 elections for members of parliament and may participate
 in meetings of their respective Tinkhundla (geographically
 
 
 276
 based councils). Problems of nationality, citizenship,
 and statelessness do not exist. Participation by women
 in the political life of the country is limited by Swazi
 custom and tradition.
 4.    Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland does not normally respond
 substantively to inquiries of representatives of Amnesty
 International groups concerning the welfare and whereabouts
 of individual political detainees. There are no organiza-
 tions based within the country that observe, report or
 contest human rights violations. No outside person or team
 is known to have sought the government's permission in
 1980 to undertake an investigation of alleged violations
 of human rights.
 
 
 277
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF'DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWAZILAND
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         14.2      7.6      9.0
 LOANS.............          5.4      2.0      2.6
 GRANTS.............          8.8      5.6      6.4
 AAIO ....... .***..**        12.8      6.0      7.5
 LOANS ......eee....          5.4      2.0      2*6
 GRANTS,..***......          7.4      4.0      4.9
 tSEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)*..         12.8      0.0      0.0
 BeFOOD FOR PEACE.,..o..          0.4      0.3      0.2
 LOANS.........*s.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS........**...          0.4      0.3      0.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL.*........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS....*          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL......*..          0.4      0.3      0.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.4      0.3      0.2
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.0      1.3      1.3
 LOANS   ....  .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS***.*...40..         1.0      1.3      1.3
 CONTR. TO IFI....          000      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          1.0      1.3      1.3
 OTHER...o .....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSiST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS....  ....o..        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS......o......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.........          0.0      0.0      0*0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 EoOTHER GRANTS........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 IIITOTAL ECON. & MIL...         14.2      7.6      9.0
 LOANS..............          5.4      2.0      2.6
 GRANTSo...,... *..          8.8      5.6      6.4
 OTHER US LOANS.........          0.0      00      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS*......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER.....*.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----      --- ----------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980      1946-80
 -----      ---------------------- --------------------------
 TOTAL*.......     29.5      11.4     11.6    117.3
 IBRD              11.0       0.0     10.1     50.7
 IFC                8.5       0.0      0.0      8.5
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      7.8
 IDS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AO8                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFB               8,9       0.0      0.0    '27.6
 UNOP                0.5      1.4      1.1     10.7
 OTHER-UN            0.6      000      0.4      2.0
 EEC                0.0      100      0.0     10.0
 
 
 278
