 SWAZILAND
 Although Swaziland is nominally a traditional monarchy,
 currently ruled by a Queen Regent, political power is now
 exercised by a group of senior politicans and traditional
 leaders associated with the Swazi Royal Family. The most
 important concentrations of power are found in the Liqoqo, a
 traditional body of advisors appointed by the Crown, and in the
 Ministers of the Cabinet. In practice, Swaziland's Government
 features both "modern" and "traditional" branches--a Cabinet,
 Parliament, and courts which follow Western law, and a tribal
 system with *national" courts, which follow Swazi law and
 custom.
 The Kingdom attained independence in 1968 with a Constitution
 that provided for a popularly elected Parliament and for the
 fundamental rights of the individual. On the grounds the
 Constitution had introduced political practices incompatible
 with the traditional Swazi way of reaching decisions by
 consensus, King Sobhuza II decreed its repeal in 1973. He
 assumed supreme power and governmental decisions thereafter
 were made by King-in-Council. Parliament reopened in January
 1979 with some members chosen through an indirect selection
 process, but the King continued to be vested with the country's
 executive authority.
 King Sobhuza died in 1982 and Queen Regent Dzeliwe assumed the
 duties of head of state. In 1983 there was a dispute over the
 role and authority between the modern and traditional elements
 of the Government, which resulted in the replacement of the
 Prime Minister and the eventual replacement of Queen Regent
 Dzeliwe by Queen Regent Ntombi. During the same period,
 Ntobi's son, Prince Makhosetive, was officially declared the
 heir to the Swazi throne and is expected to become King in the
 next few years upon completion of certain traditional
 ceremonies.
 Although the authority of the Swazi crown covers a wide
 spectrum of Swazi life, it is limited in practice by a complex
 system of traditional rights and responsibilities, which
 requires that it be exercised in accordance with unwritten
 Swazi custom. Swazi custom does not allow public dissent
 against the Government, and those who publicly criticized the
 Government or demonstrated against the authorities have, on
 occasion, been suppressed. The Royal Swazi Police are widely
 regarded as being honest, professional, and efficient, but this
 image has been somewhat tarnished by reports of police violence
 against suspected criminals. The judiciary is independent.
 RESPECT FOR HU14AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no cases or allegations of political killings by
 either officials of the Government or opposition political
 groups.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances occurring in the
 country in 1984.
 
 
 334
 SWAZILAND
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is, as a rule, not practiced in Swaziland. However,
 following the conclusion of the Nkomati Accords between South
 Africa and Mozambique in 1984, a large number of African
 National Congress (ANC) activists, many armed with automatic
 weapons and high explosives, fled from Mozambique into
 Swaziland. Swazi efforts to round up these militants resulted
 in several gun battles during which a Swazi police officer, a
 soldier, and two ANC personnel were killed and several others
 were wounded. More than 80 ANC members were eventually
 apprehended and, with the assistance of DNHCR, relocated in
 another country. During this period of tension, police
 authorities beat several militants and persons suspected of
 being involved with ANC activities.
 There were some reports of police threats and beatings in the
 handling of common criminals. Corporal punishment is permitted
 under Swazi law, and caning is occasionally administered to
 youths involved in petty or violent crimes. Police jails are
 often overcrowded and unsanitary with low standards of food,
 which probably reflects the country's economic limitations
 rather than any intent to inflict punishment. The country's
 main prison includes facilities for teaching manual trades.
 The health care and diet in the prisons approximate those
 available to the general population. Prisoners are allowed
 visits from family members.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 A 1978 law permits the Government to detain any individual for
 renewable periods of 60 days without being charged. Although
 the law provides that such detention shall be made public, no
 instance of detention under that law has been officially
 acknowledged until after the detained individuals have been
 released (although detention usually becomes public knowledge
 in a short time). Detention is not subject to appeal to the
 courts, although it may be appealed directly to the Monarch.
 Immediate family members are usually allowed to visit
 detainees. The year 1983 ended with 18 Swazis being held in
 detention. In March 1984, 10 of these were freed with the
 remainder being released in April. No one was placed under
 detention during 1984. However, it is sometimes difficult to
 determine whether a person has been placed in detention or is
 simply being held under police investigation. Swazi law allows
 the police to hold an individual for "a reasonable time"
 without charges; in some cases the period has stretched into
 weeks. Attorneys have experienced difficulties in gaining
 access to their clients on the justification that police
 investigations have not been completed. Habeas corpus may be
 invoked, but this is an expensive course of action for a
 suspect with limited means who is being investigated for a
 minor charge. During the month of November the former Finance
 Minister, the former Chief of Staff of the Army and the former
 Army Chief of Logistics were taken into police custody, where
 they remain. Public statements by the Government have
 indicated they are being held "for investigation" and not under
 the detention authority. According to one press report, the
 former Finance Minister claimed his attorney had withdrawn from
 his case because of intimidation. In contrast to these cases,
 an ANC refugee, officially resident in Swaziland, was also
 taken into custody for several days, but was released by court
 order after a writ of habeus corpus was filed.
 
 
 835
 SWAZ ILAND
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 generally honored in practice. The judiciary consists of a
 Court of Appeals, a High Court, and various subordinate
 magistrates' courts. The Head of State appoints members of the
 Court of Appeals and the High Court. Parallel to this modern
 government structure is a traditional structure consisting of
 the Liqoqo (Supreme Council of State, which advises the Queen
 Regent), traditional courts, and 40 regional councils.
 In magistrates' courts, a defendant is entitled to counsel at
 his own expense. Court-appointed defense counsel is provided
 in capital cases. Defendants are made fully aware of the
 charges against them. They and their lawyers are generally
 able to inform themselves of the evidence on which the charges
 are based. The courts are independent of executive and
 military control. Appeals from the magistrates' courts may be
 heard by the High Court, and all final appeals are heard by the
 Court of Appeals which is the highest judiciary body. These
 rights are not guaranteed to persons held under the 1978
 detention law or charged with sedition.
 In traditional courts, where ethnic Swazis may be brought for
 relatively minor offenses and violations of Swazi traditional
 laws or customs, legal counsel is not allowed, but defendants
 are usually heard on their own behalf. Swazi traditional law
 has not been formally codified, but both offenses and
 punishments are limited and findings are subject to a review
 system and appeal to the High Court and Court of Appeals.
 In 1983, the Swazi Parliament passed an amendment to the
 Sedition and Subversive Activities bill which increased the
 maximum penalty for sedition from 2 years to 20 and permitted
 the appointment of a special tribunal to hear such cases. It
 was left to the Prime Minister to appoint the members of the
 tribunal and determine their qualifications. Proceedings of
 such a tribunal are held in camera if the prosecution so
 requests. There is no provision for appealing the tribunal's
 decision to the courts. It is not clear if the amendment is,
 in fact, in force and there are no known cases of persons being
 tried under these new provisions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Swazi custom places a high value on home and family. In
 general, Swazi land law requires a warrant issued by a
 magistrate for search of a home or other premises. However,
 senior police officers are permitted to search for evidence
 without a warrant if the suspected crime is of a serious
 nature, and this procedure is frequently followed. There is no
 evidence that the Government censors correspondence or commits
 other violations of the home.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. The Prime Minister and other
 officials have repeatedly directed that Swazis critical of the
 Government express their views only to their chiefs for
 discussion in traditional Swazi councils. Anti-government
 demonstrations or leaflets are regarded as seditious and are
 
 
 336
 SWAZILAND
 treated accordingly. The Swazi radio and television stations
 are government-controlled. A private company publishes a daily
 newspaper with English and Siswati editions, and there is also
 a semi-governmental English-language paper which can be quite
 independent in its views. The media, government-controlled and
 private, practice self-censorship, most particularly in
 refraining from critical comment on government activities or on
 problems dealing with the Royal Family. However, the
 Government does not precensor newspapers nor have there been
 reports of a particular edition being seized by the
 authorities. In 1984, on several occasions, journalists were
 summoned before officials in connection with controversial
 stories and threats have been made on the possible closing of a
 paper. In one instance, a journalist and the paper's editor
 were interrogated by the police and kept in custody overnight.
 The Government proscribes publications it deems to be
 prejudicial to the interests of defense, public safety and
 order, public morality, and public health. In practice, except
 for material that is obscene or communist-oriented, the local
 and international press (which sometimes features reports
 critical of Swazi political leaders) circulate freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973, prohibits meetings
 of a political nature and processions or demonstrations in any
 public place without the consent, sometimes withheld, of the
 Commissioner of Police. In September, there were disturbances
 on the University of Swaziland campus following an attempt to
 impose a government-appointed student organization. This was
 followed in October by demonstrations on the campus and in
 Manzini after the Government expelled a former student leader
 to South Africa. The demonstration in Manzini was suppressed
 by riot police, resulting in several students seriously injured
 and hospitalized. Following these incidents, the University
 was closed for a short period and the Government appointed a
 commission to look into the problems at the University. By the
 end of the year, the Government had still not announced what
 decisions, if any, it had made as a result of the inquiry.
 Except for the prohibition on certain anti-government activity,
 freedom of association is generally permitted. Employees may,
 and do, strike and picket. Differences between labor and
 management can also be taken to the Industrial Court which came
 into operation in 1983. Under the Industrial Relations Act,
 unions are required to register with the Government and, to
 date, six unions representing workers in the fields of
 agriculture, commerce, electrical power, manufacturing,
 finance, and transportation have been registered. The
 Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions participantes in the
 International Labor Organization and is a member of the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious beliefs
 and a great variety of missionaries are active throughout the
 country. However, since the death of King Sobhuza in August
 1982, some difficulties have developed between Jehovah's
 Witnesses and traditional government officials, and there have
 been continued reports on disagreements between school
 authorities and Jehovah's Witness students over singing of the
 National Anthem and similar matters.
 
 
 337
 SWAZILAND
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel freely within Swaziland and can generally
 obtain a travel document to travel in southern Africa.
 Obtaining a passport is more difficult and time-consuming.
 Occasionally the Government refuses to issue a passport if the
 applicant's travel is considered prejudicial to Swaziland or if
 the applicant does not appear to have adequate means of support
 while abroad. Although Swaziland is a signatory to the U.N.
 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, refugees who leave
 Swaziland on U.N. travel documents are generally not granted
 the right to return. Some residents of Swaziland, of mixed
 ethnic background, have experienced difficulty in obtaining
 official determination of their citizenship status and
 therefore have difficulties in obtaining passports.
 Swaziland accepts refugees from neighboring countries and
 treats them adequately. By far the largest number of refugees
 is from South Africa, primarily ethnic Swazis who fled Zulu
 administration in the black homeland of Kwazulu. In 1984,
 Swaziland accepted over 800 refugees fleeing from military
 clashes in Mozambique. During the same year, the African
 National Congress accused the Swazi authorities of complicity
 in handing over to South African security police four members
 being held in a Swaziland jail. The Swaziland Government
 denied this charge. In October 1984, a former student at the
 University of Swaziland, who was born in South Africa, was
 expelled into South Africa after being declared a prohibited
 immigrant. He was deported even though he claimed to be a
 Swazi citizen and had an appeal pending against the deportation
 action.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political parties are outlawed and organized opposition to the
 Government in the usual sense does not exist. Following the
 completion of its term, the Swazi Parliament was dissolved
 during the latter part of 1983. A local committee in each of
 40 regional councils nominated 4 candidates for the position of
 electors and the people of each area selected 2. The 80
 electors, so chosen, then voted for 40 new members for the
 lower House of Parliament, the House of Assembly, and 10
 additional members were appointed by the Queen Regent. The
 full Assembly of 50 members then selected 10 Senators and the
 Queen Regent appointed an additional 10 to make a total of 20
 Senators in the Senate. The Head of State must approve all
 laws passed by Parliament. The Parliament has served
 occasionally as a forum for examination and criticism of
 government policies, but matters are seldom pressed to a vote
 and, when they are, unanimity is usually the result.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland does not normally respond
 substantively to inquiries of representatives of human rights
 groups concerning the welfare and whereabouts of individual
 political detainees. There are no organizations based within
 the country that observe, report, or contest human rights
 violations. In its 1984 Report, Amnesty International noted
 its concern about detention without trial of opponents of the
 
 
 338
 SWAZILAND
 Government and about the lack of procedural safeguards with the
 new sedition law. Freedom House terms Swaziland "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Swaziland is an open market economy, with limited government
 intervention, centered on trade, agriculture, and forestry.
 The modern sector is dominated by large export-oriented firms,
 which are frequently foreign-owned, and by the traditional
 sector, which comprises about 80 percent of the population.
 Since independence in 1968, Swaziland's per capita gross
 national product (GNP) has risen from about $300 to an
 estimated $940 in 1982. Despite this growth, subsistence
 farmers, who comprise two-thirds of the population, have not
 kept pace. Total income per resident of rural homesteads for
 crop year 1983/84 was approximately $375. In 1980 the World
 Bank estimated that nearly half the rural and urban population
 were below the poverty line. A recent estimate found that 39
 percent of urban families were below the 1983 proverty line.
 The drought in 1982 and 1983 prevented real economic growth,
 but the 1984 output of the food crop staple, corn, was the
 highest in history. From 1971 to 1982, the real annual per
 capita growth of gross domestic product averaged 1.3 percent
 per year.
 Swaziland's population in mid-1984 was estimated to be 651,000
 and growing by 3 percent per year.  (The Government estimates
 are 626,000 and 3.4 percent.) The rapid growth rate limits the
 amount of land available for cultivation by each homestead. It
 is difficult for a woman to be allocated land on her own.
 Economically, the country suffers from three interrelated and
 emerging problems: the inability of traditional agriculture to
 generate consistent food surpluses and provide financially
 acceptable alternatives to paid employment; the decreasing
 ability of the economy to generate jobs; and stagnant
 government revenue and growing inefficiencies resulting in
 increasing government debt.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate
 among employees based on race, religion, sex, marital status or
 political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal work.
 There are provisions covering the employment of children,
 maternity leave, and domestic employees. Legally, women are
 not discriminated against in the job market but, in practice,
 discrimination occurs frequently. Around three-fourths of the
 wage paying jobs are held by men; their average wage rate by
 skill category is higher than for females. An element in the
 income tax law, which taxed married women more than married
 men, was partially removed in 1982.
 The ability of Swazi women to deal with the problems of a
 developing society is hampered by both legal and cultural
 constraints. Traditional values are a major influence on the
 role of women in Swazi society. Since men are away from their
 homesteads much of the time, women perform most agricultural
 tasks and have virtually all responsibility for child rearing
 and domestic chores. However, they are not given authority to
 make necessary decisions, to make expenditures to acquire
 additional capital, or to try new approaches. Women are, in
 some cases, not legally equal to men, and a married woman is
 virtually a minor. She is not responsible for contracts she
 signs, and she cannot own real property or inherit property
 under normal circumstances. She must obtain her husband's
 
 
 339
 SWAZILAND
 permission to borrow money, to leave the country, and often to
 take a job. A divorced woman has no right to the custody of
 her children, although she may have to care for them with no
 support from their father. A small and growing number of women
 are beginning to participate in social, economic and political
 life outside their traditional fields of teaching, nursing, and
 clerical work. Women have equal access to schools and
 constitute around half the student body in nearly all
 institutions.
 The overwhelming constraint to truly indigenous development in
 virtually every area is the shortage of knowledgeable technical
 and administrative leaders, professionals, and institutions
 capable of introducing progressive attitudes, systems, and
 technologies into the society. Primary school enrollment is
 over 100 percent but, with a large number of overage children
 in school, only around 80 percent of the primary school-age
 children are actually in primary school. Standards are low and
 declining because emphasis has been on meeting the demand for
 additional school places, not on quality. Intensive efforts
 have been made to increase the adult literacy rate. The World
 Bank estimates it at 44.8 percent in 1976; 1982 estimates show
 a 65 percent adult literacy rate.
 Since independence, the Government has invested heavily in
 improving and expanding health care services. Clinics have
 been built and put into operation at a rapid rate, placing most
 Swazis within eight kilometers of some type of health
 facility. The number of people per physician or nurse is
 reasonably good, and the society is able to provide an
 estimated 99 percent of the essential calories per person.
 Although the crude death rate has fallen from 19 per 1,000 in
 1976 to 17.1 per 1,000 in 1984, there are still severe health
 problems which decrease the quality of life. There is a lack
 of clean, disease-free water; estimates in 1975 showed only a
 third of the country had access to safe water. The 1984 infant
 mortality rate is estimated to be 133 per 1,000 live births,
 and life expectancy is 56 years.  (The Government estimates it
 to be 48 years).
 
 
 340
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWAZILAND
 1982     1983     1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        10.0      8.0      7.6
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 10.0     8.0      7.6
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  8.7    6.2      5.8
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        8.7      6.2      5.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.4      0.2
 LOANS .............. ... .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.4      0.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN'$-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.4      0.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.4      0.2
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.3     1.4      1.6
 LOANS ..............  .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 1.3           1.4      1.6
 PEACE CORPS ......        1.3      1.4      1.6
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............. .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG.....        0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        10.0      8.0      7.7
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 10.0     8.0      7.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........     7.1      0.1     16.2    158.3
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      5.6     71.2
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      8.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      7.8
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0     10.0     37.6
 UNOP               0.1      0.1      0.0     11.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.6      2.6
 EEC                7.0      0.0      0.0     19.0
 
 
 341
