 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive, legisla-
 tive, and (with limitations) judicial powers ultimately vested in the King (Mswati
 III). The King rules according to unwritten law and custom, in conjunction with a
 partially elected parliament and an accompanying structure of published laws and
 implementing agencies. Parliamentary elections in 1993 and municipal elections in
 1995 and 1997 introduced increased representative government. New municipal
 elections took place in August, and parliamentary elections were held in October.
 However, political power continues to rest largely with the King and his circle of
 traditional advisers. The 1968 Constitution was suspended by the present King's fa-
 ther in 1973. Based upon the 1973 decree, the King has the authority to issue de-
 crees that carry the force of law, although he has not exercised this authority in
 recent years. The 1973 decree also bans political parties, meetings, and processions
 except in local "Tinkhundla" administrative centers or as authorized by the police.
 There are public demands that the 1973 decree be lifted. That question is among
 the issues on which a Constitutional Review Commission (CRC), appointed by the
 King in 1996, is expected to make recommendations after carrying out a nationwide
 proram of civic education and receiving submissions from individual citizens. The
 CRC has compiled and disseminated the constitutional framework, but civic edu-
 cation has been slow to get underway. Four progressive CRC members who resigned
 in 1997 to protest the Commission's terms of reference and slow progress have not
 rejoined the CRC, although their seats have been held open for them. The judiciary
 is independent.
 Both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the Royal Swaziland Police oper-
 ate under civilian control and are responsible for external and internal security.
 Some communities, questioning the ability of National Police to deal with enforce-
 ment at the community level, formed community police. There were reports of con-
 flicts between national and community police. Members of both the National Police
 and the community police committed some human rights abuses.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of citizens are engaged in subsistence agriculture, although a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 formal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, especially on the
 soft drink concentrate, wood pulp, and sugar industries, which are composed pri-
 marily of large firms with mostly foreign ownership. A quasi-parastatal organization
 established by royal charter maintains large investments in major sectors of the
 economy, including industry, agriculture, and services, normally in partnership with
 other investors and international development agencies.
 There continued to be serious human rights problems, although there was some
 marginal improvement in a few areas. Citizens still are not able to change their gov-
 ernment. Police continued to torture and beat some suspects. Police forcibly dis-
 persed demonstrators who sought to disrupt voting activity, and the authorities
 searched homes of trade union leaders and opposition political figures during secu-
 rity crackdowns associated with the election process and a subsequent bombing at-
 tack on the Deputy Prime Minister's office. Although there were allegations of politi-
 cal harassment, police exercised restraint in the conduct of these searches, which
 did not involve the arrest of any labor or political leaders. The Government gen-
 erally failed to prosecute or otherwise discipline officers who committed abuses.
 Prison conditions improved with the opening of new facilities, but the Government
 continued to use a nonbailable offense provision. The Government infringed on citi-
 zen's privacy rights. The Government continued to limit freedom of speech and of
 the press, restraints continued on news coverage bygovernment-owned broadcast
 houses, and all media practiced some self-censorship, although journalists spoke out
 
 
 on key issues. Parliament deferred a measure that would have further limited free-
 dom of the press by establishing a government media council, in response to media
 and public criticism. The Government restricted freedom of assembly and associa-
 tion and retained prohibitions on political activity, although numerous political
 groupings operated openly and voiced opinions critical of the Government, which re-
 ceived prominent press coverage. However, the police on occasion harassed political
 activists. There are some limits on freedom of movement. Legal and cultural dis-
 crimination and violence against women, as well as abuse of children, remained
 problems. Some societal discrimination against mixed race and white, citizens per-
 sists. The Government restricts worker rights. Although final parliamentary enact-
 ment was delayed, in July the Cabinet approved the draft of a comprehensive new
 industrial relations act designed to bring the labor law into full conformity with
 international labor conventions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings by government agents.
 Three bombings took place between August and November, apparently timed to
 coincide with major state events. Targets included the base of a Swaziland Elec-
 tricity Board (SEB) power line, an abandoned bridge over the Lusushwana river,
 and at the offices of the Deputy Prime Minister. The final bombing killed one per-
 son. Although a previously unknown group claimed responsibility for the bombings,
 the existence of the group was unconfirmed and the perpetrators remained unidenti-
 fied and their motives unknown.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports by criminal defendants of the use of torture during in-
 terrogation. Police sometimes beat criminal suspects and occasionally used the
 "tube" style of interrogation, in which police suffocate suspects through the use of
 a rubber tube around the face and mouth. The Government generally failed to pros-
 ecute or otherwise discipline police officers for such abuses. An internal complaints
 and discipline unit investigates reports of human rights abuses by the police, but
 no independent body has the authority to investigate police abuses. However, courts
 have invalidated confessions induced through physical abuse. In September the
 High Court awarded a former prisoner approximately $7,000 (42,000 emalangeni)
 in damages for cruel and unusual punishment suffered while incarcerated in 1992-
 94.
 Police forcibly dispersed demonstrators who sought to disrupt voting activity, and
 the authorities searched homes of trade union leaders and opposition political fig-
 ures during security crackdowns associated with the election process and a subse-
 quent bombing attack on the Deputy Prime Minister's office (see Section 3).
 Overcrowding and generally poor prison conditions were alleviated markedly
 through the opening of new institutions including a modem correctional facility for
 women. Foreign diplomats and representatives of international agencies toured the
 prisons, including maximum-security institutions, and reported favorably on im-
 proved medical care, nutrition, sanitation, and vocational training. While these fa-
 cilities meet minimum international standards, the use of nonbailable provisions led
 to less favorable conditions, including continued overcrowding in government re-
 mand centers, where suspects are held during pretrial detention (see Section 1.d.).
 Women and juveniles are held in separate prison facilities.
 The Government has routinely permitted prison visits by diplomats, journalists,
 human rights monitors, and representatives of international organizations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law requires warrants for arrests in
 most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect may flee. Detainees may consult with a lawyer of
 their choice and must be charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable
 time, usually 48 hours, or, in remote areas, as soon as the judicial officer appears.
 The authorities generally respect these rights in practice.
 The Government continued to limit provisions for bail for crimes appearing in the
 Nonbailable Offenses Order, which became effective in 1993 and was strengthened
 by Parliament in 1994. The Order currently lists 11 offenses. The mere charge of
 the underlying offense, without any evidentiary showing that the suspect is in-
 volved, is sufficient to employ the nonbailable provision. The Minister of Justice
 may amend the list by his own executive act.
 In November, following the bombing of a Lusushwana bridge, the police detained
 the president of the People's United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO), Mario
 
 
 Masuku, and the Secretary General of the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions
 (SFTU), Jan Sithole, for a full day of questioning. Neither was charged with a crime
 or arrested.
 The Government does not use forced exile. There are no barriers to prevent the
 return of dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent; however, the King
 has certain judicial powers.
 Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one independent and based on West-
 ern law, the other based on a system of national courts that follows unwritten tradi-
 tional law and custom. In treason and sedition cases, the King can circumvent the
 regular judiciary by appointing a special tribunal, which may adopt rules, and pro-
 cedures different from those applied in the High Court. However, this power was
 used last in 1987.
 The Western judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals (composed entirely of expa-
 triate, usually South African, judges), the High Court, and magistrate courts, allof
 which are independent of executive and military control and free from intimidation
 from outside forces. The expatriate judges, often distinguished members of their re-
 spective bars, serve on the basis of 2-year, renewable contracts. Local judges serve
 indefinitely on good behavior. In magistrate courts, the defendant is entitled to
 counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital
 cases or when difficult points of law are at issue. There are well-defined appeal pro-
 cedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 Most citizens who encounter the legal system do so through the traditional courts.
 The authorities may bring ethnic Swazis to these courts for relatively minor offenses
 and violations of traditional law and custom. In traditional courts, defendants are
 not permitted formal legal counsel but may speak on their own behalf and be as-
 sisted by informal advisers. Sentences are subject to review by traditional authori-
 ties and to appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. Legally, the public
 prosecutor has the authority to determine which court should hear a case, but in
 practice the police usually make the determination. Accused persons have the right
 to transfer their cases from the traditional courts. Delays in trials are common.
 In November, the King issued an administrative order that strengthened the judi-
 cial powers of traditional chiefs appointed by the King. The order provides for chiefs'
 courts with limited civil and criminal jurisdiction and authorizes the imposition of
 fines up to approximately $50 (300 emalangeni), and prison sentences of up to 3
 months. Accused persons are required to appear in person without representation
 by a legal practitioner or advocate. However, chiefs' courts only are empowered to
 administer customary law "insofar as it is not repugnant to natural justice or moral-
 ity," or is inconsistent with the provisions of any law in force. The order provides
 that defendants' may appeals decisions of the chiefs court to regional appeal courts,
 and to the higher courts of appeal. Appeals in criminal matters can be taken up
 to the Judicial Commissioner as a last resort, and the High Court is the court of
 last resort for civil matters. Human rights organizations and the press expressed
 serious concern over issuance of the order.
 The charges against three labor leaders arrested in 1996 for violating the Indus-
 trial Relations Act and 49 political activists arrested in 1994 are no longer pending.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or other
 premises, and police generally respect this requirement in practice. However, police
 officers with the rank of subinspector or higher have the right to conduct a search
 without a warrant if they believe that evidence might be lost through the delay in
 obtaining a warrant. Searches without warrants occur occasionally.
 Police searched dozens of homes, including those of trade union leaders and oppo-
 sition political figures during security crackdowns associated with the October elec-
 tion process and a subsequent bombing attack on the Deputy Prime Minister's office
 (see Sections l.a. and 3).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government limits freedom of speech and
 of the press through a continuing formal ban on political parties and occasional har-
 assment of journalists. The Government also has discouraged critical news coverage
 of the royal family, and journalists practice self-censorship in regard to the imme-
 diate royal family and national security policy.
 Both government-owned and independent newspapers covered a wide variety of
 sensitive topics and criticized government corruption, inefficiency, and waste, fre-
 quently using harsh invectives. With some exceptions, the Government continued to
 withhold its advertising from the country's only independently-owned daily news-
 
 
 408
 paper. However, the King granted an extensive exclusive interview to the same
 independent newspaper. A new provincial community newsletter was launched, and
 the Prime Minister's office distributes a free weekly circular reporting on govern-
 ment policy and activities. The goVernment-owned television and radio stations-the
 most influential media in reaching the public-generally followed official policy posi-
 tions. Government broadcast facilities retransmit Voice of America and British
 Broadcasting Corporation news programs in their entirety.
 The Parliament in May deferred a government proposal to establish a media coun-
 cil with powers to push joualists and publishers who did not comply with strict
 licensing requirements, thereby limiting press freedom, and recommended instead
 joint government-media discussions to review media policy. However, the new Mn-
 ster of Public Service indicated publicly that the Government intends to reintroduce
 a media council bill in the new Parliament, but that journalists would be consulted
 beforehand.
 Private companies and church groups own several newsletters, magazines, and
 one radio station that broadcasts throughout the region, but these generally avoid
 political controversy.
 The practice of self-censorship and the prohibition of political gatherings limit
 academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts free-
 dom of assembly. King Sobhuza's "1973 decree prohibits meetings of a political na-
 tre, processions, or demonstrations in any public place without the consent of the
 Commissioner of Police. The authorities did not routinely grant permission to hold
 such meetings but did not rigidiy enforc  e  G1973 decree. Poitical organizations,
 including PUDEMO and the Swaziland Youth Congress (SWAYOCO), often met
 without the required permission and without repercussions. However, the threat of
 police intervention pursuant to terms of the 1973 decree remains. Police forcibly dis-
 persed demonstrators who allegediy were disrupting voting activities on election day
 in October (see Section 3).
 Seve ractaditional forums exist for the expression of opinion, including commu-
 nity meetings, national councils, and direct dialog with vilage chiefs, but they often
 depend on the whims of leaders and are not consistently effective channels for ex-
 pressing political dissent.
 The Government restricts freedom of association. King Sobhuza's 1973 decree pro-
 hibits political parties. The 1996 Industrial Relations Act (IRA) restricts the ability
 of trade union organizations to participate in the social and political affairs of the
 nation (see Section 6.a.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Followers of all reigious faiths are free to worship with-
 out government interference or restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Withine County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Citizens may travel and work freely within the country. However,
 under traditional law a married woman requires her husband's permission to apply
 for a passport, and unmarried women require the permission of a close male rel-
 ative. A citizenship law passed in 1992 removed several ambiguities relating to citi-
 zenship and nominally enabled nonethnic Swazis to obtaln passports and citizenship
 documents. However, individuals seeking these documents sometimes experience
 lengthy processing delays, in part due to occasional prejudice that mixed race and
 white Swazis are not real Swazis.
 The Government treats several thousand ethnic Swazis living across the border
 with South Africa as virtually indistinguishable from local Swazis and routinely
 grants them travel and citizenship documents.
 The law include provisions for the granting of refugee or asylee status in accord-
 ance with the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967
 Protocol. The Government cooperates fully with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as the various nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) involved in the care of refugees. The UNHCR officially recognizes several
 hundred refugees in the country, the majority coming from east and central Africa.
 The issue of provision of first asylum has not arisen in recent years.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens are not able to exercise this right. The King retains ultimate executive
 and legislative authority, and political parties are prohibited. Passage of legislation
 by Parliament requires the King's assent to become law, which he is not obliged to
 give. When Parliament is not in session, the King may legislate by decree under hi
 residual emergency powers. The King chooses the Prime Minister and, in consulta-
 
 
 409
 tion with the Prime Minister, also chooses the Cabinet, many senior civil servants,
 and the heads of government offices.
 Citizens elect most members of the lower house of parliament. Parliamentary elec-
 tions were held by secret ballot in October for 53 of the 55 elected seats in the 65-
 seat Lower House (the King appoints the remaining 10 members), and a by-election
 was held in December for one of the two remaining constituencies. The final remain-
 ing constituency had not yet scheduled a by-election at year's end. The continmu
 ban on political parties and restrictions on political activity prompted some politic
 groupings and trade unions to call for a boycott of the elections by their members.
 Swazlland Federation of Trade Union members participating in the electoral process
 were threatened with disciplinary measures by the labor federation. Election offi-
 cials reported that approximately 200,000 of the 400,000 eligible citizens registered
 for the parliamentary elections, and that approximately 120,000 citizens voted, al-
 though critics questioned that figure.
 There was no formal international observer presence, but there was intensive cov-
 erage by local and foreign media, and resident diplomats were granted accreditation
 to observe the proceedings freely. Candidates or their representatives also were al-
 lowed to monitor the elections. Election procedures generally were carried out in an
 orderly fashion. However, the decision to open polling stations for further voting a
 week after the election because of torrential rains led to irregularities, including
 persons being found with multiple copies of registration certificates. Alleged irreg-
 ularities led to legal challenges in four constituencies, and the High Court over-
 turned the result in one constituency as a result. Opposition political groupings re-
 mained highly critical of the entire electoral process, due to the continuing formal
 ban on organized political party activity.
 In the days leading up to the elections, the police searched dozens of homes, in-
 cluding those of trade union leaders and opposition political figures ostensibly in re-
 sponse to some of the bombing incidents that occurred between August and Novem-
 ber (see Section l.a.). No one was arrested or detained. On election day, the police
 forcibly dispersed nine political activists who were demonstrating against the elec-
 tions outside of a polling place.
 In August two members of SWAYOCO were charged with violating the Electoral
 Order Act, after they allegedly were observed destroying materials related to the
 general elections, assaulting citizens, and disrupting the electoral registration proc-
 ess. They were tried and in October were convicted and sentenced to either 1 year
 in jail or a fine of approximately $167 (1000 emalangeni). After paying the fine, both
 were released from custody.
 As provided under law, the newly formed House of Assembly nominated 10 mem-
 bers from the public at large to serve in the upper house or Senate. The King ap-
 points the additional 20 Senate members. The new Cabinet of Ministers, sworn in
 on November 20, included only three elected Members of Parliament, with the bal-
 ance drawn from appointed members of the House or Senate.
 Elections were held by secret ballot without major difficulties in August to select
 new municipal councils in nine cities and towns across the country. Approximately
 70 percent of all eligible voters registered to vote, but only 22 percent of registered
 voters actually cast ballots. Citizens voted largely without interference or intimida-
 tion, except for scattered incidents in Mbabane where representatives of PUDEMO
 opposed to participation in the election attempted to deter voting activities.
 Pressure has been building for several years to modernize the political system,
 and both the King and the Government recognize that there is a need for political
 reform, including the drafting of a new constitution and, specifically, a bill of rights.
 In 1996 the King appointed a 30-member, Constitutional Review Commission (CRC),
 with the stated purpose of examining the suspended 1968 Constitution, carrying out
 civic education, determining the citizen's wishes regarding a future system of gov-
 ernment, and making appropriate recommendations on a new constitution. The CRC
 compiled a constitutional framework, including portions of the 1968 Constitution
 still in force, the 1973 decree as currently amended, and the 1992 Establishment
 of Parliament Order. The CRC distributed this framework nationwide as a starting
 point for discussion. However, only limited progress was made during the year on
 civic education, in part due to a slowdown in CRC activity to avoid confusion with
 the simultaneous civic education campaign carried out by the Electoral Commission
 prior to parliamentary elections, and to relieve the burden on local chiefs charged
 with supporting both activities. Four progressive CRC members, who resigned in
 1997 to protest the Commission's terms of reference and slow rate of progress, re-
 mained outside the CRC during the year, although their seats were held open for
 their possible return at a later date. The CRC sustained a further setback when a
 dispute between its chairman and deputy chairman resulted in the latter's removal
 from office and the elimination of his position.
 
 
 410
 
 Human rights organizations, church groups, labor unions, and other NGO's con-
 ducted their own active programs of constitutional and human rights civic edu-
 cation.
 Women generally have full legal rights to participate in the political process, but
 they are underrepresented in the Government and politics. There are only 4 women
 in the 65-member House of Assembly formed after the October elections, 4 women
 in the 30-seat Senate, and 2 women among the 16 ministers in the Cabinet. A
 woman serves as Secretary to the Cabinet and the head of the civil service. Four
 women serve as principal secretaries, the most senior civil service rank in the min-
 istries. There are 3 women on the 30-person Constitutional Review Commission.
 However, in accordance with societal practice, widows in mourning (for periods that
 can vary from 6 months to 3 years) are prevented from appearing in certain public
 places and from being near the King and, as a result, can be excluded from voting
 or running for office.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits domestic human rights groups to operate. During the
 year a local human rights group spoke out on a number of occasions, criticizing the
 lack of accountability and transparency in government circles. There were no visits
 by international human rights organizations, although foreign diplomats and local
 -representatives of international agencies were invited to tour correctional facilities
 (see Section L.c.). The Government solicited and obtained expert assistance from
 ILO in 1997 to form a tripartite committee charged with redrafting national indus-
 trial relations legislation.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of
 race, religion, sex, or political affiliation. Under the act employees may bring suit
 against employers for discrimination, and there are also provisions for criminal
 prosecutions. However, there is no record of any suits or prosecutions. Reportedly,
 the act has been used on occasion to bring moral suasion to bear against employers.
 Legal and cultural discrimination against women remains a problem. Mixed race
 citizens sometimes experience societal discrimination, although they serve in high
 positions throughout the government.
 Women. Violence against women, particularly wife beating, is frequent, despite
 traditional strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their
 husbands with assault under both the Western and the traditional legal systems
 and urban women frequently do so, usually in extreme cases when intervention by
 extended family members fails to end such violence. Rural women often have no al-
 ternative but to suffer in silence if family intervention does not succeed, because the
 traditional courts can be unsympathetic to "unruly" or "disobedient?' women and are
 less likely than the modern courts to convict men for wife beating. Rape is also com-
 mon and is regarded by many men as a minor offense, while women are inhibited
 from reporting such crimes by a sense of shame and helplessness, especially where
 incest is involved. Even in the modern courts, sentences frequently amount to no
 more than several months in jail, a fine, or both. The Legal Code provides some
 legal protection from sexual harassment but its provisions are vague and largely in-
 effective. Several NGO's provide support for victims of abuse or discrimination.
 Women occupy a subordinate role in society. In both civil and traditional mar-
 riages, wives are treated as minors legally, although those who marry under civil
 law may be accorded the legal status of adults, if stipulated in a signed prenuptial
 agreement. A woman generally requires her husband's permission to borrow money,
 open a bank account, obtain a passport, leave the country, gain access to land, and,
 in some cases, take a job. Unmarried women require a male relative's permission
 to obtain a passport (see Section 2.d.). Despite the 1980 Employment Act that re-
 quired equal pay for equal work, men's average wage rates by skill category usually
 exceed those of women.
 The dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights.
 Since traditional marriage is governed by uncodified law and custom, women's
 rights are often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are inter-
 preted. Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating prob-
 lems in determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent
 questions of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death. In tradi-
 tional marriages, a man may take more than one wife. A man who marries a woman
 under civil law legally may not have more than one wife, although in practice this
 restriction sometimes is ignored. Traditional marriages consider children to belong
 
 
 to the father and to his family if the couple divorces, Children born out of wedlock
 are viewed as belonging to the mother. Under the 1992 Citizenship Act, a woman
 does not pass citizenship automatically to her children. Inheritances are passed
 through male children only.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions, urbanization, and the increasing prominence
 of female leaders in government and civic organizations are breaking down barriers
 to equality. Women routinely execute contracts and enter into a variety of trans-
 actions in their own names. The Government has committed itself to various wom-
 en's initiatives, and the Ministry of Home Affairs coordinates women's issues. For
 example, the Government established a task force to address domestic gender
 issues, and held workshops -during the year for journalists on gender sensitivity,
 while the Ministry of Education launched an initiative to promote gender sensitiza-
 tion of school curriculums.
 Children.-The Government is concerned with the rights and welfare of children,
 and a number of laws directly address children's issues. The Government does not
 providq free, compulsory education for children. The Government pays teachers' sal-
 aries while student fees pay for books and the buildings' fund. Supplemental money
 must sometimes be raised for building upkeep, including teachers' housing. How-
 ever, the country has a 99 percent primary school enrollment rate. A government
 task force educates the public on children's issues.
 Child abuse is a problem. Children convicted of crimes sometimes are caned as
 punishment. Female children sometimes suffer sexual abuse, including by family
 members. There is a growing number of street children in Mbabane and Manzini.
 People With Disabilities.-The Ministry of Home Affairs has called for equal treat-
 ment of the disabled, however, there are no laws that protect the rights of the dis-
 abled or that mandate accessibility for the disabled to buildings, transportation, or
 government services. A government task force was established in 1997 to address
 issues affecting persons with disabilities, and in December the Minister of Health
 and Social Welfare announced that a bill giving preferential treatment to disabled
 persons for building access and other needs was in the final stages of preparation
 for submission to the Parliament.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1996 Industrial Relations Act (IRA) permits
 workers in all elements of the economy, including the public sector, to join unions
 and allows unions to associate freely in the context of traditional trade union con-
 cerns. However, it imposes criminal penalties for union activity outside core union
 concerns, specifically on social or political issues, and provides that the Government
 may suspend or close down unions that focus too much on such noncore labor mat-
 ters. It prohibits trade union federations (but not individual unions) or their officers
 from engaging in any act that "causes or incites" the slowdown or cessation of work
 or economic activity, or from acting in any way that might be construed as a "re-
 straint of trade," with 5 years' imprisonment the maximum penalty for such viola-
 tions. Employers face equivalent penalties for unauthorized lockouts.
 The IRA confines unions and employer organizations to single industries, and
 does not permit organization across economic and industrial sectors, contrary to the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention 87.
 The main trade union federation is the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions
 (SFTU). A second trade union federation is the Swaziland Federation of Labor
 (SFL), which broke away from the SFTU in 1993 and gained formal recognition
 from the Government in 1994.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The act specifies a number of provisions, which must be addressed in a con-
 stitution, including the election of officers by secret ballot. The Labor Commissioner
 must approve the union constitution, and can strike out or amend provisions that
 violate the law. The Government may dissolve unions that fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner without recourse to judicial review. There
 is no collusion between the Government and business in relation to worker rights.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegal strike. The act empowers the Government to mediate em-
 ployment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. When dis-
 putes arise, the Government often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a
 strike, which may not be called legally until all avenues of negotiation have been.
 exhausted, and a secret ballot of union members has been conducted. The law pro-
 hibits strikes in "essential" services, which include electricity, water, fire fighting,
 health, sanitation, telephone, telegraph, and broadcasting, as well as many civil
 service positions.
 
 
 There were a number of strikes, usually over wages and benefits, or the dismissal
 of fellow workers. Although the Government maintained that all outstanding issues
 already had been addressed, the SFTU continued to press for action on the 27 de-
 mands it presented in 1994, including calls for fundamental political change. These
 demands addressed a wide range of issues, including recognition of affirmative ac-
 tion, a national uniform minimum wage, an end to discrimination against women,
 the provision of better housing for workers, inclusion of worker representatives in
 constitutional discussions, and the lifting of the 1973 Decree that suspended the
 Constitution and outlawed political parties.
 The ILO Committee of Experts (COE) has noted discrepancies between the IRA
 and ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Association and ILO Convention 98 on the
 Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively. The COE concerns include the powers
 accorded government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the abil-
 ity of workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad.
 With ILO assistance, a tripartite drafting committee that included government,
 labor, and business representatives reached agreement on a comprehensive revision
 of the IRA designed to bring labor law into full conformity with international con-
 ventions. In July the Cabinet approved the draft bill, but Parliament was dissolved
 for new elections before final- passage of the measure. The Government stated that
 passage of the bill was a top priority for the new parliament, which was scheduled
 to convene in February 1999.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA piovides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Col-
 lective bargaining is widespread; approximately 80 percent of the formal private sec-
 tor is unionized. The law obliges employers to recognize a union when it achieves
 over 50 percent membership among employees. Employers must allow representa-
 tives of legally recognized unions to conduct union activities on company time. The
 Industrial Court may refuse to register collective bargaining agreements in the
 event of nonobservance of any requirement of the IRA. The IRA prohibits trade
 union federations or their officers, but not individual unions, from inciting any slow-
 down of work or economic activity or acting in any way that might be construed as
 a restraint of trade. It provides equivalent penalties to employers in the case of un-
 authorized lockouts.
 Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Industrial Court, if nec-
 essary. Although many employers resist recognition and force the issue to the Indus-
 trial Court, the Court generally rules in favor of the unions in these cases. In the
 case of unfair dismissal, the Court may order reinstatement and compensation to
 the employee as well as a fine to the employer. Union leaders made credible charges
 that management in various industries dismissed workers for union activity. The
 Government sometimes instigates such dismissals. There are no export processing
 zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Corpulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor, in-
 cluding by children, and it is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Em-
 ployment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 in an indus-
 trial undertaking, except in cases where only family members are employed in the
 firm, or in technical schools where children are working under the supervision of
 a teacher or other authorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours
 that can be worked on schooldays, and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per
 day or 33 per week. Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary.
 However, children below the minimum age frequently are employed in the agricul-
 tural sector, particularly in the eastern cotton-growing region. Children also are em-
 ployed as domestic workers, and as herd boys in rural areas. The Ministry of Labor
 is responsible for enforcement but its effectiveness is limited by personnel shortages.
 The law prohibits forced labor, including by children and it is not known to occur
 (see Section 6.d.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legally-mandated sliding scale of
 minimum wages depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 p rovide a worker and famly with a decent standard of living. The minimum month-
 wag   or a domestic worker is approximately $30 (180 emalangeni), for an un-
 skilled worker $47 (280 emalangeni), and for a skilled worker $75 (450 emalangeni).
 Labor, management, and government representatives have negotiated a maximum
 48-hour workweek in the industrial sector, except for security guards who work p
 to six 12-hour shifts per week. The Employment Act and the Wages Act entitle
 workers to 1 day of rest per week. Most workers receive a minimum of 12 days an-
 nual leave. The Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector. There
 are extensive provisions allowing workers to seek redress for alleged wrongful dis-
 
 
 413
 missal; these provisions frequently are brought into play. There are also penalties
 for employers who conduct unauthorized lockouts.
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety. The Government sets
 safety standards for industrial operations and encourages private companies to de-
 velop accident prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production has ne-
 cessitated more government action on safety issues. However, the Labor Commis-
 sioner's office has conducted few safety inspections in recent years because of staff-
 ing deficiencies. Workers have no formal statutory rights to remove themselves from
 dangerous work places without jeopardizing their jobs;, nor do any collective bargain-
 ing agreements address the matter.
