 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive, legisla-
 tive, and (with Iimitations) judicial powers ultimately vested in the King (presently
 Mswati III). The King rules according to unwritten law and custom, in conjunction
 with a mainly-electedparliament andan accompanying structure of published laws
 and implementing agencies. Parliamentary elections in 1993, local council elections
 in 1994, and municipal elections in 1995 and 1997 introduced increased representa-
 tive government, but political power continues to rest largely with the King and his
 circle of traditional advisers. The 1968 Constitution was suspended by the present
 King's father in 1973. Based upon the 1973 decree, the King has the authority to
 issue decrees that carry the force of law, although he has not exercised this author-
 ity in recent years. The 1973 decree also bans political parties, meetings, and pro-
 is     eendemands that the
 197  deree bevilifncnted  and  e estionionse s exthna aCnstitutional Review
 CommissomniCRC, appsioin the Kinglin July 19, Nisnl ePited to consider and
 makeorcmmendaatticommnsty ve, thed coeit2-y man. da. Four progressive
 cRnct meberegnhed, arioly cidting comniy ovie themC missions terms of
 refernPoce its procedue it w poes am d tme fuact  ihtmembers were ap-
 poined y te  i  rahertha  noinatd b ciic r plitcalgrops. The judiciary
 is independent.
 Both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the Royal Swaziland Police oper-
 ate under civilian control and are responsible for external and internal security.
 Some communities, questioning the ability of the National Police to deal with en-
 forcement at the community level, formed community police. There were reports of
 conflicts between the national and the community police. Members of both the Na-
 tional Police and the community police committed some human rights abuses.
 Swaziland has a free market economny, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of citizens are engaged in subsistence agrculture, although a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 formal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, especially the soft
 drink concentrate, sugar, and wood pulp industries, which are composed primarily
 of large firms with predominantly foreign ownership. A governmental organization
 maintains large investments in all major sectors of the economy, including industry,
 agriculture, and services.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation. Citizens still are
 not able to change their government. Police tortured and beat some suspects and
 sometimes used excessive force against demonstrators. The Government generally
 failed to prosecute or otherwise discipline police officers who committed such abuses.
 Prison conditions are poor, and the Government continued to use a nonbailable of-
 fense provision of the raw. Police at times harassed human rights and political activ-
 ists from prohibited political organizations, as well as labor leaders. The Govern-
 ment continues to limit freedom of speech and the press, and journalists practice
 some self-censorship, although they spoke out on key issues. However, there was
 wing freedom of speech in certain areas, including parliamentary debate, and at
 eCR's public meetings, where some citizens voiced strong political opinions. The
 Government restricted freedom of association and assembly and retained prohibi-
 tions on political activity, although numerous political formations operated openly
 and voiced opinions critical of the Government. Authorities on occasion arrested or
 detained members of political groupings, labor union leaders, and human rights ac-
 tivists for brief periods. There are some limits on freedom of movement. Legal and
 cultural discrimination and violence against women as well as abuse of children, re-
 mained problems. Discrimination against mixed race and white citizens persists.
 The Government restricts worker rights. The 1996 Industrial Relations Act (IRA),
 which both unions and organized business criticize for its heavy penalties and viola-
 tions of International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions, remained in force, al-
 though the Government ageed to revise it and in November formed a tripartite re-
 drafting committee, including employers and labor, which was assisted by an ILO
 advisor.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically-motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports by criminal defendants of the use of torture during in-
 
 
 terrogation. Police sometimes beat criminal suspects and occasionally used the
 "tube style of interrogation, in which police suffocate suspects through use of a rub-
 ber tube around the face and mouth. The Government generally failed to prosecute
 or otherwise discipline police officers for such abuses. Courts did, however, invali-
 date confessions induced through such physical abuse.
 Police sometimes used excessive force in dealing with demonstrators. In February
 police gassed, beat, and detained 20 labor and political leaders at the beginning of
 a labor mass "stay away" (a nonviolvent protest action whereby employees fail to
 report to work). Police later shot and wounded six demonstrators in Big Bend dur-
 ing the February stay away. In April during a prohibited political rally calling for
 the repeal of the 1973 decree, police beat 18 people, including 2 bystanders. How-
 ever, in October and November during a 2-day general labor mass stay away and
 6-week teachers mass stay away, police exercised marked restraint.
 Prison conditions are poor. Food is generally adequate, although sometimes family
 members must bring food to supplement the sparse prison diet. Medical care is in-
 adequate. Use of the nonbailable provision led to continued overcrowding in govern-
 ment remand centers, where suspects are held during pretrial detention (see Section
 1.d.). Women and juveniles are held in separate prison facilities.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors, and allowed
 journalists to interview labor leaders detained during the February stay away.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law requires warrants for arrests in
 most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect may flee. Detainees may consult with a lawyer of
 their choice and must be charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable
 time, usually 48 hours, or, in remote areas, as soon as the judicial officer appears.
 The authorities generally respect these rights in practice.
 The Government continued to limit provisions for bail for crimes appearing in the
 Nonbailable Offenses Order, which became effective in 1993 and was strengthened
 by Parliament in 1994. The act lists 11 offenses; narcotics use and trafficking were
 added during 1997. The mere charge of the underlying offense, without any evi-
 dentiary showing that the suspect is involved, is sufficient to employ the nonbailable
 provision. The Minister of Justice may amend the list by his own executive act.
 In January, immediately prior to a planned labor mass stay away, the nonbailable
 provision was applied to a portion of the 1963 Public Order Act, which was then'
 used to arrest four labor leaders. The court acquitted them after 26 days in prison.
 The terms under which they were held were lenient, however, and the detained
 labor leaders were allowed to meet with the press and union members. On the first
 day of the February stay away, police gassed, beat, and detained 20 labor and politi-
 cal leaders for several hours. Also during the month-long stay away, police detained
 a leading human rights activist for a day as well as various political activists, in-
 cluding youths holding a protest prayer meeting in support of the labor leaders.
 During Constitutional Review Commission visits in Augst to local centers, police
 detained one political activist briefly in Piggs Peak and arrested four activists in
 Mbabane. The four were released on bail the following day. During October-Novem-
 ber mass "stay aways" no detentions were reported.
 The Government does not use forced exile. There are no barriers to prevent the
 return of dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The judiciary is independent; however, the King
 has certain judicial powers.
 Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one independent and based on West-
 ern law, the other based on a system of national courts following unwritten tradi-
 tional law and custom. In treason and sedition cases, the King can circumvent the
 regular judiciary by appointing a special tribunal, that may adopt roles and proce-
 dures different from those applied in the High Court. However, this power was last
 used in 1987.
 The Western judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals (composed entirely of expa-
 triate, usually South African, judges), the High Court, and magistrates' courts, all
 of which are independent of executive and military control and free from intimida-
 tion from outside forces. The expatriate judges, often distinguished members of their
 respective bars, serve on the basis of 2-year, renewable contracts. Local judges serve
 indefinitely on good behavior. In magstratesl courts, the defendant is entitled to
 counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital
 cases or when difficult points of law are at issue. There ae well-defined appeal pro-
 cedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 Most Swazis who encounter the legal system do so through the traditional courts.
 The authorities may bring ethnic Swazis to these courts for minor offenses and vio-
 lations of traditional law and custom. In traditional courts, defendants are notper-
 mitted formal legal counsel hut may speak on their own behalf and he assistedby
 
 
 informal advisers. Sentences are subject to review by traditional authorities and to
 appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. Legally, the public prosecutor
 has the authority to determine which court should hear a case, but in practice the
 police usually make that determination. Accused persons have the right to transfer
 their cases from the traditional courts. Delays in trials are common. Three labor
 leaders charged in 1996 under the Industrial Relations Act and 49 political activists
 charged in 1994 have pending cases. In February the court tried and acquitted after
 26 days the four labor leaders who had been arrested immediately prior to labor's
 mass action (see Section 6.a.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or other
 premises, and police generally respect this requirement in practice. However, police
 officers with the rank of subinspector or higher have the right to search without a
 warrant if they believe that evidence might be lost through delay in obtaining a
 warrant. While searches without warrants occur occasionally, the issue of legality
 of evidence rarely arises in court. In February during labor's mass stay away action,
 police searched the home of a leading human rights activist without a warrant.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government limits freedom of speech and
 of the press through the continuing ban on political parties and the occasional har-
 assment of journalists. The Government also discourages critical news coverage of
 the royal family, and journalists practice some self-censorship. The Government's
 proposed media bill could further restrict freedom of speech and the press if imple-
 mented. Both government-owned and independent newspapers covered a wide vari-
 ety of sensitive topics and criticized government corruption, inefficiency, and waste.
 However, while there is extensive published criticism of government activities, the
 media, both government-controlled and private, practice self-censorship in regard to
 the immediate royal family and nationalsecurity policy. The government-owned tel-
 evision and radio stations-the most influential media in reaching the public-gen-
 erally followed official policy positions. In January the Government reportedly can-
 celed a news talk show on state-owned television with representatives from both
 government and labor that was to address the impending labor stay away. Report-
 ers at state-owned radio were discouraged from reporting fully on developments re-
 lating to the February stay away. Several journalists were harassed by police while
 covering rallies by the Swaziland Democratic Alliance (SDA), and television came
 under criticism by government officials for its coverage of activities by prodemocracy
 groups, particularly an April rally by the SDA. The Government acted to withhold
 its advertising from the country's only independently-owned daily. Although the
 Government claimed that its action was for nonpolitical reasons, the decision fol-
 lowed an article in May regarding possible tax arrears on property allegedly held
 by the King.
 The Ministry of Public Service and Information introduced a bill in Parliament
 on a national information policy, which was designed to set up a government regu-
 latory body, provide an overly-broad definition of publication, and impose criminal
 pen   ies on infractions. The media and many NGO's voiced major concerns, causing
 the bill to be referred to a parliamentary subcommittee for further review-a review
 which also would set forth objections and potential modifications to the hill-with
 return for full parliamentary review in early 1998.
 Private companies and church groups own several newsletters, magazines, and
 one radio station that broadcasts throughout the region, but these avoid political
 controversy.
 The practice of self-censorship and the prohibition or political gatherings limit
 academic freedom.
 b. Freedo riof Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts free-
 dom of assembly. King Sobhuza's 1978 decree prohibits meetings of a political na-
 ture, processions, or demonstrations in any public place without the consent of the
 Commissioner of Police. The authorities generally did not grant permission to hold
 such meetings but did not rigidiy enforce the 1973 decree. Political organizations,
 including the People's United Democracy Movement (PUDEMO) and Swaziland
 Youth Congress (SWAYOCO), often met without the required permission and with-
 out repercussions. However, the threat of police intervention remains, and on sev-
 eral occasions police harassed political and labor groups taking part in political ac-
 tivities, such as peaceful meetings, rallies, and demonstrations. In April during a
 Swaziland Democratic Alliance rally calling for the repeal of the 1973 decree, police
 beat 18 people, including 2 bystanders.
 
 
 341
 Several traditional forums exist for the expression of opinion, including commu-
 nity meetings, national councils, and direct dialog with village chiefs, but they often
 depend on the sufferance of leaders and are not effective channels for expressing
 political dissent.
 The Government restricts freedom of association. King Sobhuza's 1973 decree pro-
 hibits political parties. Labor law restricts the ability of trade union organizations
 to participate in the social and political affairs of the nation (see Section 6.a.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Followers of all religious faiths are free to worship with-
 out government interference or restriction. A wide variety of religious groups ac-
 tively participate in society and engage in public discussion that extends to political
 and social issues.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens may travel and work freely within the country. However,
 under traditional law a married women requires her husband's permission to apply
 for a passport, and unmarried women require the permission of a close male rel-
 ative. A citizenship law passed in 1992 removed several ambiguities relating to citi-
 zenship and nominally enabled nonethnic Swazis to obtain passports and citizenship
 documents. Bureaucratic delays, however, plague individuals seeking these docu-
 ments, in part due to occasional prejudice that mixed race and white Swazis are not
 real Swazis. Mixed race citizens in particular are- sometimes subject to unfair and
 discriminatory treatment.
 The Government treats several thousand ethnic Swazis from the former homeland
 of KwaZulu in South Africa as virtually indistinguishable from local Swazis and
 routinely grants them travel and citizenship documents.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees (UNHCR) as well as the various nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) in-
 volved in the care of refugees. The UNHCR officially recognizes several hundred ref-
 ugees in Swaziland, the majority coming from east and central Africa. The issue of
 provision of first asylum has not arisen in recent years. The Government did not
 forcibly return any persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens are not able to exercise this right. The King retains ultimate executive
 and legislative authority, and political parties are prohibited. Passage of legislation
 by Parliament requires the King's assent to become law, which he is not obliged to
 give. When Parliament is not in session, the King may legislate by decree under his
 residual emergency powers. The King chooses the Prime Minister and, in consulta-
 tion with the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, as well as many senior civil servants,
 and heads of government offices. Ten of the 16 members of Cabinet selected by the
 King are elected members of parliament.
 Pressure has been building to modernize the political system. In July 1996, the
 King appointed a 30-member Constitutional Review Commission (CRC) with a 2-
 year mandate, with the stated purpose of examining the suspended 1968 Constitu-
 tion, carrying out civic education, determining the people's wishes for their future
 system of government, and making appropriate recommendations on a new constitu-
 tional document. The CRC compiled the relevant documents outlining the current
 constitutional framework, including portions of the 1968 Constitution still in force,
 the 1973 decree as currently amended, and the 1992 establishment of parliament
 order. The CRC distributed these documents to the public in July and August dur-
 ing nationwide visits. On most occasions, the CRC allowed the public to voice criti-
 cal opinions and concerns, although the formal collection of views was planned for
 a later stage. The CRC was widely criticized for being nonrepresentative (members
 were appointed by the King and serve as individuals ratlher than as representatives
 of organizations), for its focus on bureaucratic details and slow start, and for terms
 of reference that critics felt restricted the Commission's independence. Four progres-
 sive members of the 30-member Commission resigned, and another was expelled
 from his organization for not resigning. Human rights organizations, church groups,
 labor unions, and other NGO's conducted their own active programs of constitu-
 tional and human rights civic education.
 Women have full legal rights to participate in the political process. There are 2
 women in the 65-member House of Assembly, and 5 women in the 30-member Sen-
 ate. There is 1 woman in the 16-person Cabinet. Four women serve as principal sec-
 retaries, the most senior civil service rank in the ministries. There are 3 women on
 the 30-person Constitutional Review Commission.
 
 
 342
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits domestic human rights groups to operate. In 1997 a
 local human rights group spoke out on a number of occasions, criticizing the Govern-
 ment's detention of labor leaders, handling of labor disputes, and the lack of ac-
 countability and transparency in government circles. A major reference work on
 human rights in Swailand was published by Swazi legal scholars and human rights
 activists. There were no visits by international human rights organizations.
 However, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the
 ILO were active critics of the Government's treatment of labor and the 1996 Indus-
 trial Relations Act (IRA). The Government met with an ICFTU delegation during
 the February stay away and with visiting ILO representatives in June and Septem-
 ber. The Government agreed in August to amens the IRA and formed a redrafting
 committee in November, including employer and labor members, assisted by an ILO
 advisor.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of
 race, religion, sex, or political affiliation. Under the act employees may bring suit
 against employers for discrimination, and there are also provisions for criminal
 prosecutions. However, there is no record of any suits or prosecutions. Reportedly,
 the act has been used on occasion to bring moral suasion to bear against employers.
 Mixed-race citizens sometimes experience discrimination.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, is frequent, despite
 traditional strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their
 husbands with assault under both the western and traditional legal systems and
 frequently do so, usually in extreme cases when intervention by extended family
 members fails to end such violence. The traditional courts, however, can be unsym-
 pathetic to "unruly" or "disobedient" women and are less likely than the modern
 courts to convict men for wife beating. Rape is also common and is regarded by
 many men as a minor offense. Even in the modern courts, sentences firequently
 amount to no more than several months in jail, a fine, or both. The Legal Code ad-
 dresses legal protection from sexual harassment, but its provisions are vague and
 largely ineffective. Several NGO's provide support against abuse or discrimination.
 Women occupy a subordinate role in society. In both civil and traditional mar-
 riages, wives are legally treated as minors, although those who marry under civil
 law may be accorded the legal status of adults, if stipulated in a signed prenuptial
 agreement. A woman generally requires her husband's permission to borrow money,
 open a bank account, obtain a passport, leave the country, gain access to land, or,
 in some cases, take a job. Unmarried women require a male relative's permission
 to obtain a passport (see Section 2.d.). Despite the 1980 Employment Act requiring
 equal pay for equal work, men's average wage rates by skill category usually exceed
 those of women.
 The dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights.
 As traditional marriage is governed by uncodified law and custom, women's rights
 are often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are interpreted.
 Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems in
 determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent questions
 of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death. In traditional mar-
 riages, a man may take more than one wife. A man who marries a woman under
 civil law legally may not have more than one wife, although in practice this restric-
 tion is sometimes ignored. Traditional marriages consider children to belong to the
 father and to his family if the couple divorces. Children born out of wedlock are
 viewed as belonging to the mother. Under the 1992 Citizenship Act, a woman does
 not automatically pass citizenship to her children.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions, urbanization, and the increasing prominence
 of female leaders in government and civic organizations are breaking down barriers
 to equality. Women now routinely execute contracts and enter into a variety of
 transactions in their own names. The Government has committed itself to various
 women's initiatives in the wake of the 1995 Beijing Conference on Women, and the
 Ministry of Home Affairs coordinates women's issues. The Government established
 a task force to address gender issues and hosted a meeting of the Southern African
 Development Community (SADC) countries to discuss how gender issue could be in-
 tegrated into the SADC agenda.
 Children.-The Government is concerned with the rights and welfare of children,
 and a number of laws directly address children's issues. The Government does not
 provide free, compulsory education for children. The Government pays teachers' sal-
 
 
 343
 ary while student fees pay for books and the buildings' fund. Supplemental money
 must sometimes be raised for building upkeep, including teachers' housing. How-
 ever the country has a 99 percent primary school enrollment. The 1952 Adoption
 of Children Act includes a number of provisions for protecting children under con-
 sideration for ado tion, and the 1970 Maintenance Act includes various provisions
 regarding the enforcement of maintenance decrees for the benefit of women and
 children. A government task force educates the public on children's issues.
 Child abuse is a problem. Children convicted of crimes sometimes are caned as
 punishment. Female children can suffer sexual abuse, including by family members.
 There are growing numbers of street children in Mbabane and Manzini.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government, through the Ministry of Home Affairs,
 has called for equal treatment of the disabled. A "disabled bill was drafted and
 opened to discussion by the Federation of the Disabled in Swaziland (FODSWA) in
 lIecember. There are no laws mandating accessibility to buildings, transportation,
 or government services. The Constitutional Review Commission extended its dis-
 tribution of civic education materials to ensure distribution to the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1996 Industrial Relations Act (IRA) permits
 workers in all sectors of the economy, including the public sector, to join unions. It
 permits unions to associate freely in the context of traditional trade union concerns.
 However, the IRA imposes criminal penalties for union activity outside core union
 concerns, specifically on social or political issues, and it provides that the Govern-
 ment may suspend or close down unions that engage in such noncore labor matters.
 It prohibits trade union federations (but not individual unions) or their officers from
 engaging in any act that "causes or incites" the slowdown or cessation of work or
 economic activity, or to act in any way that might be construed as a "restraint of
 trade," with 5 years' imprisonment the maximum penalty for such violations. Em-
 ployers have equivalent penalties for unauthorized lockouts. The IRA confmes
 unions and employer organizations to single industries, and does not permit organi-
 zation across economic and industrial sectors, contrary to ILO Convention 87. The
 main trade union federation is the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU).
 A second trade union federation is the Swaziland Federation of Labor (SFL), which
 broke away from the SFTU in 1993 and gained formal recognition from the Govern-
 ment in 1994. In November a tripartite drafting committee, with assistance from
 the ILO, was formed to bring the IRA in line with internationally-recognized worker
 rights
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The act specifies a number of provisions that must be addressed in a constitu-
 tion, including the election of officers by secret ballot. The Labor .Commissioner
 must approve the union constitution, andhe can strike out or amend provisions that
 violate the law. The Government may dissolve unions that fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner without recourse to judicial review. In
 April several unions, including the SFTU, were suspended for not submitting re-
 quired financial statements, although the SFTU'S suspension was subsequently re-
 voked. There is no collusion between the Government and business in relation to
 worker rights.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or an illegal strike. The act empowers the Government to mediate
 employment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. When dis-
 putes arise, the Government often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a
 strike, which may not be called legally until all avenues of negotiation have been
 exhausted and a secret ballot of union members has been conducted. The law pro-
 hibits strikes in "essential" services, which cover electricity, water, firefighting,
 health, sanitation, telephone, telegraph, and broadcast, as well as many civil service
 positions.
 There were a number of strikes, usually over wages and benefits, or dismissal of
 fellow workers. In February the SFTU conducted a mass stay away related to 27
 demands presented to the Government in 1994, including calls for fundamental po-
 litical change. These demands addressed a wide range of issues, including recogni-
 tion of affirmative action, a national uniform minimum wage, an end to discrimina-
 tion against women, the provision of better housing for workers, inclusion of worker
 representatives in constitutional discussions, and the lifting of the 1973 decree that
 suspended the Constitution and outlawed political parties. The stay away lasted 4
 weeks and primarily affected the large sugar and pulp plantations and industries.
 Immediately prior to the planned stay away action, four labor leaders were arrested
 under a portion of the 1963 Public Order Act that had been made a nonbailable of-
 fense the previous day (see Section 1.d.. They were acquitted by trial and released
 
 
 26 days later. During the stay away police shot six people, wounding one seriously,
 and detained and beat labor and political activists; one who was wheelchair-bound
 sustained injuries that required 6 -months' medical treatment. In March the four
 labor leaders who had been arrested filed an approximately $1.3 million claim
 against the Government. The. SFTU_ conducted a 3-day stay away for similar mo-
 tives in October where there was both increase worker intimidation and increased
 police restraint. A wage-based teachers' strike lasted 6 weeks in October and No-
 vember, durn  a key examination period, without violence. The charges against
 three labor leaders from the 1996 stay away remained pending.
 In response to a complaint by the ICFTU (initiated by the SFTU), the ILO Com-
 mittee of Experts (COE) has noted to the Government discrepancies between the
 IRA and ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Association and ILO Convention 98 on
 the Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively. The COE concerns include-the pow-
 ers accorded government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the
 ability of workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and
 abroad. The Government agreed in August to amend the IRA and formed in Novem-
 ber a tripartite redrafting committee that included employers, labor officials, and an
 ILO adviser.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectioely.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Col-
 ,lective bargaining is widespread; approximately 80 -percent of the formal private sec-
 tor is unionized. The law obliges employers to recognize a union when it achieves
 over 50 percent membership among employees. Employers must allow representa-
 tives of legally recognized unions to conduct union activities on company time. The
 Industrial Court may refuse to register collective bargaining agreements in the
 event of nonobservance of any requirement of the IRA. The IRA prohibits trade
 union federations or their officers, but not individual unions, from inciting any slow-
 down of work or economic activity or acting in any way that might be construed as
 a restraint of trade. It provides equivalent penalties to employers in the case of un-
 authorized lockouts.
 Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Industrial Court, if nec-
 essary. Although many employers resist recognition and force the issue to the Indus-
 trial Court, the Court generally rules in favor of the unions in these cases. In the
 case of unfair dismissal, the Court may order reinstatement and compensation to
 the employee as well as a fine to the employer. Union leaders made credible charges
 that management in various industries dismissed workers for union activity. The
 Government sometimes instigates such dismissals.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor, in-
 cluding child labor, and it is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Em-
 ployment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 in an indus-
 trial undertaking, except in cases where only family members are employed in the
 firm, or in technical schools where children are working under the supervision of
 a teacher or other authorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours
 that can be worked on schooldays and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per
 day or 33 per week. Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary.
 However, children below the minimum age are frequently employed in the agricul-
 tural sector, particularly in the eastern cotton-growing region. Children are also em-
 ployed as domestic workers and as herd boys in rural areas. The Ministry of Labor
 is responsible for enforcement, but its effectiveness is limited by personnel short-
 ages. The law prohibits forced labor, including child labor, and it is not known to
 occur (see Section 6. c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legally-mandated sliding scale of
 minimum wages depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 provide a worker and family with a decent standard of living. The minimum month-
 ly wage for a domestic worker is approximately $40 (180 emalangeni), for an un-
 skilled worker $65 (280 emalangeni), and for a skilled worker $100 (450
 emalangeni).
 Labor, management, and government representatives have negotiated a maximum
 48-hour workweek in the industrial sector, except for security guards who work up
 to six 12-hour shifts per week. The Employment Act and the Wages Act entitle all
 workers to 1 day of rest per week. Most workers receive a minimum of 12 days of
 annual leave. The Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector.
 There are extensive provisions allowing workers to seek redress for alleged wrongful
 dismissal; these provisions are frequently brought into play. There are also penalties
 for employers who conduct unauthorized lockouts.
 
 
 345
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety. The Government sets
 safety standards for industrial operations and encourages private companies to de-
 velop accident prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production has ne-
 cessitated more government action on safety issues. However, the Labor Commis-
 sioner's office has conducted few safety inspections in recent years because of staff-
 ing deficiencies. Workers have no formal statutory rights to remove themselves from
 dangerous work places without jeopardizing their jobs; nor do any collective bargain-
 ing agreements address the matter.
