 SWAZILAND
 Although it is nominally a traditional monarchy, currently
 ruled by a Queen Regent, political power in Swaziland is now
 exercised by a group of senior politicans and traditional
 leaders associated with the Swazi royal family. In practice
 Swaziland's Government features both "modern' and "traditional"
 branches--a Cabinet, Parliament, and courts which follow
 Western law and a tribal system with 'national" courts which
 follow Swazi law and custom.
 The Kingdom attained independence in 1968 with a Constitution
 that provided for a popularly elected Parliament and for the
 fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. On the
 grounds that the Constitution had permitted the introduction
 of political practices incompatible with the traditional Swazi
 way of reaching decisions by consensus, King Sobhuza II
 decreed its repeal in 1973. He assumed supreme power and
 governmental decisions thereafter were made by King-in-council.
 Parliament reopened in January 1979 with some members chosen
 through an indirect selection process, but the King continued
 to be vested with the country's executive authority.
 King Sobhuza died in 1982 and Queen Regent Dzeliwe assumed the
 duties of head of state. In 1983 there arose a dispute over
 the role and authority of various elements of the Government
 which resulted in the replacement of Prime Minister Prince
 Mabandla by Prince Bhekimpi and the eventual replacement of
 Queen Regent Dzeliwe by Queen Regent Ntombi. During the same
 period, Ntombi's son, Prince Makhosetive, was officially
 declared the heir to the Swazi throne and is expected to
 become King upon reaching his majority in 1989. During this
 period of regency, Prince Sozisa, the senior prince of the
 Kingdom, was empowered by royal decree to represent the Queen
 Regent if she is unable to perform the functions of her office
 and has, in fact, been delegated much of the authority of the
 Crown, which he has exercised with the assistance of the Prime
 Minister and members of the Swazi supreme council, the Liqoqo.
 Although the authority of the Swazi Crown covers a wide
 spectrum of Swazi life, it is limited in practice by a complex
 system of traditional rights and responsibilities which
 requires that it be exercised in accordance with Swazi custom.
 Swazi custom does not allow public dissent against the Govern-
 ment, and those who publicly criticized the Government or
 demonstrated against the authorities have, on occasion, been
 suppressed. The Royal Swazi Police are widely regarded as
 being honest, professional, and efficient. The judiciary is
 traditionally independent, although some political pressure
 was brought to bear on the High Court during 1983.
 In 1983, there were some minor positive human rights develop-
 ments in Swaziland. An industrial court became operational,
 and the Swaziland National Association of Teachers, which
 had been dissolved in 1977 following a government determina-
 tion that it was engaging in political activities, was
 permitted to reestablish. However, in the period following
 the succession controversy, the Government used the existing
 detention laws against some of its critics, suppressed
 (359)
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 24
 
 
 360
 peaceful student demonstrations, and brought pressure on the
 High Court and the press. The legislature also has passed a
 government-sponsored amendment to the sedition law changing
 the maximum penalty for sedition from two years to 20 and
 allowing for trial in camera by a specially appointed tribunal.
 The Tribunal's decisions cannot be appealed.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 :Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There have been no known cases or allegations of killings by
 either official government or opposition political groups.
 b. Disappearance
 The Swazi authorities do not abduct persons and there have
 been no reports of disappearances occurring in the country
 during this reporting period.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no indication that torture and cruel, inhuman, or
 degrading treatment or punishment have occurred in Swaziland.
 Swazi prisons provide health care and diet roughly equivalent
 to the standard of the general population. Family visits are
 permitted, some training facilties are available, and prisoners
 can consult with attorneys of their choice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although habeas corpus is theoretically applied to all pri-
 soners, a 1978 law permits the Government to detain any indivi-
 dual for renewable periods of 60 days without charge. Detention
 is not subject to appeal to the courts, although it may be
 appealed directly to the monarch. During 1983, there were at
 least eight cases of such detention. In the first case, the
 editor of a local newspaper was held for,10 days in July.
 Although the law provides that the fact of detention shall be
 made public, the detention was not officially acknowledged,
 although it was common knowledge. Other cases included the
 permanent secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, the attorney
 of the former Queen Regent Dzeliwe, and two royal princes who
 are minor government officials. All four detainees were involved
 in the dispute over the replacement of the former Queen Regent
 and all four remained in detention in October 1983. In June
 1983, a Swazi journalist was apprehended by the police and
 interrogated for four days in connection with a report he
 filed with a foreign newspaper concerning antigovernment
 leaflets that were circulating in the Kingdom. He was released
 without charge.
 
 
 361
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is provided for by law and
 is generally honored in practice. In magistrates' courts, a
 defendant is entitled to counsel at his own expense. The
 Crown will provide a court-appointed defense counsel in capital
 cases. Counsel has effective access to defendants. Defendants
 are made fully aware of the charges against them. They and
 their lawyers are generally able to inform themselves of the
 evidence on which the charges are based. The courts are basi-
 cally independent of executive and military control. Appeals
 from magistrates' courts may be heard by the High Court and all
 final appeals are heard by the Court of Appeals, which is the
 highest judiciary body.
 These rights are not guaranteed to persons held under the 1978
 detention law or charged with sedition. The number of persons
 so held, however, is less than 20. In traditional courts,
 where ethnic Swazis may be brought for relatively minor offenses
 and violations of Swazi traditional laws or customs, legal
 counsel is not allowed, but defendants are usually heard on
 their own behalf. Swazi traditional law has not been formally
 codified, but both offenses and punishments are limited and
 findings are subject to a review system and appeal to the High
 Court and Court of Appeals.
 On August 17, former Queen Regent Dzeliwe filed an applica-
 tion with the Swazi High Court for reinstatement as regent
 of the Kingdom after having been deposed by government decree
 earlier in the month. On August 19, the Government responded
 by issuing a new decree which purported to deprive the court
 of jurisdiction over matters concerning the appointment and
 dismissal of the Queen Regent. At the same time there were
 indications that government pressure was brought to bear on
 the court. Finally, on August 24, a High Court announcement
 on the case stated that "..it would not be in the interests of
 Swaziland for there to be a confrontation between the courts
 and the Government on this issue. Consequently no judgment
 will be delivered." The court also noted that *the new decree
 considerably cuts down the operation of the rule of law and
 this could seriously affect the good name and standing of
 Swaziland in international circles." On the day prior to the
 court's announcement, the attorney representing the former
 Queen Regent, Douglas Lukhele, was placed in detention without
 charge, where he remained in December.
 In October, the Swazi Parliament passed an amendment to the
 Sedition and Subversive Activities Bill which increased the
 maximum penalty for sedition from two years to 20 and permitted
 the appointment of a special tribunal to hear such cases. It
 was left to the Prime Minister to appoint the members of the
 tribunal and determine their qualifications. Proceedings of
 such a tribunal are held in camera if the prosecution so
 requests. There is no provision for appealing the tribunal's
 decision to the courts. The amendment will come into effect
 as soon as the Queen Regent signs it.
 
 
 362
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Swazi custom places a high value on home and family. Search
 warrants issued by the court are required except in rare
 circumstances. There is no evidence that the Government has
 conducted illegal searches or censored correspondence during
 1983, and there is no significant intervention by the Government
 in the private lives of citizens.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. During 1983 the Prime Minister
 and other officials repeatedly directed that Swazis critical
 of the Government express their views only to their chiefs for
 discussion in traditional Swazi councils. Antigovernment
 demonstrations or leaflets are regarded as seditious and are
 treated accordingly. During the year at least 11 persons were
 charged with sedition or similar crimes, mostly for distrib-
 uting publications critical of the country's leadership or
 calling for a boycott of the upcoming elections. None of
 these cases had come to trial by late 1983. The Swazi radio
 and television stations are government controlled. There is a
 government-owned newspaper which is printed in Siswati and a
 semigovernmental English-language paper. In addition, a
 private company publishes a daily with English and Siswati
 editions. The Government proscribes publications it deems
 to be prejudical to the interests of defense, public safety,
 order, public morality, and public health. Self-censorship is
 practiced in the media, most particularly in commenting on
 government activities or on problems dealing with the royal
 family. There were several reports in 1983 that members of
 the media were instructed not to report on certain controver-
 sial areas and that journalists were summoned before officials
 to explain why a certain story was released. In one case, a
 Swazi journalist was interrogated about an article he wrote
 for a foreign newspaper. In another, the editor of the private
 newspaper was detained for 10 days after writing a story on the
 upcoming elections. However, the Government does not precensor
 newspapers nor are there reports of a particular edition being
 seized by the authorities, and many foreign publications circu-
 late freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973 prohibits meetings
 of a political nature and processions or demonstrations in any
 public place without written consent, sometimes refused, of
 the Commissioner of Police. During 1983, there were two
 antigovernment student demonstrations in Swaziland. On August
 25, approximately 300 students and local community members
 staged a demonstration in Manzini in support of former Queen
 Regent Dzeliwe. The group was dispersed by riot police.
 An estimated 40 protestors were taken away in police vans, but
 as none are known to be in custody or charged with an offense,
 
 
 363
 they were presumably released shortly thereafter. On August
 29, 75-100 students, mostly from the Institute of Health
 Sciences, gathered in Mbabane to march in support of the
 former Queen Regent and against other government leaders. The
 group fled when the Deputy Commissioner of Police appeared on
 the scene. However, following this incident, a large number
 of students were charged with attempting to form an illegal
 political party and for contravening the Riotous Assembly Act.
 They had not come to trial by the end of 1983.
 Except for the prohibition on certain antigovernment activity,
 freedom of association is generally permitted. After being
 disbanded for six years because of political activity, the
 Swaziland National Association of Teachers was permitted
 to reestablish itself in 1983. On July 1, 1982, the Govern-
 ment placed into operation the Industrial Relations Act which
 guarantees the right to organize employees and employers.
 It also establishes negotiating machinery and a disputes
 procedure. Employees may and do strike and picket. Dif-
 ferences between labor and management can also be taken to
 the industrial court which came into operation in 1983.
 Under the Industrial Relations Act, unions were required to
 register with government and, to date, five unions repre-
 senting workers in the fields of transport, agriculture,
 commerce, manufacturing and finance have been registered.
 The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions has sent delegations
 to international labor meetings and labor organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious beliefs
 and a great variety of missionaries are active throughout the
 country. However, since the death of King Sobhuza in August
 1982, some difficulties have developed between the Jehovah's
 Witnesses and traditional government authorities.
 The major problem developed in September 1982, when the Governor
 of Lobamba directed that, as a sign of mourning for the late
 King, all Swazi males would shave their heads and Swazi married
 women would trim their hair. Because of religious beliefs, many
 Jehovah's Witnesses did not follow the directive and some 90
 members (men, women, and children) of the congregation were
 arrested, tried by various national courts, and convicted of
 disobeying a royal command. All had their heads forcibly shaved
 and were fined. In some cases, a few Witnesses were jailed
 while money was being raised to pay their fines but, in all
 cases, the fines were paid and the Witnesses were released. In
 April 1983, the Swazi High Court set aside the conviction of 12
 Witnesses who had been convicted by one national court. Efforts
 are underway to vacate the remaining convictions but the proce-
 dure has been slow. In addition to the above convictions,
 several individuals lost their jobs as a result of government
 pressure brought to bear on their employers. Two companies
 partly owned by the Commonwealth Development Corporation,
 terminated a total of 24 Jehovah's Witnesses. After threats of
 court action, some severance entitlements were paid but, to
 date, none of the workers has been reinstated. It has also been
 
 
 64
 reported that approximately 15 children of this religious group
 have had difficulties with school authorities which have resulted
 in the children's expulsions. Most of these cases were because
 the children refused to sing certain hymns. Two children were
 expelled because they did not cut their hair. In all cases, the
 children have been readmitted to their schools or have been
 admitted to new schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel freely within Swaziland and can generally
 obtain a travel document to travel in southern Africa. Obtain-
 ing a passport is more difficult and time consuming. Occasion-
 ally the Government refuses to issue a passport if the appli-
 cant's travel is considered prejudicial to Swaziland or if the
 applicant does not appear to have adequate means of support
 while abroad. Refugees who leave Swaziland on U.N. travel
 documents are generally not granted the right to return. Some
 residents of Swaziland, of mixed ethnic background, have
 experienced difficulty in obtaining official determination of
 their citizenship status. A new Swazi citizenship bill passed
 by the Parliament in 1983 but not yet signed into law by the
 Queen Regent may resolve this problem.
 Swaziland accepts refugees from neighboring countries and treats
 them adequately. There is no evidence of forced repatriation.
 By far the largest number of refugees are from South Africa,
 primarily ethnic Swazis who fled Zulu administration in the
 black homeland of Kwazulu.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Although Swaziland is nominally a traditional monarchy now ruled
 by a Queen Regent, a small group of key government leaders hold
 most of the political power and decision making authority.
 Political parties are outlawed and organized opposition to the
 Government in the usual sense does not exist. There is
 participation through traditional structures and Swazis are
 cautioned to use only those channels in voicing criticism or
 dissent. Following the completion of its term, the Swazi
 Parliament was dissolved during the latter part of 1983. A
 local committee in each of 40 regional councils nominated four
 candidates for the position of electors and the people of each
 area selected two.   The 80 electors, so chosen, then voted
 for 40 new members for the lower House of Parliament. the
 House of Assembly, and 10 additional members were appointed by
 the Queen Regent. The full assembly of 50 members then
 selected 10 Senators and the Queen Regent appointed an addi-
 tional 10 to make a total of 20 Senators in the Senate.
 The head of state must approve all laws passed by Parliament.
 The Parliament has served occasionally as a forum for examina-
 tion and criticism of government policies, but matters are
 seldom pressed to a vote, and when they are, unanimity is
 usually the result. The judiciary consists of a Court of
 Appeals, a High Court, and various subordinate magistrates'
 
 
 365
 courts. The head of state appoints members of the Court of
 Appeals and the High Court. Parallel to this modern govern-
 ment structure is a traditional structure consisting of a
 Liqoqo (Supreme Council of State which advises the Queen
 Regent), traditional courts, and 40 regional councils. In
 1983, the heir to the Swazi throne, Prince Makhosetive, was
 formally announced and is expected to become King when he
 reaches majority in 1989.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland does not normally respond substan-
 tively to inquiries of representatives of human rights groups
 concerning the welfare and whereabouts of individual political
 detainees. There are no organizations based within the country
 that observe, report, or contest human rights violations. In
 1983 representatives from foreign congregations of Jehovah's
 Witnesses wrote the Swazi authorities concerning the difficul-
 ties that Swazi Witnesses were encountering, and some foreign
 chapters of Amnesty International are known to have written
 the authorities concerning Swazis placed in detention. The
 Swazi authorities do not seem to have responded in either
 case. In its 1983 report, Amnesty International expressed
 concern about the death penalty and the imprisonment of
 Jehovah's Witnesses. Freedom House described Swaziland
 .partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Swaziland has a free enterprise economy, characterized by a
 division between the modern sector dominated by large export-
 oriented firms which are frequently foreign owned and the
 traditional sector which comprises about 80 percent of the
 population. Since independence in 1968, Swaziland's per
 capita gross national product (GNP) has risen from less than
 $300 to an estimated $843 in 1981. GNP per capita fell
 in 1982 to $750. From 1971 to 1982, the real annual per
 capita growth of gross domestic product has been 1.4 percent
 per year. Swaziland's average annual per capita growth in
 agricultural production was the highest in sub-Saharan Africa.
 These figures, however, do not properly reflect the status of
 the typical Swazi who lives in the rural areas and practices
 subsistence agriculture. The estimate for per capita crop
 .and animal production in rural areas was just over $150 in
 1982. However, receipts from nonfarm activities, and remit-
 tances from commuters and absentees, increased the average
 per capita income in rural areas to around $338. An estimated
 70 percent of traditional households have someone working in
 the modern sector who provides regular remittances. The World
 Bank estimated that in 1979 one half the rural population was
 below the absolute poverty level.
 There are no known accurate figures on unemployment, but the
 proportion of the population ages 15-64 who had paid employment
 
 
 366
 has been hovering around 28 percent. Of the estimated 8,300
 people who each year complete at least four years of education
 and attempt to find a modern sector job, around 7,100 have
 been able to find one either through the expansion of the
 economy, in South Africa, or by replacing workers who retire
 or die. The balance, around 1,100, return to the rural areas.
 In 1982, for the first time since Swaziland began keeping
 employment figures, total paid employment dropped 3.0 percent.
 Thus, there were at least 6,200 people who sought paid employ-
 ment and did not find a job. Sixteen percent of all the
 Swazis with paid employment are working in the South African
 gold mines. The numbers going to the mines has been roughly
 stationary during the last five years.
 Swaziland's population in mid-1983 was.632,000 and is estimated
 to be growing by 3.0 percent per year (3.4 percent according
 to the Government). This phenomenon places even greater
 strains on the limited governmental financial resources, and
 further contributes to the rising unemployment.
 About 60 percent of the land is held in trust for the Swazi
 nation by the monarchy and is occupied largely by traditional
 farmers. Traditional land tenure makes it difficult for many
 people to acquire land, to consolidate holdings, or to get
 bank loans. Still, there are very few cases where people on
 national lands have lost their usage rights and people have
 shown willingness to invest in structures and equipment on
 national land. The nonnational land is individually titled
 and is primarily foreign owned. The right to own property is
 guaranteed by law.
 In order to encourage local employment, the Government has
 made it increasingly difficult for some categories of foreign
 workers to acquire work permits.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate
 among employees based on race, religion, sex, marital status,
 or political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal
 work. There are provisions covering the employment of.
 children, providing maternity leave, and special provisions
 for domestic employees. Legally, women are not discriminated
 against in the job market, but in practice de facto discrimina-
 tion occurs frequently. An element in the income tax law,
 which taxes married women more than married men, was partially
 removed in 1982.
 The ability of Swazi women to deal with the problems of a
 developing society is hampered by both legal and cultural
 constraints. Traditional values are a major influence on
 the role of women in Swazi society. Women are, in some cases,
 not legally equal to men, and a married women is virtually a
 minor. She is not responsible for contracts she signs, nor
 can she own real property or inherit property under normal
 circumstances. She must obtain her husband's permission to
 borrow money, to leave the country, and often to take a job.
 A divorced woman has no right to the custody of her children,
 although she may have to care for them with no support from
 their father. A small and slowly growing number of women are
 
 
 367
 beginning to participate in social, economic, and political
 life outside their traditional fields of teaching, nursing,
 and clerical work. In addition, there are more women instruc-
 tors than men at nearly all levels and in nearly all types of
 educational institutions, including the university.
 Over the past five years, there has been a large increase
 in the externally held public and publicly guaranteed debt
 of the Government of Swaziland. The ratio of external debt
 to GNP has risen 16 percent in 1978 to 30 percent in 1983.
 This compares to 36 percent in countries with a comparable
 per capita income. The cost of servicing this debt is now
 taking six percent of exports (it took 2.2 percent in 1978).
 In comparable counties, this ratio is 16 percent. Thus,
 while there is not a debt problem at present in Swaziland, the
 large recent increases limit the Government's ability to meet
 its development program and could restrict the current
 budget.
 Swaziland's adult literacy rate is estimated by the World
 Bank at 55.2 percent (Swazi figures for 1982 are 65 percent)
 and its primary school enrollment is nearly 100 percent.
 Standards, however, are low and are declining because emphasis
 is on quantity at the expense of quality. The pass rate for
 the Cambridge Overseas School certificate (high school comple-
 tion exam) has been dropping since the early 1970's and is
 currently only 24 percent.
 Because of a lack of clean, disease-free water, inadequate
 sanitation, and government emphasis on curative rather than
 preventive medicine, the health status of the population
 is poor. The infant mortality rate is estimated to be 142
 per 1,000 live births, and life expectancy is 47 year.
 These are among the highest for all lower middle income
 countries.
 The number of people per physician or nurses, however, is
 reasonably good, and the society is able to provide an esti-
 mated 99 percent of essential calories per person. Health
 care is provided through a system of government hospitals and
 clinics and by medical installations opoerated by private
 companies and religious missions.
 
 
 368
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWAZILAND
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       11.5     10.0      8.0
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ....  11.5   10.0      8.0
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  9.7   8.7      6.2
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       9.7      8.7      6.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.).,.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       0.6      0.0      0.4
 LOANS ...    .........    0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.6      0.0      0.4
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      0.6      0.0      0.4
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.        0.6      0.0      0.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.*.        1.2      1.3      1.4
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       1.2      1.3      1.4
 PEACE  CORPS ......      1.2      1.3      1.4
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.hlAP  GRANTS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IlI.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       11.6     10.0      8.0
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................  11.5     10.0      8.0
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..................  0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1991     1982    1983     1946-83
 TOTAL .........   12.7     7.1      0.0    142.1
 IBRD              10.0     0.0      0.0     65.6
 IFC               0.0      0.0      0.0      8.5
 IDA               0.0      0.0      0.0      7.8
 IcB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     0.0      0.0     27.6
 UNOP               0.7     0.1      0.0     11.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0     0.0      0.0      2.0
 EEC                2.0     7.0      0.0     19.0
 
 
