 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy. All
 executive, legislative, and judicial powers are ultimately
 vested in the King. He is advised by the Queen Mother,
 traditional figures, and the ministers of the Cabinet; he
 rules according to Swazi law and custom, never codified but
 ultimately determined by the King himself and his advisors.
 There is no constitution. Legislation is passed by the
 Parliament and is then submitted to the Monarch for
 assent--which may be withheld. Great emphasis is placed on
 obtaining consensus as the basis for executive decision.
 Swaziland's Government features both "modern" and
 "traditional" branches--a cabinet, parliament, and courts
 which follow Western law, and a tribal hierarchy with
 "national" courts which follow traditional Swazi law and
 custom. The King appoints the Cabinet, which is responsible
 to him, from among Members of Parliament.
 National defense is provided by the Swaziland Defense Force,
 consisting of fewer than 3,000 troops. The Royal Swazi Police
 is the primary internal security organization. These forces
 have difficulty coping with the spillover from southern
 African regional conflicts. The use of Swaziland by the
 African National Congress (ANC) as a transit corridor into
 South Africa has led to occasional confrontation involving ANC
 members, South African security forces, and Swazi authorities.
 The huge influx of Mozambican refugees has placed an additional
 strain on the Swazi security apparatus. Neither the police
 nor the defense force have been accused of human rights
 violations.
 Swaziland's economy is based on agriculture, with
 approximately 80 percent of the population engaged in
 subsistence farming. It is a free market economy, with a
 number of large firms (many foreign-owned) producing the
 majority of Swazi exports. Imports come primarily from South
 Africa.
 While human rights are generally respected in Swaziland, there
 are significant restrictions on free speech and political
 rights. By custom, Swazis tend to avoid overt criticism of
 the Government, exhibiting a culturally induced self-
 censorship. This reduces the need of the Government to
 silence critics. Nevertheless, the Government is sensitive to
 negative or potentially insulting remarks about the King,
 Swazi traditions, and matters of national security, and will
 act against persons who offend in these areas. Two
 journalists were arrested in February when they wrote a story
 about the Mozambique resistance group, RENAMO, which the Swazi
 Government found threatening to Swazi-Mozambican relations.
 During an interregnum beginning with the death of King Sobhuza
 II in 1982 and ending with the accession of Mswati III in
 1986, a schism developed within the Swazi royal family
 revolving around the replacement of the former King's
 designated Queen Regent and Prime Minister in August 1983.
 This dispute led to the conviction of 10 influential
 decisionmakers (many of them members of the royal family)
 fortreason and related charges in March 1988. The interregnum
 intrigues are also believed to be behind the arrest in April
 of 9 persons under 60-day detention orders. A July royal
 pardon of the prisoners convicted of treason cleared Swazi
 prisons of all political prisoners.
 
 
 360
 SWAZILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports or allegations in 1988 of political
 killings by the Government. However, several incidents
 involving members of the African National Congress occurred in
 Swaziland in 1988. On January 13, a South African ANC member
 was shot dead by an unidentified gunman in a restaurant in
 Manzini. In October 1987,. an ANC member running from South
 African police forces shot and killed a South African soldier
 who had followed him into Swazi territory. He was tried for
 murder by a Swazi court and acquitted on May 4, 1988. There
 were several shootouts between Swazi police and ANC members
 during 1988, with no fatalities.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance in 1988.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture, as a rule, is not practiced *in Swaziland. However,
 occasionally there are allegations made by prisoners of police
 threats and beatings. Complaints generally come from
 criminal, not political, prisoners. Defendants occasionally
 charge that confessions have been extorted by the police,
 especially in trials dealing with ritual murder. These
 charges by the defense are sometimes substantiated by the
 judges. Caning can be administered to youths involved in
 either petty or violent crimes.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests in all but certain
 exceptional circumstances. These exceptions, however, are
 poorly defined and, in practice, police who have strong
 suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 The police are allowed to hold a person for an undefined
 "reasonable time" without charge. In some cases, this has led
 to persons being detained without charge for considerable
 periods. Such detainees are allowed to consult with a lawyer
 of their own choosing, though some attorneys have had
 difficulty gaining access to their clients. Provision for
 bail exists. A 1978 detention law permits the Government to
 detain any person without charge for a renewable period of 60
 days. This law, invoked several times in 1987, was again used
 in 1988. In February the Swazi police arrested two
 journalists from the Swazi Times newspaper for writing an
 article suggesting that the Swazi Government was sympathetic
 to RENAMO and that it permitted RENAMO to use Swazi territory
 as a refuge to escape Mozambican forces. The two were
 released after spending 60 days in prison. In April, nine
 persons, including several members of the royal family, were
 detained under the 60-day law, reportedly for involvement in
 the ousting of Queen Regent Dzeliwe and the installation of
 Queen Regent Ntombi in 1983. No charges were pressed against
 the detainees. One prisoner was released in late April; the
 other eight were held until June 21. Detention under the 1978
 Detention Law cannot be appealed to the courts, though it may
 be appealed personally to the Monarch.
 
 
 361
 SWAZILAND
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The modern judiciary consists of a Court of Appeals, a high
 court, and various subordinate magistrates' courts which are
 independent of executive and military control and free from
 intimidation from outside forces. Some members of the
 judiciary are not Swazi but are appointed from the bars of
 other countries with compatible legal systems. The current
 Chief Justice is British. Court-appointed counsel is provided
 in capital cases or where difficult points of law are at
 issue. There are well-defined appeal procedures up to the
 Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 honored in practice, although the court president may order a
 trial to be held in camera in certain (e.g., rape) cases. The
 Prime Minister may also require that a trial be held in
 private, but this is rare and has not been done for several
 years. Accused persons are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty. In sedition cases, the Prime Minister, if he is of
 the opinion that the security of Swaziland may be involved,
 may order that proceedings be held in camera before a special
 tribunal appointed by the King. The special tribunal may, if
 it deems appropriate, adopt rules and procedures apart from
 those applied in the High Court.
 In traditional courts, where ethnic Swazis may be brought for
 relatively minor offenses and violations of Swazi traditional
 laws or customs, legal counsel is not allowed, but defendants
 may speak on their own behalf. Swazi traditional law has not
 been codified. Both offenses and punishments are limited, and
 findings are subject to a review sysEem and appeal to the High
 Court and the Court of Appeals. Accused persons who desire
 counsel may insist that their case be transferred from the
 traditional courts.
 In November 1987, King Mswati III issued the Tribunal Decree,
 which permitted the formation of a special tribunal to try
 offenses committed against the King and Queen Mother. The
 Decree specified that the tribunal was to be composed of at
 least three persons, chosen by the King, who have "suitable
 and sufficient knowledge of Swazi law and custom.- This
 Decree-permits in camera sessions, forbids the accused from
 having legal representation, denies the right of appeal, and
 sets a maximum sentence of 20 years in jail or a $8,500 fine.
 Soon after the publication of the Decree, a special 3-person
 tribunal was formed to try 12 prisoners for treason. Its
 proceedings were held in camera, .and the 1987-1988 trial
 record remains confidential. Although 2 prisoners were
 acquitted, the remaining 10 were convicted of treason and
 related crimes and received sentences ranging from 3 to 15
 years. All 10 prisoners subsequently benefited from a royal
 pardon on July 12. Prince Mfanisibili, however, the
 alleged ringleader of the group, remains in jail to complete 6
 more years of a 7-year criminal sentence he received in 1987
 for obstruction of justice. Amnesty International's 1988
 report said the special tribunal proceedings did not satisfy
 international standards of fair trial.
 
 
 362
 SWAZILAND
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Swazi law generally requires that a warrant be issued by a
 magistrate before police may search homes or other premises.
 However, senior police officers are permitted to search for
 evidence without a warrant if the suspected crime is of a
 serious nature. This exception is frequently used. While
 there is no evidence that the Government actively monitors
 private correspondence or conversation, the Swazi police have
 been known to apprehend and interrogate persons who, according
 to its informants, have made objectionable statements about
 the King during the course of private conversation or via
 telegraphic correspondence.
 Recent growth in criminal activity, including violent crime,
 has led to increased vigilance by police. In August the
 police erected a number of roadblocks around the major cities,
 stopping and searching all cars. A number of weapons were
 found. Police also conducted extensive, generalized house
 searches in the urban areas. The impetus to these activities
 was a public outcry for action following a rash of armed
 robberies and killings in the Mbabane area over the preceding
 months. In addition to netting weapons, the police also
 arrested a number of illegal immigrants (mostly Mozambicans),
 many of whom were deported.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. A Swazi's main traditional
 forum for expressing discontent is through his or her Chief,
 and public condemnation of certain policies and people is not
 permitted. Criticism of the royal family and of national
 security policy is forbidden. In July and August, the
 People's Parliament offered an unusual forum for free speech.
 A rarely used traditional mechanism for communication between
 the King and his people, the People's Parliament is
 essentially a free-for-all assembly. There is no agenda, and
 anyone can speak. At the beginning of the session, which
 lasted 2 weeks, the King guaranteed freedom of speech for all
 participants. The result was a spirited public discussion on
 a number of issues. Public officials were openly attacked,
 and policies criticized. At the close of the session, the
 King reiterated that statements made by participants had been
 made with promise of impunity and warned those criticized to
 refrain from taking any action against their detractors.
 The media, both government controlled and private, practice
 self-censorship, refraining from critical comment on sensitive
 government activities or on controversial issues involving the
 royal family. Swazi radio and television stations are
 government controlled, and there is also a semiofficial
 newspaper. Private companies and church groups publish
 several newspapers and magazines. The 60-day detention of two
 Swazi Times journalists for writing an article criticizing
 government policy revealed the limits of press freedom (see
 Section l.d.). The Government maintained that the article, in
 addition to being false, harmed Swazi-Mozambican relations and
 that the journalists had failed to exercise good judgment as
 the Prime Minister had advised earlier in the year.
 The Government has occasionally proscribed publications,
 including foreign publications, deemed to be prejudicial to
 
 
 363
 SWAZILAND
 the interests of defense, public safety, or public health.
 Two major South African publications, banned in 1985 because
 of critical articles on Swazi domestic politics, remain
 excluded. No new bannings occurred in 1988. Academic
 freedom, though generally accepted, does not extend to
 permitting direct criticism of the royal family or government
 ministers, and certain aspects of government policy (i.e.,
 security) may not be discussed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's Proclamation of April 12, 1973, reaffirmed by the
 King's Proclamation Amendment Decree of 1987, prohibits
 meetings of a political-nature and processions or
 demonstrations in any public place without the consent,
 sometimes withheld, of the Commissioner of Police. In
 practice, however, no permit is required for most gatherings.
 While freedom of association is generally permitted, it is not
 observed in regard to what the Government deems antigovernment
 activity. Trade associations and professional bodies exist in
 Swaziland and maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies in their fields.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious
 beliefs, informally considers itself to be a Christian
 country, and permits a wide variety of foreign missionary
 activity. Organized religions are free to establish places of
 worship and train clergy. No licenses are required for such
 organizations or in order to publish religious texts, nor are
 there any bars to religious travel outside the country. At
 the same time, the authorities promote the observance of Swazi
 customs. When these customs conflict with religious beliefs,
 there are occasional difficulties. Church condemnation of
 traditional Swazi ceremonies in the past has led to the arrest
 and deportation of church figures. The Government has
 objected to pastoral letters criticizing social injustice
 which it considered political interference. In 1988 there
 were several cases of chiefs in rural areas creating
 difficulties for Jehovah's Witnesses. As a result, the
 Government reiterated publicly that all religious groups, as
 long as they obey Swazi laws, should be permitted to practice
 their religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. Those who
 have left the country may freely return, and citizenship is
 not revoked for political reasons. Swazis generally can
 obtain a travel document to travel in the region, but the
 Government occasionally refuses to issue a passport if the
 applicant does not appear to have adequate means of support
 while abroad. Citizenship for nonethnic Swazis and persons of
 mixed heritage can be difficult to establish, creating
 problems in obtaining passports and other civil documents.
 Swaziland is a signatory to the U.N. Protocol Relating to the
 Status of Refugees and treats displaced persons from
 neighboring states well. Seven thousand primarily ethnic
 Swazis from South Africa who fled Zulu administration in the
 black South African homeland of Kwazulu reside in Swaziland.
 
 
 84
 SWAZILAND
 In 1988 there was a huge increase in the number of Mozambican
 refugees living in Swaziland. While approximately 28,000 were
 officially registered by the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR), it is believed that an additional 30,000
 or more may be in Swaziland illegally. Swaziland permits the
 UNHCR to interview those who seek refugee status and grants
 asylum if the person can establish that he or she will face
 persecution if repatriated. Illegal aliens who cannot
 establish their refugee status, however, may be deported.
 During the July/August roadblock operation by police, hundreds
 of Mozambicans illegally in the country were arrested. After
 UNHCR screening, a number were legally registered as
 refugees. Many, however,-were determined to be economic
 migrants, not legitimate refugees, and these were repatriated
 to Mozambique. As in previous years, the Swazi police
 arrested a number of ANC activists (primarily South African)
 in 1988. They were turned over to the local UNHCR
 representative for transfer to countries (usually Tanzania and
 Zambia) willing to receive them.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government
 through democratic means. Political parties are outlawed, and
 an organized political opposition to the Government in the
 sense of a multiparty system does not exist. The King is an
 absolute monarch, although final decisions concerning matters
 such as political policy, the appointment of ministers, or
 issuance of decrees are made by the Monarch after obtaining
 the advice of the royal family, the senior chiefs, the
 Cabinet, Members of Parliament, and various interested
 parties. The system provides for extensive consultation in
 private and depends on slow consensus building, placing a
 premium on ethnic Swazi descent and especially on royal or
 other traditionally prized connections. Legislation is passed
 by the Parliament and is then submitted to the Monarch for
 assent--which may be withheld. Swazis do participate in the
 selection of Members of Parliament. Parliamentarians (50 in
 the House and 20 in the Senate) are chosen in a complex
 process involving the interaction of a 7-member electoral
 committee, 40 traditional districts, 80 electors, and the
 King's appointive powers. The King may dissolve the
 Parliament and call new elections. Elections are normally
 held every 5 years. The Parliament serves as a forum for
 examination and criticism of government policies, but matters
 are seldom pressed to a vote and, when they are, unanimity is
 usually the result.
 The second most powerful person in Swaziland is traditionally
 the Queen Mother, and other women play prominent roles as
 well. There is one female cabinet minister, the first to hold
 a ministerial position, and several parliamentarians are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Swaziland prefers to take a low profile in dealing with
 nongovernmental organizations. However, it permitted in 1987
 representatives of the Ministry of Justice and the University
 of Swaziland to join, in their private capacity, the newly
 formed African Association for Human and People's Rights in
 Development (AAHRID). As AAHRID members, they report on human
 rights abuses in Swaziland. The Government has not been the
 
 
 365
 SWAZILAND
 subject of any resolutions by official international
 organizations in 1988.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Unique Swazi governmental and social traditions unavoidably
 create differences between ethnic and nonethnic Swazis. For
 example, ethnic Swazis from South Africa seeking political
 refuge in Swaziland are treated much like Swazi citizens and
 are often given work permits. Those who are not ethnic Swazis
 are treated more as foreigners, and permits are given more
 reluctantly. Nevertheless, the kingdom makes a special effort
 to welcome the full participation of nonethnic Swazis in its
 life. A significant expatriate community exists, primarily
 businessmen and missionaries.
 The role of women in Swazi society is largely determined by
 traditional values. Since men are away from their homesteads
 much of the time, women perform most agricultural tasks and
 have responsibility for virtually all child rearing and
 domestic chores. However, they are not given authority to
 make family decisions, and, in most cases, are not legally
 equal to men. A married woman, unless her position had
 beendefined by a prenuptial agreement, is virtually a minor
 under the law. She is not responsible for contracts she
 signs, and she may not, except in rare instances, hold real
 estate or inherited property in her own name. She must
 normally obtain her husband's permission to borrow money, to
 leave the country, and, in some cases, to take a job. A woman
 divorced in a traditional court has no right to the legal
 custody of her children, although she may have to care for
 them with no support from their father. In the modern or
 statutory courts, custody is awarded according to the
 interests of the child, and financial support for wives
 granted custody is generally provided.
 In the workplace, the Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers
 to discriminate among employees on the basis of race,
 religion, sex, marital status, br political affiliation. It
 requires equal pay for equal work. Even so, around 75 percent
 of all private sector jobs are held by men, and their average
 wage rate by skill category is substantially higher than for
 women. Women have access to schools and constitute about half
 the student body in nearly all institutions. There has been a
 significant increase in the number of women who are lawyers,
 medical doctors, and members of other professions.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 reaffirms the right
 of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely.
 Trade unions have widened the scope of their activities since
 1981 but, since most Swazis are subsistence farmers, they play
 a small role in the economy and have little political
 influence. They are able, within limits, to operate
 independently of government or political control.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions, within the
 framework of the IRA. The Act specifies a number of
 provisions which must be addressed in a constitution. These
 include provisions for election of officers by secret ballot,
 annual meetings (at a minimum) open to all members, fees,
 
 
 366
 SWAZILAND
 grounds for suspension of members, paying out of union funds,
 and other rules. A constitution must be approved by the Labor
 Commissioner, who can strike out or amend provisions which
 violate requirements of the law. Union representatives are
 freely elected by secret ballot. Unions cannot be dissolved
 as long as they adhere to the regulations of the Industrial
 Relations Act. Unions which fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner can be dissolved.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise,
 including what determines the legality of a strike. The Act
 provides for an Industrial Court, presided over by a High
 Court judge, for the settlement of employment disputes. The
 Industrial Court is empowered to hear and give judgment on
 disputes and grievances and to enjoin any organizations from
 striking or continuing to strike.
 Strikes are rare in Swaziland and are generally considered to
 be "unSwazi" by the Government and most of the population.
 When disputes arise, the Government tries to intervene to
 reduce the likelihood of a strike, which may not be legally
 called until all avenues of negotiation have been exhausted.
 The Labor Commission may then issue a 14-day postponement of
 any strike which may be extended upon presentation of
 additional documentation. Where the national interest or
 welfare is concerned, the Minister of Labor may forbid a
 strike or may refer the dispute to the Industrial Court. In
 June 180 striking workers at a furniture factory lost their
 jobs after refusing to return to work when the Government
 declared the strike illegal on the ground that the strikers
 had not followed the dispute resolution channel prescribed by
 law.
 The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions, the union umbrella
 organization, participates in the International Labor
 Organization and is a member of the Organization for African
 Trade Union Unity. Two international union conferences were
 held in Swaziland in 1988. In March the Southern African
 Trade Union Coordination Council held a transport union
 workshop in Mbabane. In July the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions and the African Regional Organization
 held their 10th regional conference in Swaziland. This
 willingness to host labor conferences constitutes a change in
 government attitude in the last 2 years. In 1986 it refused
 to allow an international meeting of trade unionists to take
 place in Swaziland.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Industrial Relations Act of 1980 provides for the right to
 organize and bargain collectively. The Industrial Court is
 empowered to register collective agreements. The Industrial
 Relations Act has provisions which outlaw interference and
 antiunion discrimination by employers. Disputes in this area
 are referred to the Labor Commissioner and then the Industrial
 Court, if necessary. Employees can prohibit employers from
 attending union functions when the union does not have the 40
 percent membership in the workplace required for recognition.
 However, members of a legally recognized union must be allowed
 to attend union activities. There are no off-shore
 manufacturing facilities in Swaziland, and labor legislation
 is applied uniformly throughout the country.
 While collective bargaining does occur, it is generally on a
 low scale and in specific sectors. The right of unions to
 
 
 367
 SWAZILAND
 organize is codified, and there is little overt antiunion
 discrimination. The Government constantly works to avoid
 labor confrontation, encouraging voluntary negotiations
 between employers and unions. The Government, while not
 openly antiunion, frequently refers to labor unrest as
 threatening to Swaziland's image as a fruitful and stable
 place for foreign investment.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.
 There is no forced labor in Swaziland, and such labor is
 legally prohibited.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Employment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child
 below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except in
 cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or
 in technical schools where children are working under the
 supervision of a teacher or other authorized person.
 Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be
 worked on schooldays and limits such work overall to 6 hours
 per day or 33 hours per week. However, such provisions are
 difficult to enforce due to the small size of enforcement
 staff.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is extensive legislation, notably in the Employment Act
 of 1980, protecting worker health and safety in Swaziland.
 There is a 48-hour workweek in the modern sector. Swaziland
 does not have a single minimum wage but rather has a sliding
 scale of minimum wages depending on the type of job. For-a
 clerk, the level is about $22 per week. This salary places
 the clerk above the average per capita income, and so he or
 she could be said to have a decent living. A casual laborer
 earning about $10 per week probably does not have a decent
 living. However, most Swazi families also cultivate and graze
 cattle on Swazi national land on which their homesteads are
 erected and from which family income is also derived. When
 this source of income is taken into account, by African
 standards Swazis make a good living.
 In 1987 the Ministry of Labor and Public Services conducted a
 safety survey of 28 industrial establishments. The average
 yearly accident rate for the companies was 5.2, deemed by the
 Government to be too high. Consequently, the Ministry of
 Labor and Public Services directed employers to introduce
 accident prevention programs and reminded them of their
 responsibility, under the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1983,
 to report all accidents to the Swazi labor office within 7
 days of occurrence.
 
 
 368
