 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with all executive, leg-
 islative, and judicial powers ultimately vested in the King. Advised by the Queen
 Mother, traditional figures, and Cabinet ministers, the King rules according to
 Swazi law and custom, never codified but ultimately determined by himself and his
 advisors. The King appoints the Cabinet from among Members of Parliament. King
 Sobhuza II in 1973 repealed the Westminster-type constitution containing a bill of
 rights on the grounds that it was incompatible with the Swazi tradition of decision-
 making. In 1978 the King established the Tinkhundla system, which allowed limited
 popular participation at the district level while giving the King and a small electoral
 committee the power to determine parliamentary representation. In 1992 a modified
 system, allowing for direct elections by secret ballot to the House of Assembly and
 elimination of the electoral college, was being implemented. Elections are expected
 during the first half of 1993.
 National defense is provided by the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force, consisting
 of 3,000 troops. The Royal Swaziland Police is the primary internal security organi-
 zation. Civilian authorities control both the police and the defense force. Swaziland's
 total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control
 and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were $11 million. The de-
 fense budget is approximately 5 percent of the Swazi budget. There are no indica-
 tions that efforts will be made to reduce these expenditures in the near future.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture, though a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 formal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, composed pri-
 marily of large, foreign-owned firms.
 In 1992 political rights remained circumscribed. Restrictive decrees, including one
 which permits the Government to hold any person in administrative detention with-
 out charge or trial for successive 60-day periods, remained in effect but were not
 enforced. Instead, the Government continued to respond to public pressures for po-
 litical reform by permitting greater freedom of speech and press and by the King's
 appointment of a commission "to promote and sustain the democratic process in
 Swaziland." The Commission's report, released in October, recommended changes in
 the Tinkhundla administrative system, the adoption of a written constitution estab-
 lishing the King's position and detailing a bill of rights, direct elections by secret
 ballot, recision of the administrative detention decree, and codification of Swazi law
 and custom. By year's end, the Electoral Education Committee had begun to educate
 Swazis in the process of holding direct elections by secret ballot. Swazi law and cus-
 tom discriminate against women, according them a legally and economically subor-
 dinate status.
 
 
 265
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extirajudicial Killing.-There were no allegations of such
 killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture is not generally practiced, but there have been occasional reports by pris-
 oners of police threats and beatings. In January and June, defendants testified in
 court about police beatings during interrogations. Such complaints generally come
 from criminal, not political, prisoners. There were no instances of police officers
 being tried, punished, or otherwise disciplined for such abuses in 1992.
 Caning or whipping is often administered to youths involved in either petty or vio-
 lent crimes. Approximately 42 percent of convicted juveniles received sentences of
 whipping.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although Swazi law requires warrants
 for arrests in most circumstances, the exceptions are poorly defined, and police who
 have strong suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 Arrestees are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their choice, and provision for
 bail exists. Police occasionally fail to charge suspects within the 48 hours required
 under uncodified regulations.
 The Swazi authorities have extensive powers of 'administrative detention." A
 1973 decree permits the Government to hold any person without charge or trial for
 a renewable period of 60 days. Detention under this decree may in theory be ap-
 pealed to the High Court under that Court's general power to review the constitu-
 tionality of governmental action, but to date no such appeal has been heard, and
 the decree itself specifically prohibits any appeal of a detention order. In practice,
 the only a ppeal available under the 1973 detention order is one made directly to
 the King. No persons have been held in administrative detention since March 1991.
 Existence of the decree, however, may inhibit political activity and has been the
 focus of extensive international and domestic criticism.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one
 independent and based on Western law, the other based on a system of national
 courts which follows Swazi law and custom. In treason and sedition cases, the King
 has power to circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special tribunal,
 which may adopt rules and procedures different from those applied in the High
 Court. This power was last used in 1987.
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, the High Court, and mag-
 istrates' courts, which are independent of executive and military control and free
 from intimidation from outside forces. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is enti-
 tled to counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in
 capital cases or when difficult points of law are at issue. There are well-defined ap-
 geal procedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body. Some mem-
 ers of the regular judiciary are appointed from the bars of other countries with
 compatible legal systems.
 In traditional courts, to which ethnic Swazis may be brought for relatively minor
 offenses and violations of traditional Swazi law and custom, formal legal counsel is
 not allowed, but defendants may speak on their own behalf and may be assisted by
 informal advisors. Sentences are subject to review and to appeal to the High Court
 and the Court of Appeals. Accused persons who desire counsel can insist that their
 cases be transferred from the traditional courts. There is occasionally confusion over
 which court should hear a case. By law, the public prosecutor has the authority to
 determine which court should hear a case, but, in practice the police usually make
 the determination.
 In 1992 there was a growing public frustration and outcry at what is perceived
 as gross inefficiency in the legal system, personified by the modern  diciary. This
 feeling is shared by the police, public prosecutors, and the courts. Inefficiency (mni-
 festedby poorly investigated and prepared cases and a shortage of magistrates and
 judges) ed to a series of unpopular acquittals which damaged public confidence in
 the system and which threatens the rule of law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 generally requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or
 other premises. However, police officers with the rank of subinspector or higher
 have the right to search without a warrant if they believe evidence might belost
 through delay in obtaining a warrant. While searches without warrants occur occa-
 sionally, the issue of legality of evidence rarely arises in court.
 There is no evidence that the Government systematically monitors private cor-
 resoondence or conversations. However. a political party alleged that the telephones
 
 
 266
 of its leaders have been tapped. The Swazi police have been known to apprehend
 and interrogate persons reported to have made objectionable statements about the
 King during the course of private conversations or in telegraphic correspondence.
 There were no known apprehensions or interrogations of this type in 1992.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech, especially on political mat-
 ters, is limited. Public criticism of the immediate royal family and of national secu-
 rity policy is generally forbidden. On several occasions during 1992, the authorities
 permitted leaders of groups seeking greater democratization to speak out publicly
 at rallies and meetings. In some cases, however, persons were arrested and charged
 with various violations such as organizing an illegal political meeting or disturbing
 the peace. Usually, on further investigation or trial, the charges were dismissed or
 the defendants acquitted.
 Swazis have a number of traditional forums through which they can express dis-
 content, including direct dialog with their chiefs, community meetings, Tinkhundla
 meetings, and National Libandlas (special councils, nicknamed "People's Par-
 liaments," in which all Swazis are permitted to participate). Many Swazis, however,
 view all these forums as ineffective means for expressing their political views.
 The media, both government-controlled and private, practice semf-censorship, re-
 fraining from criticism of the royal family and from reporting in advance the move-
 ments of the King or Prime Minister. The two daily newspapers, especially the pri-
 vately owned paper, and the government-controlled television station furthered a
 poces begun in mid-1991 of expanding the range of sensitive topics they are will-
 ing to address and their role as forums for the expression of popular opinion. The
 government-controlled Swazi radio station has not exhibited the freedom exercised
 ytheother media. Private companies and church groups publish several news-
 papers and magazines. One church group owns and operates a radio station.
 Academic freedom is limited by the practice of self-censorship and the prohibition
 of overtly political gatherings.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-King Sobhuza's 1973 decree
 prohibits political parties and meetings of a political nature and demonstrations in
 any public place without the consent of the Commissioner of Police. During 1992
 the Government used the powers sparingly. On February 25, the People's United
 Democratic Movement (PUDEMO) declared at a public meeting that they would not
 respect the ban. Two officers of the organization were arrestedbut were quickly re-
 leased after the Government declined to file formal charges. Similar gatherings by
 a youth organization and another political party have taken place wthout incident.
 neve theless, some members of political groups and the Human Rights Associa-
 tion of Swaziland (HUMARAS) are believed to be kept under surveillance and occa-
 sionally harassed by police. While the level of such harassment decreased during
 1992, credible reports persist that political activists are chared with criminal of-
 fenses or put under pressure by their employers for theirpolitcal activities. The ju-
 dicial commission of inquiry into the November 1990 incident in which Swazi police
 and defense forces brutally broke up a student sit-in at the University of Swaziland
 presented its report late in the summer to the Ministry of Education. The report
 was returned t   he commission because it was allegedly incomplete. The print
 media and organizations concerned with human rights have periodically called for
 its release
 Except for the King's 1973 decree, there are no formal legal barriers to freedom
 of association. Trade associations and professional bodies exist and maintain rela-
 tions with recognized international bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Swaziland is hospitable to all religious believers. Orga-
 nized religions are free to establish places of worship and train clergy, to publish
 religious texts, and to undertake religius travel outside the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-.-Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. However, for
 travel abroad, under traditional law, married women requirethe husband's permis-
 sion to apply for a passport. Further ambiguities in citizenship laws made it difficult
 for nonethnic Swazis to obtain passports and hence denied some of them the right
 to travel abroad. Those persons who have left the country legally may freely return.
 The King, in his 1992 New Year's message to the nation, invited all Swazis in
 exile to return and resume their lives and activities. One person returned and was
 immediately arrested. He was released on bond within days, and the charge of ille-
 ally being in the countr  was later dismissed. Subsequently, he filed lawsuits to
 ave his Swazi citizenship restored and to seek compensation for damages to his
 property as a result of being detained and ultimately deported 12 years earlier. At
 
 
 year's end, no decisions had been rendered in either lawsuit. Others in exile have
 returned for short visits but not permanently.
 Swaziland treats refees from   neighboring states well. About 7 000 ethnic
 Swazis from the South African "homeland" of Kwagulu reside in Swazftand (6,000
 as registered refugees). Recent years have seen a large influx of Mozambican refu-
 gees. While the Government reports a refu e population of appr.ximately 42,000,
 oy_ ly8000 are registered with the United Naions High Commissioner for Refugees
 (TNHC R).and are receiving assistance in camps. Efforts to locate refugees not living
 in camps have not been successful, making accurate estimates of the total refugee
 population difficult. Some 30,000 Mozambicans may be in Swaziland as illegal im-
 migrants. Swaziland permits the UNHCR to interview those who seek refugee sta-
 tus and grants asylum if the person can establish a well-founded fear of persecution
 or physical danger if repatriated. Illegal aliens who cannot establish their refugee
 status, however, are usualy deported.
 Small groups of young South Africans claiming to bo fleeing violence in South Af-
 rica continued to arrive in Swaziland in earl 1992. The Government and the
 UNHyR refused to facilitate their onward travelto refugee facilities in other south-
 ern African countries as they had previously. Donors who provided transportation
 to Zambia and Tanzania in the past similarly ceased such activities. As a result,
 the flow of South Africans merely seeking onward transit ended during the year.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Swazi citizens do nat hnve the right to change their government through demo-
 cratic means. Political parties are ilegal, but some organized political opposition
 does exist. The King rules in conjunction with the Queen Mother. Traditionally, d-
 cisionmaking has been by consensus, with the King soliciting advice from the royal
 family, the senior chiefs, the Cabinet, Members" of Parliament, and other interested
 parties. Still, the  r  can legally accept or dismiss advice as he sees fit. Legislation
 is passed by the Pariament and is then submitted to the Monarch for assent, which
 maybe withheld. The King can also legislate by decree.
 With the dissolution of Parliament in October and the naming of the Electoral
 Education Committee Swaziland began the process of elecorliange. Under the
 new usystem, 50 memers of the House of Assembly will be directly eected by the
 people in a secret ballot. The other 10 members wilbe appoited by the King. Ten
 members of the upper house, the Senate, will be appointed by the House of Assem-
 bly. The King will appoint the other 20 members of the Senate and choose Cabinet
 ministers from among the members of Parliament. The electoral college has been
 dissolved, and the number of the traditional districts will be increased to 50.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Human Rights Association of Swaziland (HUMARAS) was established in
 1991. Alt~though stil not officiall r registered by the Government, it operated freely
 in 1992. It sponsored a human rights conference, held educational meetings, formed
 local chapters in the major cities and towns throughout the country, and took forc-
 fuitions on human and political rights issues.
 W leteGovernment does not encourage activities by international nongovern-
 mental human rights organizations it hosted a U.N.-sponsored seminar on human
 rights in May. Participants included representatives from the various ministries, the
 plice, the military, and civic organizations. HUMARAS was notably omitted from
 the list of organizations invited to attend.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sez, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Swazi law and social traditions give rise to subtle forms of discrimination against
 nonethnic Swazis. For example, ambiguities in the citizenship law often make it
 more difficult for nonethnic Swazis to obtain travel documents and other privileges
 accorded more readily to ethnic Swazis.
 Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in Swazi society, and the
 dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights. Because
 traditional marriage is governed by uncodified Swazi law and custom, women's
 rights are often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are inter-
 preted (e.g., parents, village elders, police, government officials). In bth traditional
 and civil marriages, wives are legally treated as minors. Although many women who
 marry under civilc law mistakenly believe the will be accorded the legal status of
 adults, this is possile only if stipulated in a sgned prenuptial agreement.
 In .practice, changing socioeconomic onditions and uranization are slowly break-
 ing down these barriers to equality, and wives now routinely and successfully exe-
 cute contracts and enter into a variety of transactions in their own names. Htwever.
 
 
 the husband's permission is still often required for a woman to borrow money, open
 a checking account, leave the country, and, in some cases, take a job. Divorce is dis-
 couraged by families, but is now common. In traditional marriages, children are con-
 sidered to belong to the father and to his family if the couple divorces. In cases in
 which children are born out of wedlock, which is common, they are considered to
 belong to the mother. In traditional marriages, a man may take more than one wife.
 A man who marries a woman under civil law legally may not have more than one
 wife, although in practice this restriction is sometimes ignored        -
 Marriage is further complicated because couples often marry in both civil and tra-
 ditional ceremonies, creating problems in determining which set of rules applies to
 the marriage and to subsequent questions of child custody and inheritance in the
 event of its termination. This is a less common problem than in the pat, however.
 The Swaziland Council of Churches Legal Aid Center provides free information on
 issues such as marriage and maintenance laws.
 Physical abuse of women, particularly wife bating, is common, despite traditional
 strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their husbands
 with assault under both the traditional and modern legal systems and frequently
 do so in extreme cases when the intervention of extended family members fails to
 end such violence. The traditional courts, however, can be unsympathetic to .un-
 ruly" or 'disobedient" women and are less likely than the modern courts to convict
 men for wife beating. Still, even in the modern courts, sentences frequently amount
 to no more than several months in jail or a frne, or both.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of
 race, religion, sex, or political afliation. It requires equal pay for equal work. How-
 ever, men's average wage rates by skill category are in .some sectors three times
 those of women. The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions' Special Women's Wing
 is focusing on the issues of wage discrimination and maternity benefits, an well as
 other aender-based discrimination. Legal protection from sexual harassment is ad-
 dresod in the Swazilegal ode, but its provisions are vague and largely ineffective
 in halting tis type of d     nsrimination.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.--The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms
 the right of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely. Persons in all se-
 tors of the economy, including the public sector, are permitted to join unions. Unions
 operate independently of government or political control, provided they act as eco-
 nomic, rather than polirica, o y anizations.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The Ac t specifies a number of previsions which must be addressed in a con-
 stitution. These include the election of officers by secret ballot, annual meetings
 open to all members, fees,, grounds for suspension of members, and expenditure of
 union funds. The union constitution must be approved by the Labor Commissioner,
 who can strike out or amend provisions which violate the law. Unions maynot be
 dissolved as long an they adhere to the regulations of the IRA. Unions which fail
 to maintain proper registration with the abor Commissioner may be dissolved
 without recourse to judicial review, but this authority ha never been exercised.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has
 noted discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on freedom of asocia-
 tion and ILO Convention 98 on thc right to s anize and bargain collectively, both
 ratified by Swaziland in 1978. The concerns  y the COE iclude the broad powers
 accorded government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the abil-
 ity of workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegalstrike. The Act empowers the Industrial Court to settle
 employment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. While
 strikes have been rare in Swaziland, and Swazi tradition is to avoid confrontation,
 consciousness of workers' rights is growing rapidly. When disputes arise, the Gov-
 ernment often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a strike, which may not
 be legally called until o avenues of negotiation have been exhausted. The Labor
 Commissioner may then issue a 14-day ostonement which may be extended upon
 presentation of further documentation. A number of strikes or threatened strikes in
 1992 highlighted the growing consciousness of workers and the continued reluctance
 of some employers to accept organized labor unions. Disputes centered on the issue
 of pay. In July and August, a bitter pay dispute involving two financial organiza-
 tions escalated into a secondary strike against the banks before being settled.
 Despite the IRA requirement for the Minister of Labor's approval of unions' inter-
 national affiliations, the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU), the coun-
 
 
 269
 try's major union federation, is a member of the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions and represents Swazi workers in regional trade union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Em-
 ployers are obliged to recognize a union when it achieves 40-percent membership
 among employees. Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Indus-
 trial Court, if necessary. The Court is limited by the law in several respects, how-
 ever. It may not, for example, order reinstatement in cases of unfair dismissal and
 is limited in the compensation it can order in such cases to an amount equivalent
 to 6 months salary. Employers can prohibit employees from attending union meet-
 ings on company time if the union has not achieved the 40-percent membership
 level required for recognition. However, members of legally recognized unions must
 be allowed to attend union activities. Although many employers habitually resist
 recognition and force the issue into the Industrial Court, the Court has generally
 ruled in favor of the unions on this issue.
 While collective bargaining occurs, it is not widespread. The Government issues
 directives on wage levels and thus restricts the bargaining process. The Industrial
 Court may refuse to register agreements in the event of nonobservance of these gov-
 ernment directives. The COE has criticized this as a violation of ILO Convention
 98.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is legally prohibited
 and not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment Act of 1980 pro-
 hibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except
 in cases where only family members are employed in the firm or in technical schools
 where children are working under the supervision of a teacher or other authorized
 person. Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be worked on school
 days and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per.day or 33 per week. Employ-
 ment of children in the formal sector is not customary. However, children are fre-
 quently employed below the minimum age in the agricultural sector, particularly in
 the country's eastern cotton growing region. The Ministry of Labor has enforcement
 responsibiit, but its effectiveness is limited by personnel shortages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no overall minimum wage, but rather
 a legally mandated sliding scale of minimum w as depending on the type of work.
 These minimum wages generally provide a worker and family with an adequate
 standard of living within the context of Swazi society. Most workers receive a mini-
 mum of 14 days' annual leave. The Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the
 formal sector.
 There is a labor/management/gvernment-negotiated maximum 48-hour workweek
 in the modern sector, except for security guar , who work up to six 12-hour shifts
 per week. All workers are entitled to 1 day of rest per week under the Employment
 Act and the Wages Act. Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety in
 Swaziland. The Government sets safety standards for industrial operations and en-
 courages private companies to develop accident prevention programs. Recent growth
 in industrial production has necessitated more government action on safety issues.
 In 1991 only 15 safety inspections by the Labor Commissioner's office took place,
 2 in manufacturing industries. These totals remain low because of staffimg defi-
 ciencies in the Labor Commissioner's office.
