 SWAZILAND
 The Kingdom of Swaziland is a small developing country located
 in southern Africa. It is a traditional monarchy ruled by a
 King with the assistance of a Cabinet and Parliament, and a
 parallel traditional governmental structure comprised of a
 Supreme Council of State which advises the Crown, district
 authorities, and national courts which follow traditional Swazi
 law and custom.
 Having formerly been a British High Commission Territory, the
 Kingdom attained independence in 1968 with a constitution that
 provided for a popularly elected Parliament and for the
 fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual. On the
 grounds that the constitution had permitted the introduction
 of political practices incompatible with the traditional Swazi
 way of reaching decisions, King Sobhuza II decreed its repeal
 in 1973. He assumed supreme power and governmental decisions
 thereafter were made by the King-in-Council. The Council was
 comprised of Cabinet members appointed by the King. Parliament
 was re-opened in January 1979 with some members chosen through
 indirect election and others nominated by the King. King
 Sobhuza continued to be vested with the country's executive
 authority. He ruled through a Cabinet appointed by himself,
 and he retained the right to withhold assent to bills passed
 by the Parliament. King Sobhuza died in August 1982 and the
 Queen Mother, Dzeliwe, assumed the duties of Head of State and
 Regent. One of King Sobhuza's adolescent sons is expected to
 be selected as his successor and become King upon reaching
 majority. The Swazi monarch's authority is limited in practice
 by a complex system of traditional rights and responsibilities
 which requires that it be exercised in accordance with Swazi
 custom. The judiciary is independent. Despite the absence of
 a constitution or other written legal safeguards, there has
 been no systematic disregard by the Government for the rights
 of the person.
 Swaziland has a free-enterprise economy. During 1982 the
 Industrial Relations Act and sections of the Employment Act
 came into operation and are expected to contribute to safeguard-
 ing the rights of workers.
 1. Respect For the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There have been no known cases or allegations of killings by
 either official government or opposition political groups.
 b. Disappearance
 A 1978 law provides that detentions must be made public.
 Persons are rarely abducted or secretly arrested. They are
 held clandestinely only in rare instances in which they are
 believed to be material witnesses in a case under police
 investigation.
 c. Torture
 There have been no allegations that torture is countenanced or
 practiced.
 
 
 313
 
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There is no evidence that persons in Swaziland have been
 subjected to cruel or degrading treatment or punishment.
 The country's main prison includes facilities for teaching
 manual trades. The health care and diet in the prisons are
 approximately the same as those available to the general
 population. Prisoners are allowed visits from family members
 and from attorneys of their choice.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 A 1978 law permits the Government to detain any individual for
 renewable periods of 60 days without being charged. Although
 the law provides that the fact of such detention shall be made
 public, no instance of detention under that law has been
 officially acknowledged until after the detained individuals
 have been released. Detention is not subject to appeal to the
 courts, although it may be appealed directly to the monarch.
 There were no known cases of detention under the 1978 law during
 1982. The right to habeas corpus is provided in Swazi courts
 for all other types of prisoners. Swaziland has no known
 political prisoners.
 f . Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided forby law and is
 honored in practice. In *national" (traditional) courts, legal
 counsel is not allowed, but defendants are heard on their own
 behalf. In magistrates' courts, which operate under Roman-Dutch
 law, a defendant is'entitled to counsel at his own expense; the
 crown will provide a court-appointed defense counsel in capital
 cases. Counsel has free access to defendants within the limits
 of prison regulations. Harassment of defense counsel by the
 Government does not occur. Except for detainees under the 1978
 law, defendants are made fully aware of the charges against them.
 They and their lawyers are generally able to inform themselves
 of'the evidence on which the charges are based. The courts are
 independent of executive and military control. No judge has ever
 been removed from office by the Government. Appeals from the
 magistrates' courts may be heard by the high court and all final
 appeals are heard by the court of appeals which is the highest
 judiciary body.   There are no special courts to deal with secur-
 ity or political offenses and civilians are not tried by military
 courts.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is safeguarded by custom and is honored
 in practice. Swaziland law requires a warrant issued by a
 magistrate for the search of a home or other premises, except
 when the purpose of the search would'be defeated by delay in
 obtaining the warrant. Allegations that government officers
 have illegally entered homes are very infrequent; none came to
 public attention in 1982. There have been no allegations that
 the Government practices "bugging" or other violations of the
 home.
 
 
 314
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is not guaranteed by law, but comment critical
 of the Government is permitted in traditional Swazi councils and
 in the Parliament which has been increasingly willing to serve
 as a forum for examination and criticism, where deemed appropri-
 ate, of government policies. The Swazi radio and one newspaper
 are government-owned; Swazi television and a second newspaper
 are partially state owned; a third newspaper is privately owned.
 Self-censorship is practiced in the media, most particularly in
 commenting on the monarch or royal household. The one indepen-
 dent newspaper has reported criticism of the Government and in
 1982 started to publish editorials. The formation of a Swaziland
 National Association of Journalists also took place in 1982.
 The Government proscribes publications it deems to be prejudicial
 to the interests of defense, public safety and order, public
 morality, and public health. In practice, except for material
 that is obscene or communist oriented, the local and inter-
 national press circulate freely in Swaziland.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973, provides that no meet-
 ings of a political nature and no processions or demonstrations
 shall be held in any public place except with written consent,
 not.always granted, of the Commissioner of Police. Except for
 the prohibitions on political activity, there are no impediments
 to the freedom of association. There are seven registered trade
 unions in Swaziland; however, only one is active. There are
 reports of plans to form new trade unions in the coming year.
 The Swaziland National Association of Teachers remains dissolved
 following a government determination in 1977 that it was engag-
 ing in political activity. Official consideration is being
 given to reinstatement of a teachers association. A journalists
 association was authorized in 1982. On July 1, 1982 the Govern-
 ment placed into operation the Industrial Relations Act which
 guarantees the right to organize to employees and employers. It
 also establishes negotiating machinery and a disputes procedure.
 Employees may strike and picket.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although there is no law on the subject, Swaziland is tradition-
 ally hospitable to all religious beliefs. There is no state
 religion and religious groups are not persecuted or harassed.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of internal travel is guaranteed by custom and is re-
 spected in practice. Swazis may obtain with relative ease a
 travel document valid for travel throughout the southern African
 region. External travel outside of southern Africa requires a
 passport, which can take considerable time to obtain, and
 which the Government denies if it deems the applicant's proposed
 travel to be prejudicial to its interests or if the applicant
 has no apparent means of support for the proposed period of
 absence from Swaziland. Passport fees are not excessive. The
 right of return is granted to all Swazi passport holders but is
 almost universally denied to refugees who leave Swaziland on
 United Nations travel documents. Some residents of Swaziland,
 
 
 315
 especially those of mixed ethnic background, have experienced
 serious difficulty in obtaining official determination of their
 citizenship status but this problem may be somewhat resolved by
 a new Swazi citizenship bill which was published in 1982 but has
 not yet come into force.
 Swaziland does allow refugees from neighboring countries to
 enter the country. Refugee and asylum policy is governed by
 the Refugee Control Order of 1978. Sections of this Order are
 not consistent with the UN Refugee Convention and Protocol, of
 which Swaziland is a signatory. There are about 7,000 refugees
 from the.Republic of South Africa living in rural resettlement
 areas in Swaziland and an additional 400-500 living in urban
 areas. Swaziland has also accepted approximately 50 refugees
 from Mozambique. Small numbers of South African refugees tran-
 sit Swaziland on their way to third countries. Few Swazis have
 fled their own country. In general, refugees are adequately
 treated by local standards. No involuntary repatriation of
 refugees is known to have taken place in 1982.
 ei. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Freedom to participate in the political process does not exist
 in the sense understood by modern international standards.
 There is participation expressed through traditional structures
 and customs. Swaziland Ls a traditional monarchy and the King
 is the Head of State. -In 1973 King Sobhuza repealed the 1968
 Independence Constitution, suspended meetings of Parliament, and
 assumed all governmental powers. In 1977 he announced the
 expiration of terms of office of Members of Parliament.
 In January 1979 a new parliament, chosen partly through indirect
 elections and partly through direct appointment by the King, was
 convened:for the first time. The new Parliament consists of a
 :50-member House of Assembly (40 chosen through indirect election
 and 10 directly4appointed by the King) and a. 20-member Senate
 (10 chosen through Indirect election and 10 appointed by the
 King)'. Any legislation passed by the Parliament must be
 approved by the King before it becomes law. Executive authority
 is exercised by a Cabinet presided over by a Prime Minister
 (Head of Government), who is appointed by the King from among
 the Members of the Lower House of Parliament.
 The Judiciary consists of a Court of Appeals, a High Court, and
 various subordinate and traditional courts. Members of the Court
 of Appeals and of the High Court are appointed by the King.
 Parallel to this modern government structure is a traditional
 structure consisting of a liqoqo (advisory council to the King),
 traditional courts, and 40 tinkhundla (regional councils).
 In keeping with Swazi traditions of government by consensus, all
 political parties are banned in Swaziland.
 Since the death of King Sobhuza in August, the country has been
 -governed by'a Queen Regent and the lipogo. The appointment of
 :a new.'King is expected-to be announced soon.
 
 
 316
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland does not normally respond substan-
 tively to inquiries of representatives of human rights groups
 concerning the welfare and whereabouts of individual political
 detainees. There are no organizations based within the country
 that observe, report, or contest human rights violations. In
 1982 no outside person or team is known to have sought the
 Government's permission to undertake an investigation of alleged
 violation of human rights; however, Amnesty International's 1982
 report expressed concern about the use of detention without
 trial. The 1982 Freedom House report rated Swaziland as "partly
 free."
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Swaziland has a free-enterprise economy characterized by a
 division between a modern sector dominated by large export-
 oriented firms which are frequently foreign owned and a
 traditional sector which comprises about 80 percent of the
 population. During the 1970's Swaziland's real per capita gross
 domestic product (GDP) grew by 4.6 percent per year, and its
 average annual per capita growth in agricultural production was
 the highest in sub-Saharan Africa. Gross national product per
 capita in 1981 was estimated to be $840. These figures, however,
 do not properly reflect the true status of the typical Swazi who
 lives in the rural areas and practices subsistence agriculture.
 Most of the traditional households have some members working in
 the modern sector who provide regular remittances. The World
 Bank estimates that approximately 50 percent of the total popu-
 lation, however, is below the absolute poverty level. Unemploy-
 ment is a serious problem and is growing. Of the nearly 9,000
 students who leave the school system each year, approximately
 2,000 are forced to return to traditional rural activities after
 failing to find wage jobs. Swaziland's population of about
 585,000 grows at an annual rate variously estimated between 2.6
 percent to 3.4 percent. This phenomenon places even greater
 strains on the limited land resources and further contributes to
 the rising unemployment.
 About 60 percent of the land is held in trust for the Swazi
 nation by the monarchy; this "national" land is occupied
 largely by traditional farmers. Traditional land tenure makes
 it difficult for many people to acquire land, to consolidate
 holdings, or to get bank loans. Still, there are very few cases
 where people on national land have lost their usage rights and
 people have shown willingness to invest in structures and equip-
 ment on national land. The non-national land is individually
 titled and is primarily foreign owned. The right to own
 property is guaranteed by law.
 In order to encourage local employment, the Government has made
 it increasingly difficult for some categories of foreign workers
 to acquire work permits.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate be-
 tween employees based on race, religion, sex, marital status, or
 political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal- work.
 There are provisions covering the employment of children,
 providing maternity leave, and special provisions for domestic
 employees. Legally, women are not discriminated against in the
 
 
 317
 job market, but in practice discrimination does take place. An
 element in the income tax law, which taxed married women more
 than married men, was partially removed in 1982.
 The ability of Swazi women to deal with the problems of a
 developing society is hampered by both legal and cultural con-
 straints. Traditional values are a major influence on the role
 of women in Swazi society. Women are in some cases not legally
 equal to men and a married woman is virtually a legal minor. A
 married woman is not responsible for contracts she signs, nor
 can she own real property or inherit property under normal
 circumstances. A married woman must obtain her husband's
 permission-to borrow money, to leave the country, and often to
 take a job. A:divorced woman has no right to the custody of her
 children, although she may have to care for them with no support
 from their father.  A-small and slowly growing number of women
 are beginning to participate in social, .economic, and political
 ,life outside their traditional fields of teaching, nursing, and
 xlerical work. In additioni there are more women instructors
 than menat. nearly all levels and in nearly all types of
 educational-znstitutions including the university.
 Swazilandnaoadult literacy rate is 65 percent and its primary
 school-vavakkment isnearing.,100 percent. Standards, however,
 areac.w-andytare declining because emphasis is on quantity.at the
 expense-of;..quality.-  The pass rate bor the-Cambridge-Overseas
 .School Ceztificate.(COSC or.high srtlDol-completion exam) has
 been droppLngeInce -he:marly-i970!s and is currently. only 26
 'percent.
 Because of a.lack of.clean, disease-free water, inadequate sani-
 tation and government emphasis,on-curative rather than preven-
 tive medicine, the health status of the population is poor. The
 infant mortality rate (135 per 1000 live births), the child
 mortality rate (27 per 1000) and life expectancy (47 years) are
 among the worst for all lower-middle income countries. The
 number of people per physician or nurse, however, is reasonably
 good and the society is able to provide an estimated 99 percent
 of-essential calories per person. Health care is provided
 .through a.system of government hospitals and clinics and by
 medical installations operated by private companies and
 religious missions.
 
 
 318
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS ANC GRANTS- G!LIGATIOS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF OOLLAPS)
 COUNYRY: SWAZILAND
 130     1931     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          9.0     11.5     10.0
 LOANS ..............         2.6      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         6.4     11.5     10.0
 A.AIC .................... 7.5         9.7      8.7
 LOANS .............. 2.              0.0      0.0
 ZRANTS ...........         . 4.9      ..7      8.7
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 ,6.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        1.2      9.6      0.0
 LOANS ................      0.0      ..U      0.0
 GRANTS ................ . O.       0.6      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.u      0.0
 REPAY. IN 5-LOANS .....          .0       .       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....          0.0      0.9.     0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........          0.2      0.6      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.3EV I WFP.        0.2       0.6      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....          0.0      l.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.3      1.2      1.3
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. ... 1.3      1.2      1.3
 PEACE  CORPS. ...        1.3       1.2      1.3
 NARCOTICS ........        0.D       0.0      0.0
 OTnER............       0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          D.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        Coo       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS  0......... .     0.       0.0      0.0
 5.CREDIT SALES-FM S....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EDTRNC ....         0.0      1.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-cX=ISS STOCK...          0.3      0.0      0.0
 .OTIHER GRANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON.   MIL...         9.0     11.5     10.0
 LOANS .... ............     2.6       O.0      C.0
 GRANTS ...............     6.4     11.5     10.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.3      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM SANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............   .    3.0       0.0     "0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM ZNTERNATIDNAL ASENCIES
 1950     1i'1     1952     1946-82
 TOTAL .........   11.6     1Z.7       7.0    137.6
 IbRO              10.1     10.0       0.0     60.7
 iF;                0.0      0.       0.0      3.5
 IDA                U.0      O.U       0.0      5.4
 10S                0.0      0.fl      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0     27.6
 UNJP               1.1      0.7       0.0     11.4
 OTHER-UN           C.4       0.0      0.0      2.0
 EEC                0.0      2.0       7.0     19.0
 
 
 319
