 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed by the hereditary monarch of
 the tribal Swazi nation. In theory, his powers are
 not circumscribed by written legal guarantees of
 human rights; in practice, however, his authority is
 limited by a complex system of traditional rights and
 responsibilities.   In 1973, despite his party's
 overwhelming-victory in free elections, the King
 suspended the "Western" constitution and parliament
 which Swaziland inherited from Britain on its independ-
 ence in 1968 and announced his intention to return to
 government through traditional tribal institutions.
 At that time the International Commission of Jurists
 feared that this could prove a "serious setback" for
 human rights, observing that "Swaziland has always
 been regarded as one of the most enlightened countries
 in Africa in terms of civil rights and race relations."
 Critics believe the attempt to revive a traditional
 and autocratic, if benevolent, system of government
 will not prove sufficiently flexible to accommodate
 increasing demands for more Mdodern mechanisms for
 political participation. To date, however, despite
 the lack of written legal safeguards there has been
 no significant degradation of respect for human
 rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been no allegations of torture in Swaziland.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no evidence that persons in Swaziland
 (including political prisoners) have been subjected
 to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 (113)
 
 
 114
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Swaziland's 1973 Security Act authorizes the arrest
 and detention without charge for renewable periods of
 60 days of persons suspected of acting against the
 interests of the state. The government continues to
 use this authority to jail its critics for short
 periods without trial and without announcement of the
 reasons for their detention. Amnesty International
 protested the detention in 1976 of Dr. Zwane, leader
 of a small opposition party, because of an article he
 wrote for a South African newspaper concerning
 Swaziland's foreign policy. He was subsequently
 released. At least four persons are currently
 thought to be in detention for offenses ranging from
 political opposition to alleged disrepsect for the
 royal family.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary in Swaziland is independent and respect-
 ed. It will give a fair hearing or public trial to
 persons claiming violations of their human rights. A
 dual system of courts with rights of appeal has been
 used with considerable flexibility and humaneness to
 assure recourse to both modern Roman-Dutch and
 traditional Swazi law to fit individual cases.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfill-
 ment of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter,
 Health Care, and Education
 The government of Swaziland has launched a rural
 development plan designed to improve the standard of
 living of the majority of Swazis who depend on
 subsistence agriculture for a livelihood. However,
 some critics of the government charge that its
 economic development policy does not adequately
 address the needs of the poorer sectors of the
 population. The government tolerates widespread
 nepotism and petty corruption. As a result, signific-
 ant resources have been diverted from the rural poor
 majority.
 
 
 115
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Swaziland protects the rights of its citizens to
 freedom of thought and religion. Freedom of speech,
 including the right to criticize governmental polic-
 ies, is part of the Swazi tradition and is strictly
 respected so long as the speaking is done in the
 tribal councils described in 3 c below. Free assembly
 for political activity outside this framework,
 however, is not permitted. The press and radio are
 subject to government control and occasional censorship.
 Information dissemination is not vigorously controlled;
 considerable latitude is allowed to privately-owned
 publications. Swaziland does not permit trade
 unions, a restriction which contributed to a brief
 and unusual outbreak of protest and Violence in late
 1977.
 b. Freedeom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Swaziland permits full freedom of movement within
 the country but'restricts the freedom to emigrate.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The government of Swaziland considers itself responsible.
 to the people of the tribal Swazi nation but believes
 that its legitimacy is derived through national
 tradtion rather than electoral processes. It seeks
 to take account of the will of the population, but
 provides few mechanisms for its organized expression.
 Since the dissolution of Parliament in 1977, King
 Sobhuza has ruled as King-in-Council with advice from
 the former cabinet and tribal chiefs. In 1977
 
 
 the King proposed a new system for selecting popular
 representatives based on the traditional tribal
 councils or Tinkhundla, in which all Swazi citizens
 can speak out on issues of political concern. While
 this method offers no opportunity for elections or
 other formal mechanisms for political participation,
 it is defended by the government as better suited to
 Swazi customs and appears to enjoy broad support
 among the tradition-oriented Swazi population.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-Governmental Investi-
 gation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland has not attempted to
 restrict independent investigation of the human
 rights situation in its country. It is sensitive to
 expressions of international conern about specific
 allegations and in 1977 cooperated with inquiries by
 the UN High Commission for Refugees into charges that
 it was pursuing a policy of "benign neglect" toward
 political refugees from South Africa and Mozambique.
 It accepts full responsibility for the protection of
 the human rights of its citizens and does not attempt
 to cover up any violations of those rights which may
 occur under its system of limited legal safeguards
 and political rights.
 
 
