 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with
 all executive, legislative, and judicial powers ultimately
 vested in the King. Advised by the Queen Mother, traditional
 figures, and cabinet ministers, he rules according to Swazi law
 and custom, never codified but ultimately determined by himself
 and his advisors. Swaziland's Government combines modern and
 traditional elements--a cabinet, parliament, and independent
 courts which follow Western law--and a tribal hierarchy with
 'national" courts which follow traditional Swazi law and
 custom. The Cabinet is appointed by the King from among
 Members of Parliament and is responsible to him. A
 Westminster-type constitution containing a bill of rights was
 imposed on Swaziland at independence by its former colonial
 ruler, but it was repealed by King Sobhuza II in 1973 on the
 grounds that it was incompatible with the Swazi tradition of
 decisionmaking. In 1978 the King established the Tinkhundla
 system, which allows limited democratic participation at the
 district level while giving the King and a small electoral
 committee the power to determine parliamentary representation
 (see Section 3).
 National defense is provided by the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense
 Force, consisting of 3,000 troops. The Royal Swaziland Police
 is the primary internal security organization. Both the police
 and the defense force are controlled by civilian authorities.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little
 government intervention in the marketplace. The majority of
 Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture, though a
 relatively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the
 largest component of the formal economy. The economy relies
 heavily on the export sector, composed primarily of large,
 foreign-owned firms.
 In 1991 political rights remained seriously circumscribed, and
 there continued to be important restrictions on the freedom of
 speech and assembly. In August eight persons who spoke at a
 political rally were arrested and charged with having
 participated in an illegal political meeting. All were freed
 on bail, and the case against them was subsequently dismissed
 when the State withdrew all charges. Notwithstanding these
 arrests, the authorities encouraged open public debate on the
 need for political change, especially in the press and in a
 series of public meetings beginning in September. Other human
 rights problems included mistreatment of prisoners and
 discrimination (and violence) against women. Six persons
 detained in 1990 without charge under Swaziland's 60-day
 detention order were released in March. At the end of 1991,
 there were no persons in detention under this law, though it
 remained a deterrent to dissent.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no allegations of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 
 
 393
 SWAZILAND
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is not generally practiced, but there are occasional
 reports by prisoners of police and military threats and
 beatings. In one such confirmed report, a handcuffed prisoner
 was punched and kicked by a police officer during questioning.
 Such complaints generally come from criminal, not political,
 prisoners. There were no instances of police officers being
 tried, punished, or otherwise disciplined for such abuses.
 Defendants occasionally claim that the courts have accepted
 confessions extorted by the police, but the credibility of such
 claims is difficult to ascertain. Caning can be administered
 to youiths involved in either petty or violent crimes.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests' in all but certain
 circumstances. These exceptions, however, are poorly defined,
 and police who have strong suspicions about a suspect do not
 normally seek a warrant. Arrestees are allowed to consult with
 a lawyer of their choice, and provision for bail exists.
 Police occasionally fail to charge suspects within the 48 hours
 required under uncodified regulations.
 In another category known as "administrative detention," a 1978
 law permits the Government to hold any person without charge or
 trial for a renewable period of 60 days. Detention under this
 law may in theory be appealed to the High Court under that
 Court's general power to review the constitutionality of the
 law itself, but to date no such appeal has been'heard, and the
 law itself specifically prohibits any'court appeal'of a
 detention order. In practice, the only appeal available under
 the 1978 detention order is one made directly to the Monarch.
 The law has generally been used against political opponents
 viewed by the Government or the Monarch as threats to internal
 security or stability. It was invoked in 1991 to renew
 detention orders first issued against six persons in 1990.
 These six persons, who included five political activists and
 royal family member Prince Mfanasabili Dlamini, were all
 released in late March. No persons were in administrative
 detention at year's end, but its existence continues to inhibit
 political activity.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, the High
 Court, and magistrates' courts, which are independent of
 executive and military control and free from intimidation from
 outside forces. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is
 entitled to counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed
 counsel is provided in capital cases or when difficult points
 of law are at issue. There are well-defined appeal procedures
 up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body. Some
 members of the regular judiciary are appointed from the bars of
 other countries with compatible legal systems.
 In treason and sedition cases, the King has powers to
 circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special
 tribunal, which may adopt rules and procedures different from
 those applied in the High Court. In 1987, for example, the
 last time a special tribunal convened, King Mswati III issued a
 decree that authorized a special tribunal to try offenses
 committed against the King and Queen Mother. This decree
 
 
 394
 SWAZILAND
 permitted secret sessions, forbade the accused from having
 legal representation, and did not allow an appeal.
 In traditional courts, to which ethnic Swazis may be brought
 for relatively minor offenses and violations of traditional
 Swazi law and custom, formal legal counsel is not allowed, but
 defendants may speak on their own behalf and may be assisted by
 informal advisors. Sentences are subject to review and to
 appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. Accused
 persons who desire counsel can insist that their cases be
 transferred from the traditional courts. Because there is some
 jurisdictional overlap between the two court systems, there is
 occasionally confusion over which court should hear a case. By
 law, the public prosecutor has the authority to determine which
 court should hear a case, but, in practice, it is usually the
 police who do so. Police usually choose the court in which
 they believe a conviction is most likely.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The law generally requires that a warrant be issued by a
 magistrate before police may search homes or other premises.
 However, the law also provides police officers with the rank of
 subinspector or higher the right to search without a warrant if
 they have what they consider reasonable cause to believe
 evidence can be obtained that might otherwise be lost through
 delay in obtaining a warrant. While searches without warrants
 occur occasionally, the issue of legality of evidence, or the
 method by which evidence is obtained, rarely arises in court.
 There is no evidence that the Government systematically
 monitors private correspondence or conversations, but the Swazi
 police have been known to apprehend and interrogate persons
 reported to have made objectionable statements about the King
 during the course of private conversations or in telegraphic
 correspondence. In May, for example, a local journalist was
 charged with sedition on the basis of comments he allegedly
 made while drinking at a bar. He was free on bail at year's
 end.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech, especially on political matters, is
 limited. Public criticism of the immediate royal family and of
 national security policy is generally forbidden. The secretary
 of the Law Society was threatened in early January with
 detention without charge when he publicly criticized the
 current detention law.
 The Parliament serves as a forum for examination and criticism
 of government policies, but matters are seldom pressed to a
 vote and, when they are, unanimity is usually the result. In
 May a Member of Parliament, P. D. Dlamini, was fired from his
 job at a company in which a royally controlled holding company
 has a substantial stake. It is widely accepted that Dlamini
 was ousted because of his outspoken criticism of certain royal
 counselors made on the floor of Parliament. He subsequently
 fled the country briefly because he feared he would be detained
 under the 60-day detention law. He later returned to Swaziland
 and to an active role in Parliament, but he has not been
 reinstated in his job.
 
 
 395
 SWAZILAND
 Swazis have a number of traditional forums through which they
 can express discontent, including direct dialog with their
 chiefs, community meetings, Tinkhundla meetings, and National
 Libandlas (special councils, nicknamed "People's Parliaments,"
 in which all Swazis are permitted to participate). However,
 the National Libandla has not met since mid-1990, and many
 Swazis view it and other traditional forums as an obsolete
 means for expressing their political views.
 The media, both government-controlled and private, practice
 self-censorship, refraining from criticism of the royal family
 or from reporting in advance the movements of the King or Prime
 Minister. However, in 1991 the private print media
 increasingly criticized and questioned other actions of the
 Government and established political structures. The
 Government controls Swazi radio and television stations and
 indirectly influences, through one of the King's trust funds,
 one of the two daily newspapers. Private companies and church
 groups publish several newspapers and magazines. One church
 group owns and operates a radio station.
 In July the Government announced new regulations whereby all
 press inquiries to government agencies would be channeled
 through an unwieldy interministerial information committee.
 Although considered a restraint on the press, the new
 regulations were not enforced in 1991. In late September,. the
 Government announced a ban on newspaper reporting of public
 comments on the Tinkhundla system, apparently in reaction to
 widespread, and accurate, reports of public criticism of the
 Government. The ban was rescinded the next day, and the
 Government described the ban as "an error."
 The Government has occasionally proscribed publications,
 including foreign publications, deemed to be prejudicial to the
 interest of defense, public safety, or public health. There
 have been no such bannings since 1985, and the ban on the two
 magazines proscribed at that time was lifted by Parliament in
 1991.
 Academic freedom is also limited by the practice of
 self-censorship and the prohibition of overtly political
 gatherings (see Section 2.b.).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 King Sobhuza's 1973 decree prohibits political parties and
 meetings of a political nature and demonstrations in any public
 place without the consent of the Commissioner of Police. The
 Government occasionally uses this power to stop meetings or
 harass groups which might embarrass it. In August eight people
 were charged with having organized and participated in an
 illegal political meeting. The charges stemmed from the
 inaugural meeting of the Swaziland Youth Congress, or SWAYOCO,
 at which several speakers criticized the existing political
 system and called for democratic reforms. Of the eight,
 several had previously been tried and acquitted of treason but
 later detained in 1990 under the 60-day detention order. In
 this instance, three of the eight were detained briefly and
 then freed on bail, while the others were simply charged and
 released. The case was dismissed' in late November when the
 Government withdrew all charges against the eight.
 In March, as followup to the November 1990 incident in which
 Swazi police and defense forces brutally broke up a student
 sit-in at the University of Swaziland, the Government
 
 
 396
 SWAZILAND
 established a judicial commission of inquiry led by the acting
 Chief Justice. Hearings in 1991 were held in camera. At
 year's end, there remained widespread skepticism about whether
 the results of the inquiry would ever be made airailable to the
 public and, if so, about their credibility.
 Alleged members of underground political groups, such as the
 People's United Democratic Movement or PUDEMO, are believed to
 be kept under surveillance and occasionally harassed by police.
 Except for the King's 1973 decree, there are no formal legal
 barriers to freedom of association. Trade associations and
 professional bodies exist and maintain relations with
 recognized international bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is hospitable to all religious believers. It
 considers itself to be a Christian country and permits a wide
 variety of foreign missionary activity. Organized religions
 are free to establish places of worship and train clergy, to
 publish religious texts, and to undertake religious travel
 outside the country. At the same time, the authorities promote
 the observance of Swazi customs. Problems arise when these
 customs conflict with religious beliefs. Church condemnation
 of traditional Swazi ceremonies, for example, has led in the
 past to the arrest and deportation of church figures. However,
 no such incidents have occurred since 1987.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. Those who
 have left the country may freely return. While there have been
 no cases of the Government denying citizenship privileges,
 including travel documents, since 1986, ambiguities in
 Swaziland's citizenship law can be exploited to deal with
 politically unpopular persons. Swazi men with adequate funds
 generally can obtain a travel document to travel in the region,
 but, under both modern and traditional law, married women
 require the husband's permission to apply for a passport. In
 practice, this law makes it more difficult for women than men
 to obtain one.
 Swaziland treats refugees from neighboring states well. About
 7,000 primarily ethnic Swazis from South Africa, who fled the
 South African "homeland" of KwaZulu, reside in Swaziland (6,000
 as registered refugees). Recent years have seen a large influx
 of Mozambican refugees. While approximately 34,700 are
 officially registered by the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (LTNHCR), it is believed that an additional 30,000
 or more Mozambicans may be in Swaziland as illegal immigrants.
 Swaziland permits the UNHCR to interview those who seek refugee
 status and grants asylum if the person can establish a
 well-founded fear of persecution or physical danger if
 repatriated. Illegal aliens who cannot establish their refugee
 status, however, are usually deported. Many immigrants
 identified for deportation serve extended time in detention
 while arrangements for their repatriation are made. This delay
 is due to the absence of an agreed repatriation procedure with
 Mozambique, rather than a policy to penalize illegal immigrants.
 Small groups of young South Africans fleeing violence in South
 Africa continued to arrive in Swaziland in 1991. The
 
 
 397
 SWAZILAND
 Government, together with the UNHCR, has worked to send these
 refugees on to their desired destinations, normally African
 National Congress (ANC) training centers in Zambia and
 Tanzania. None was forcibly repatriated.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Swazi citizens do not have the right to change their government
 through democratic means. Political parties are outlawed, and
 an overt, organized political opposition does not exist. The
 King rules in conjunction with the Queen Mother.
 Traditionally, decisionmaking has been by consensus, with the
 King soliciting advice from the royal family, the senior
 chiefs, the Cabinet, Members of Parliament, and other
 interested parties. Still, the King can legally accept or
 dismiss advice is he sees fit. Legislation is passed by the
 Parliament and is then submitted to the Monarch for assent,
 which may be withheld. The King can also legislate by decree.
 Swazis participate indirectly in'the selection of Members of
 Parliament through the Tinkhundla system. The King can
 dissolve Parliament and call new elections, normally held every
 5 years. Parliamentarians (50 in the House and 20 in the
 Senate) are chosen in a complex process involving the
 interaction of a 7-member electoral committee, 40 traditional
 districts, 80 electors, and the King's appointive powers. The
 district-level Tinkhundla meetings do allow a measure of
 democratic participation, but village elders control the
 nominating process, and voting is not by secret ballot.
 In 1990 the King announced procedures for considering reform of
 the Tinkhundla system, e.g., to permit direct election of
 Members of Parliament, as recommended by the 1990 National
 Libandla. In September the Masitsela Committee began a series
 of meetings in' each of the districts to solicit public comment
 on the political system. The ensuing debate was remarkably
 open and largely critical of elements of the Tinkhundla
 system. King Mswati has promised to appoint a second committee
 to consider the public comments and to present recommendations
 for Tinkhundla reform to the King.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1991 the Human Rights Association of Swaziland was
 established. Though still not officially registered by the
 Government, it operated freely in 1991 and spoke out on several'
 occasions together with other groups, such as the Law Society
 of Swaziland and the Swaziland Trade Union Federation, on
 important human rights issues.
 While the Government does not encourage activities by
 international nongovernmental human rights organizations, it
 received and cooperated with an Amnesty International team
 which visited in March to investigate the 60-day detention law.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Swazi law and social traditions give rise to subtle forms of
 discrimination against nonethnic Swazis. For example,
 ambiguities in the citizenship law often make it more difficult
 
 
 398
 SWAZILAND
 for nonethnic Swazis to obtain travel documents and other
 privileges accorded more readily to ethnic Swazis.
 Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in Swazi
 society, and the dualistic nature of the legal system
 complicates the issue of women's rights. Because traditional
 marriage is governed by uncodified Swazi law and custom,
 women's rights are often unclear and change according to where
 and by whom they are interpreted (e.g., parents, village
 elders, police, government officials). In both traditional and
 civil marriages, wives are legally treated as minors, although
 many women who marry under civil law mistakenly believe that in
 doing so they will be accorded the legal status of adults.
 However, this is legally possible only if the parties to the
 marriage sign a prenuptial agreement providing such status.
 In practice, changing socioeconomic conditions and urbanization
 are breaking down these barriers to equality, and wives now
 routinely and successfully execite contracts and enter into a
 variety of transactions in their own names. However, they
 still often require their husbands' permission to borrow money,
 open a checking account, leave the country, and, in some cases,
 take a job. Divorce is discouraged by families, but is now
 common. In traditional marriages, children are considered to
 belong to the father and his family if the couple divorces. In
 cases in which children are born out of wedlock, which is
 common, they are considered to belong to the mother. In
 traditional marriages, a man may take more than one wife. A
 man who marries a woman under civil law legally may not have
 more than one wife, although in practice this restriction is
 sometimes ignored.
 Marriage is further complicated because couples often marry in
 both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems in
 determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to
 subsequent questions of child custody and inheritance in the
 event of its termination. This is a less common problem than
 in the past, however. The Swaziland Council of Churches opened
 a legal aid center in 1988 which provides free information on
 issues such as marriage and maintenance laws.
 Physical abuse of women, particularly wife beating, is common,
 despite traditional strictures against this practice. Women
 have the right to charge their husbands with assault under both
 the traditional and modern legal systems and frequently do so
 in extreme cases when the intervention of extended family
 members fails to end such violence. The traditional courts,
 however, can be unsympathetic to "unruly" or "disobedient"
 women. The modern courts are more likely to convict wife
 beaters, but sentences frequently amount to no more than
 several months in jail or a fine, or both.
 In the workplace, the Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers
 to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex, or
 political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal work.
 However, men's average wage rates by skill category are in some
 sectors three times those of women. The Swaziland Federation
 of Trade Unions' Special Women's Wing is focusing on the issues
 of wage discrimination and maternity benefits, as well as other
 sex-based discriminatory practices. In 1991 this organization
 continued to highlight the issue of sexual harassment of female
 employees by male employers, which is believed to be
 widespread. Legal protection from sexual harassment is
 addressed in the Swazi legal code; but its provisions are vague
 and largely ineffective in halting this type of discrimination.
 
 
 399
 SWAZILAND
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms the right of
 trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely. Persons
 in all sectors of the economy, including the public sector, are
 permitted to join unions. Unions are able to operate
 independently of government or political control, contingent
 upon their acting as economic, rather than political,
 organizations.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the
 framework of the IRA. The Act specifies a number of provisions
 whic: must be addressed in a constitution. These include
 provisions for election of officers by secret ballot, annual
 meetings open to all members, fees, grounds for suspension of
 members, and expenditure of union funds.' The union
 constitution must be approved by the Labor Commissioner, who
 can strike out or amend provisions which violate the law.
 Unions maynot be dissolved as long as they adhere to the
 regulations of the IRA. Unions which fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner may be dissolved, but
 this authority has never been exercised.
 For several years, including 1991, the International Labor
 Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has noted
 discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on freedom
 of association and ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize
 and bargain collectively, both ratified by Swaziland in 1978.
 The several concerns of the COE include the broad powers
 accorded government officials to control union activity and the
 strictures on the ability of workers to form unions and
 associate with other unions at home and abroad.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise,
 including what determines a legal or illegal strike. The Act
 empowers the Industrial Court to settle employment disputes and
 grievances and may enjoin a union-from striking. While
 historically strikes have been rare in Swaziland, and Swazi
 tradition is to avoid confrontation, consciousness of workers'
 rights is growing rapidly. When disputes arise, the Government
 often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a strike,
 which may not be legally called until all avenues of
 negotiation have been exhausted. The Labor Commissioner can
 then issue a 14-day postponement of a strike, which can be
 extended upon presentation of further documentation. There
 were a number of strikes or threatened strikes in 1991, all of
 which highlighted the growing consciousness of workers and the
 continued reluctance of some employers to accept organized
 labor unions. Disputes frequently centered on the issue of
 recognition of unions by management or more straightforward
 issues such as pay., In August a bitter pay dispute at a local
 commercial bank escalated into a 2-day nationwide shutdown of
 the banking system before being settled.
 The IRA requires approval by the Minister of Labor on union
 applications for international affiliations. The Swaziland
 Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU), the union umbrella
 organization, is a member of the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity. The SFTU also represents Swazi labor in the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 Southern Africa Trade Union Coordination Council.
 
 
 400
 SWAZILAND
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The IRA provides for the right to organize and bargain
 collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Employers
 are obliged to recognize a union when it achieves 40-percent
 membership among employees. Disputes in this area are referred
 to the Labor Commissioner and the Industrial Court, if
 necessary. The Court is limited by the law in several
 respects, however. It may not, for example, order
 reinstatement in cases of unfair dismissal and is limited in
 the compensation it can order in such cases to an amount
 equivalent to 6 months salary. Employers can prohibit
 employees from attending union meetings on company time if the
 union has not achieved the 40-percent membership level required
 for recognition. However, members of legally recognized unions
 must be allowed to attend union activities. Although many
 employers habitually resist recognition and force the issue
 into the Industrial Court, the-Court has generally ruled in
 favor of the unions on this issue.
 While collective bargaining does occur, it is not widespread.
 The Government issues directives on wage levels and thus
 restricts the bargaining process. The Industrial Court may
 refuse to register agreements in the event of nonobservance of
 these government directives. The COE has criticized this as a
 violation of ILO Convention 98.
 There are no export processing zones in, Swaziland.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is legally prohibited and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Employment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child
 below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except in
 cases where only family members are employed in the firm or in
 technical schools where children are working under the
 supervision of a teacher or other authorized person.
 Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be
 worked on schooldays and limits such work overall to 6 hours
 per day or 33 hours per week. Employment of children in the
 formal sector is not customary. However, it is widely believed
 that children are frequently employed below the minimum age in
 the agricultural sector, particularly in the country's eastern
 cotton growing region.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no overall minimum wage, but rather a sliding scale of
 minimum wages depending on the type of work. Most workers
 receive a minimum of 14 days' annual leave after each period of
 12 months of continuous service. These standards are upheld in
 the formal sector, and generally provide a worker and family
 with an adequate standard of living within the context of Swazi
 society.
 There is a labor/management/government-negotiated maximum
 48-hour workweek in the modern sector, enforced by the
 Commissioner of Labor, except for security guards, who work up
 to six 12-hour shifts per week. All workers are legally
 entitled to 1 day of rest per week under the Employment Act and
 the Wages Act.
 
 
 401
 SWAZILAND
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety in
 Swaziland. The Government sets safety standards for industrial
 operations and encourages private companies t9 develop accident
 prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production
 has necessitated more government action on safety issues. In
 1986 only 20 safety inspections by the Labor Commissioner's
 Office took place, none in manufacturing industries. In 1990
 there were 38 health and safety inspections (8 in manufacturing
 industries). This total is down sharply from 1989 because of
 staffing gaps in the Labor Commissioner's office. There were
 1,368 cases of occupational illnesses and accidents reported to
 the Ministry of Labor in 1990, of which 44 were fatal.
 Although these figures represent an increase over previous
 years, they are not out of proportion with the rapid growth in
 industrial employment.
 
 
 402
