 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is populated almost entirely by ethnic Swazis and
 governed as a modified traditional monarchy. The King rules
 in conjunction with the Queen Mother and is advised by
 traditional figures and the ministers of the Cabinet.
 Following King Sobhuza's death in 1982, there were disputes
 within the royal family which resulted in the replacement of
 the Prime Minister and the Queen Regent. The interregnum
 ended with the accession of Mswati III on April 25, 1986.
 Swaziland's Government features both "modern" and
 "traditional" branches--a cabinet, parliament, and courts
 which follow Western law, and a tribal hierarchy with
 "national" courts which follow Swazi law and custom. The
 Cabinet is appointed by and is responsible to the Monarch.
 The 1968 constitution containing a bill of rights was repealed
 by King Sobhuza II in 1973 on the grounds that it introduced
 political practices which were incompatible with the Swazi
 tradition of decisionmaking by consensus. Parliament reopened
 in 1979 with some members chosen through an indirect process,
 but the King remained vested with executive authority.
 National defense is provided by the Umbufto Swaziland Defense
 Force, consisting of fewer than 3,000 troops. The Royal Swazi
 Police is the primary internal security force. These forces
 are not able to cope with the spillover from the growing
 southern African regional conflict. Both African National
 Congress (ANC) militants and South African security forces
 created difficulties in 1986, the former attempting to use
 Swaziland as a base, the latter entering Swaziland to attack
 the ANC.
 Swaziland has an open market economy with large export firms
 that are frequently foreign owned. The Government encourages
 the growth of a modern, free economic sector which tends to
 reward initiative on a nondiscriminatory basis. Traditional,
 subsistence farming employs about 80 percent of the population.
 Human rights are generally respected in Swaziland. Although
 Swazi custom discourages public dissent against the
 Government, the crown's authority is limited by a complex
 system of traditional rights and responsibilities. The
 peaceful transfer of power represented by the King's
 accession, the.release of the last political prisoners at the
 end of 1985, and the scrupulously conducted trials of two
 previously powerful figures in 1986 were positive developments.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports or allegations of political killings by
 agents of the Government. However, there were several
 incidents perpetrated by South African forces entering
 Swaziland illegally in June and December and striking at
 alleged ANC targets. On December 12, raiders from South
 Africa entered the country in apparent pursuit of ANC
 elements. In the process, they seized one man (subsequently
 returned with informal apologies) and shot his teenaged son.
 They also seized four other people; one was reported killed in
 the operation, two (Swiss nationals) were returned to
 
 
 319
 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland, and one reportedly remains in South African
 custody. Such illegal entry by South African forces is beyond
 the ability of Swaziland's small security forces to control.
 b. Disappearance
 There was one report of a disappearance. On June 26, a rural
 police station holding an ANC activist, Sidney Msibi, was
 raided by a group reportedly coming from South Africa. Msibi
 was apparently taken into South Africa, and there has been no
 further report of him.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is, as a rule, not practiced in Swaziland. However,
 there were some reports of police threats and beatings in the
 handling of common criminals and suspects. Defendants often
 charge that confessions have been extorted by the police,
 especially in trials dealing with ritual murder. These
 charges by the defense are sometimes found to be substantiated
 by the judges. Caning is occasionally administered to youths
 involved in either petty or violent crimes. Prisons are often
 overcrowded and unsanitary with low nutritional standards for
 the prisoners, a condition which probably reflects the
 country's economic limitations rather than any intent to
 inflict punishment. Prisoners are allowed visits from family
 members, and the main prison includes facilities for teaching
 manual trades.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests in all but certain
 exceptional circumstances. These exceptions, however, are
 poorly defined and, in practice, police who have strong
 suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 The police are allowed to hold a person for a "reasonable
 time" without charge. In some cases, this has led to persons
 being detained without charge for up to several weeks. Such
 detainees are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their own
 choosing, though some attorneys have had difficulty gaining
 access. Provision for bail exists.
 A 1978 detention law permits the Government to detain any
 person without charge for renewable periods of 60 days; this
 law is not often invoked, but has been used to detain
 political prisoners without charge, most recently in 1985.
 Detention under this law is not subject to appeal to the"
 courts, though it may be appealed directly to the Monarch. In
 some instances, detainees have been held incommunicado under
 this law. There was no evidence of political detainees being
 deliberately held without charge in 1986.
 Forced labor does not exist in Swaziland.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 honored in practice, although the court president can order a
 trial to be held in camera in certain (e.g., rape) cases. The
 Prime Minister can also require that a trial be held in
 private, but this is very rare and has not been done for
 several years. The modern judiciary consists of a Court of
 Appeals, a High Court, and various subordinate magistrates'
 
 
 320
 SWAZILAND
 courts and is independent of executive and military control.
 Many members of the judiciary are not Swazis but are appointed
 from the bars of other countries with compatible legal
 systems. The Chief Justice, for example, is currently an
 Englishman. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is entitled
 to counsel at his own expense. Court-appointed counsel is
 provided in capital cases or where difficult points of law are
 at issue. There are well defined appeal procedures up to the
 Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 The right of appeal, which normally applies in criminal/civil
 cases, is not guaranteed to persons held under the 1978
 detention law or to those persons charged with sedition.
 Although legislation passed in 1983 would allow sedition cases
 to be held in camera, no one has yet been tried under that
 measure. Since the release of five prisoners in December
 1985, there have been no political prisoners in Swaziland.
 In traditional courts, where ethnic Swazis may be brought'for
 relatively minor offenses and violations of Swazi traditional
 laws or customs, legal counsel is not allowed, but defendants
 may speak in their own behalf. Swazi traditional law has not
 been formally codified. Both offenses and punishments are
 limited, and findings are subject to a review system and
 appeal to the High Court and Court of Appeals. Accused
 persons who desire counsel can insist that their case be
 transferred from the traditional courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Swazi custom places a high value on home and family. In
 general, Swazi law requires a warrant issued by a magistrate
 before police may search homes or other premises. However,
 senior police officers are permitted to search for evidence
 without a warrant if the suspected crime is of a serious
 nature. This exception is frequently used. There is no
 evidence that the Government censors correspondence or commits
 other violations of the sanctity of the home. Nor are there
 efforts by the State to intrude into the private beliefs of
 the individual.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. The Prime Minister and other
 officials have repeatedly directed that Swazis critical of the
 Government express their views only to their chiefs for
 discussion in traditional Swazi councils. Academic freedom
 does not extend to permitting direct attacks on government
 figures or policy. Antigovernment demonstrations or leaflets
 are regarded as seditious. Swazi radio and television
 stations are government controlled, and there is also a
 semiofficial newspaper. Private companies publish several
 newspapers and magazines. The media, both government-
 controlled and private, practice self-censorship, refraining
 from critical comment on government activities or on
 controversial issues involving the royal family. On several
 occasions in 1986, editors were directly cautioned by
 officials to avoid certain subjects. The Government has
 occasionally proscribed publications, including foreign
 publications, deemed to be prejudicial to the interests of
 defense, public safety, or public health. Two major South
 
 
 321
 SWAZILAND
 African publications, banned in 1985 from Swaziland because of
 critical articles on Swazi domestic politics, remain excluded.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973, prohibits meetings
 of a political nature and processions or demonstrations in any
 public place without the consent, sometimes withheld, of the
 Commissioner of Police. In practice, however, no permit is
 required for most gatherings. Except for the prohibition of
 certain antigovernment activity, freedom of association is
 generally permitted. Trade associations and professional
 bodies exist in Swaziland and maintain relations with
 recognized international bodies in their fields.
 The Industrial Relations Act (IDA) of 1980 reaffirms the right
 of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely. It
 also provides for an Industrial Court for the settlement of
 disputes arising from employment. A High Court judge presides
 over the Court. The Industrial Court is empowered to hear and
 determine trade disputes and grievances, to register
 collective agreements, to hear and determine matters relating
 to collective agreements, and to enjoin any organization from
 striking or continuing to strike.
 Strikes are rare in Swaziland and are generally considered to
 be "unSwazi" by the Government and most of the population.
 The Government generally intervenes beforehand to reduce the
 likelihood of a strike, which cannot be legally called until
 all avenues of negotiation have been exhausted. The Labor
 Commission can then issue a 14-day postponement which can be
 extended when additional documentation is presented. Where
 the national interest or welfare is concerned, the Minister of
 Labor can forbid a strike or can refer the dispute to the
 Industrial Court.
 Trade unions have widened the scope of their activities since
 1981 but, since most Swazis are subsistence farmers, they play
 a small role in the economy and have little political
 influence. They are able, within limits, to operate
 independently of government or political control. One notable
 exception occurred in January 1986, when the Government
 refused to allow an international congress of trade unionists
 scheduled to meet in Swaziland to take place, reportedly
 because invitations were sent out to international
 representatives without first obtaining clearance from the
 Government. The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions, the
 union umbrella organization, participates in the International
 Labor Organization and is a member of the Organization for
 African Trade Union Unity.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious
 beliefs, informally considers itself to be a Christian
 country, and permits a wide variety of foreign missionary
 activity. Organized religions are free to establish places of
 worship and train clergy. No licenses are required for such
 organizations or in order to publish religious texts, nor are
 there any bars to religious travel outside the country. At
 the same time, the authorities promote the observance of Swazi
 customs, where adherents reap an advantage in public life.
 When these customs conflict with religious beliefs, there are
 occasional difficulties. In the past, for example, the
 
 
 322
 SWAZILAND
 Government has objected that pastoral letters criticizing
 social injustice constituted political interference. However,
 no such instances occurred in 1986.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. Those who
 have left the country may freely return, and citizenship is
 not revoked for political reasons. Swazis generally can
 obtain a travel document to travel to some states in southern
 Africa, but the Government occasionally refuses to issue a
 passport if the applicant does not appear to have adequate
 means of support while abroad. Citizenship for nonethnic
 Swazis can be difficult to establish, creating problems in
 obtaining passports and other civil documents. Swaziland is a
 signatory to the U.N. Protocol Relating to the Status of
 Refugees, and treats displaced persons from neighboring
 countries well. By far the largest number of refugees is the
 7,000 primarily ethnic Swazis from South Africa who fled Zulu
 administration in the black South African homeland of Kwazulu.
 In recent years, a large number of Mozambicans have entered
 Swaziland illegally to escape the drought and the escalating
 civil conflict in Mozambique and to seek employment. By the
 end of 1986, Swaziland had granted first asylum to 5,500
 Mozambican refugees. In most cases, Swaziland permits the
 UNHCR to interview the asylum-seeker first and grants asylum
 if the person can argue convincingly that he or she will face
 persecution if repatriated. In some cases, apprehended
 illegal Mozambicans are deported. Refugees who leave
 Swaziland on U.N. travel documents (e.g. for study abroad) are
 sometimes not allowed to return.
 As in previous years, in 1986 Swazi police arrested a number
 of non-Swazi ANC activists. They were turned over to the
 local UNHCR representative for transfer to neighboring
 countries (primarily Tanzania) willing to receive them.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Swaziland is ruled by the King-in-Council. This means that
 ultimate decisions concerning matters such as political
 policy, the appointment of ministers, or issuance of decrees
 are made by the Monarch after obtaining the advice of senior
 members of the royal family, the senior chiefs, the Cabinet,
 and members of Parliament. This consultation takes place in
 private, and public debate of political matters under
 consideration by the Monarch is rare. Legislation is passed
 by the Parliament and is then submitted to the Monarch for
 assent--which may be withheld. While political power is not
 confined to the royal family, it is concentrated there. This
 system is essentially a version of the traditional Swazi form
 of government as modified during the long reign of King
 Sobhuza II. It provides for extensive consultation and
 depends on slow consensus building. The system does not
 exclude white or mixed-race Swazis, but it does place a
 premium on ethnic-Swazi descent and especially on royal or
 other traditionally prized connections. The second most
 powerful person in the kingdom is traditionally the Queen
 Mother, and other women play prominent roles as well.
 
 
 323
 SWAZILAND
 Political parties are outlawed, and an organized political
 opposition to the Government in the sense of a multiparty
 system does not exist. Members of Parliament (50 in the House
 of Assembly and 20 in the Senate) are chosen in an intricate
 manner involving the interactions of 40 regional councils, 80
 electors, and the Monarch's appointive powers. The Parliament
 has served occasionally as a forum for examination and
 criticism of government policies, but matters are seldom
 pressed to a vote and, when they are, unanimity is usually the
 result. One of the ministers is a nonethnic Swazi, as are a
 number of members of Parliament. Several women are also
 members of Parliament. The Crown does not descend by
 primogeniture. After the death of the King, the heir to the
 throne is chosen from among the King's surviving sons by
 senior members of the royal family.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Swaziland does not play a prominent role in international
 human rights matters. There is no public indication that the
 Government was queried in 1986 by representatives of human
 rights groups concerning its human rights practices. However,
 in 1985 Amnesty International made several appeals to the
 Government for the release of five prominent political
 detainees, all of whom were eventually released on December
 31, 1985. There are no organizations based within the country
 whose purpose is primarily to observe, report, or contest
 human rights violations, but the bishops of the Anglican and
 Roman Catholic churches circulated a joint pastoral letter in
 1985 which discussed human rights violations, including the
 case of the five political detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Unique Swazi governmental and social traditions unavoidably
 create differences between ethnic and nonethnic Swazis. For
 example, ethnic Swazis from South Africa seeking political
 refuge in Swaziland are treated very much like Swazi citizens
 and are promptly given work permits. Those who are not ethnic
 Swazis are treated more as foreigners and permits for others
 are given more reluctantly. Nevertheless, the Kingdom makes a
 special effort to welcome the full participation of nonethnic
 Swazis in its life. A significant expatriate community
 exists, especially concentrated in the business and missionary
 areas. The population's needs and aspirations are met on a
 generally nondiscriminatory basis.
 Traditional values are a major influence on the role of women
 in Swazi society. Since men are away from their homesteads
 much of the time, women perform most agricultural tasks and
 have responsibility for virtually all child rearing and
 domestic chores. However, they are not given authority to
 make family decisions, and, in some cases, are not legally
 equal to men. A married woman, unless her position has been
 defined by a prenuptial agreement, is virtually a minor under
 the law. She is not responsible for contracts she signs, and
 she cannot hold real estate or inherited property in her own
 name. She must normally obtain her husband's permission to
 borrow money, to leave the country, and, in some cases, to
 take a job. A woman divorced in a traditional court has no
 
 
 324
 SWAZILAND
 right to the legal custody of her children, although she may
 have to care for them with no support from their father. In
 the modern or statutory courts, the presumption of custody is
 in the woman's favor and maintenance is provided.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate
 among employees based on race, religion, sex, marital status,
 or political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal
 work. Even so, around 75 percent of all wage-paying jobs are
 held by men and their average wage rate by skill category is
 higher than for women. However, women have equal access to
 schools and constitute around half the student body in nearly
 all institutions. There has -been a significant increase in
 the number of women who are lawyers, medical doctors, and
 members of in other professions.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 There is extensive legislation, notably in the Employment Act
 of 1980, protecting worker health and safety in Swaziland,
 with child labor receiving special attention. The workweek in
 the modern sector is 48 hours per week. There is no minimum
 wage. The following are examples of minimum wages currently
 in effect for certain job sectors based on the presumption of
 a 48 hour work week: casual labor, $0.20 per hour; cementer,
 $0.32 per hour: store clerk, $0.39 per hour; machine operator,
 $0.42 per hour; laboratory technician, $1.42 per hour. The
 Employment Act contains provisions covering the employment of
 children, maternity leave, and domestic employees. No one may
 employ a child below the age of 15 in an industrial
 undertaking, except in cases where only family members are
 employed in the firm, or in technical schools where children
 are working under the supervision of a teacher or other
 authorized person. Legislation limits the number of night
 hours which can be worked on school days and limits such work
 overall to 6 hours per day or 33 hours per week. However,
 such provisions may be difficult to enforce due to the small
 size of the enforcement staff.
 
 
 325
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWAZILANO
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          7.6     10.4     11.7
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................      7.6     10.4     11.7
 A.AIO ...... ..............     5.8      3.7     10.6
 LOANS ..............        0.3       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................ .  5.5      8.7     10.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...         0.0       0.5      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.2       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   .0.2       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-T3TAL ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.2       0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV 3 WFP.         0.2       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..          1.6      1.7      1.1
 LOANS ..............0.3               0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.6       1.7      1.1
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.6       1.7      1.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............0......0         0.0      0.0
 1I.14L. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.1      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.1             0.1      0.0
 A.9AP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       3.0      0.0
 C.INTL NIL.EO.TRNG....          0.1      0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ZII.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,..          7.7     10.5     11.7
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    7.7      10.5     11.7
 OTHER US LOANS 0..........        00       0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.3       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986      946-86
 TOTAL ........    16.2      18.2      5.1    181.6
 IBRD               5.6      8.6       0.0     79.8
 IF:                0.0       4.1      5.1     17.6
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      7.8
 105                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                9.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              10.0       5.3      0.0     42.9
 UN)P               0.0       0.2      0.0     11.9
 OT4ER-UN           0.6       0.0      0.0      2.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0     19.0
 
 
 326
