 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed by a hereditary monarch.
 His authority is not circumscribed by constitutional
 guarantees of human rights. However, it is limited
 by a complex system of traditional rights and
 responsibilities which requires that it be exercised
 in accordance with Swazi custom and with the tacit
 consent of the people. Despite the lack of written
 legal safeguards, there has been no systematic
 disregard for the rights of the person under this
 system.   While the people of Swaziland have only
 limited opportunities for organized political
 dissent, they are not subject to oppression, abuse
 or exploitation.
 In 1973 King Sobhuza II decreed the repeal of the
 western-style constitution which had entered into
 force on the country's independence in 1968. He
 announced that he had assumed supreme power and
 would henceforth exercise all legislative, executive
 and judicial authority in collaboration with a
 council of advisors constituted by the government
 of the day. He appointed a royal commission to look
 into a new constitution which would harmonize
 modern legal principles with Swaziland's traditional
 way of life. In October 1978, indirect elections
 were held to re-establish-Parliament as the first
 step toward return to constitutional rule on this
 new basis.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is forbidden by law in Swaziland, and
 there have been no allegations that it is countenanced
 in practice.
 
 (173)
 
 
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no evidence that persons in Swaziland,
 including political detainees, have been subjected
 to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 Former political detainees recently released and
 now living abroad who have challenged the legal
 basis for their detention have stated that their
 treatment in detention was quite humane.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Swazi law permits the Government to detain any
 person for sixty days without bringing charges.
 With the King's consent, the detention may be
 extended for further periods of sixty days.
 Detention is not subject to appeal to the courts,
 although it may be appealed directly to the King.
 In 1978 this law was modified to require the
 Government to obtain authorization at the highest
 levels before ordering detention and to make public
 the fact of any person's detention under these
 provisions. However, some~detentions have not been
 officially acknowledged as prescribed under the new
 law. Of the at least four persons known to have
 been in detention when the 1977 report was published,
 one has escaped, two have been released and one
 remains in detention.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary in Swaziland is independent and
 respected. Persons charged with specific violations
 of law receive a fair, public trial. A dual system
 of courts with rights of appeal has been used with
 flexibility and humaneness to assure recourse to
 either modern Roman-Dutch law or traditional Swazi
 law as appropriate in individual circumstances.
 However, persons detained under the provisions of
 emergency security legislation receive no trial.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Allegations of invasion of the home are infrequent
 
 
 175
 in Swaziland. Swazi law requires a warrant for the
 search of a home except when the purpose of the search
 would be defeated by delay in obtaining the warrant.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 According to preliminary indications, Swaziland's
 new five-year plan provides for continuation of an
 economic development strategy based on industrial-
 ization. In past years, this emphasis has led to
 rapid growth in the modern sector, which was not
 matched by equivalent progress in the rural
 subsistence sector. This is reflected in the
 disparity between a per capita income of nearly
 $500 a year for the population as a whole and a
 per capita income of less than $150 a year for the
 seventy percent of the population engaged in
 subsistence farming. However, the incomes of small
 farmers should increase as the Government's
 integrated Rural Development Program is extended
 into cash crops and is reinforced by effective
 agricultural marketing arrangements. Funds
 allocated in 1978 to ministries concerned with
 basic human needs increased over the previous
 year, but declined as a percentage of the total
 budget because of major capital expenditures,
 including establishment of a new airline, a
 shipping line and other improvements to the
 country's transportation system. Corruption has
 not affected the implementation of United States
 assistance programs in Swaziland; the Government
 has moved quietly against corruption where it has
 - been uncovered. The tax system is progressive,
 with the burden falling primarily on the small
 modern sector; there is no sales tax and the
 traditional subsistence sector is largely untaxed.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 There have been no allegations of infringement of
 
 
 Swazi citizens' freedom of thought or religion.
 Freedom of speech, including critical comment, is
 permitted in traditional Swazi councils but not in
 organized political parties. Neither the local
 nor the international press, which circulates
 freely in Swaziland, is subject to governmental
 control. As for freedom of assembly, the King's
 proclamation of April 12, 1973 provides that no
 meetings of a political nature and no processions
 or demonstrations shall be held in any public
 place except with the prior written consent -- not
 always granted -- of the Commissioner of Police.
 Employees are allowed to organize for economic
 betterment; however, only a relatively small
 number belong to the country's few active unions,
 which are forbidden to engage in political activity.
 Women have access to education at all levels and
 occupy some mid-level posts in government service
 in addition to providing the vast majority of the
 country's teachers and nurses. Swaziland does not
 suffer from racial or ethnic discrimination; it is
 nearly homogeneous, with only a small minority of
 other African ethnic groups and Europeans. These
 minorities and urbanized Swazis sometimes claim
 that the traditional Tinkhundla system of rural
 councils does not provide them full access to
 political participation. However, Swazi government
 policy supports a non-racial society, and the
 white minority participates freely in the economic
 life of the Kingdom.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restrictions on movement within
 Swaziland. There are no laws prohibiting foreign
 travel or emigation. However, Swazi citizens have
 no guaranteed right to a passport and cannot
 always obtain the documents required for foreign
 travel and return.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In the absence of political parties, which were
 banned in the King's proclamation of 1973, citizens'
 views are conveyed to higher authorities by Swazis
 
 
 individually or through the traditional village
 and regional councils of the system. This system
 appears to enjoy broad support among the tradition-
 oriented rural majority although it has been
 criticized by some urban dwellers. With the
 completion in 1979 of the process begun by indirect
 elections for a legislature in October 1978, Swazi
 citizens will be represented in a legislative body
 carefully balanced among geographical areas and
 empowered to convey their views directly to the
 King. Plans for increasingly direct participation
 by citizens in political decision making have been
 announced, but no return to unrestricted activity
 by partisan political parties is contemplated.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government of Swaziland has not restricted
 independent investigation of the human rights
 situation in its country. No such investigation
 has been sought or undertaken in recent years.
 
 
