 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive legisla-
 tive, and (with some limitations) judicial powers ultimately vested in the K~ing. Ad-
 vised by traditional figures and Cabinet ministers, the King rules according t un-
 written Swazi law and custom and through a modern structure of published laws
 and decrees implementing agencies, and an independent judiciary. The King ap-
 oints the Cabinet from among members of Parliament. Direct elections for the
 House of Assembly (the lower house of Parliament) were held in October under new
 procedures recommended by a special commission following extensive public hear-
 ings throughout the country.
 Civilian authorities control both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the
 Royal Swaziland Police. On approximately 50 occasions during the year, criminal
 suspects made credible accusations that police had used excessive force to obtain
 evidence or a confession.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture, though a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector accounts for the largest component of the formal
 economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, composed primarily of
 large firms with predominantly foreign ownership.
 Significant progress toward reform included the holding of parliamentary elec-
 tions and the announcement of the Government's intention formally to repeal the
 60-day detention decree that permitted detentions without charges (the decree was
 not used in 1993). While no international observers were invited, the procedures for
 nominations and elections for Swaziland's first elected parliament in 20 years were
 generally considered to be open, fair, and free of unwarranted influence. The reg-
 istration and voter education procedures, although imperfect, were reasonably suc-
 cessful. However, restrictions on political activity and the ban on political parties
 remained in force. Legal and cultural discrimination and physical violence against
 women continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no allegations of such
 killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Approximately 50 persons alleged that they were abused or tortured while in police
 custody in 1993. In most of these cases, the police mistreated arrestees in attempts
 to force confessions or obtain evidence in criminal cases.
 The report on the 1990 beating by members of the Swazi military of a group of
 University of Swaziland students was completed but by year's end had not been
 made public. No criminal charges were brought against the perpetrators.
 Convicted youth offenders can be sentenced to whipping by cane. In 1993 this sen-
 tence was imposed less frequently than in the recent past.
 
 
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Swazi law requires warrants for arrests
 in most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect will flee.
 Those arrested are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their choice and are to be
 charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable time, usually 48 hours or,
 in remote areas, as soon as the 4udicial officer appears. Provision for bail exists ex-
 cept for persons charged with crames appearing in the Non-Bailable Offenses Order
 of 1993. The Order, which became effective on August 24, identifies nine offenses
 ranging from murder to inciting to riot for which a defendant cannot be granted
 bail. Proponents of the legislation believe it will improve the administration of jus-
 tice by guaranteeing that a defendant appears for hearings and trial and that the
 law also protects the defendant from vigilante groups who oppose bail. Opponents
 of the legislation believe the order denies due process to defendants and encroaches
 on the discretion and independence of the courts.
 The Government on September 27 announced its intention to repeal the 1973 de-
 cree permitting the detention of any person without charge or trial for renewable
 periods of 60 days. The 60-day detention decree was not used in 1993.
 Exile was not used as a means of political control during the year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.--Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one
 independent and based on Western law, the other based on a system of national
 courts which follows Swazi law and custom. In treason and sedition cases, the King
 can circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special tribunal, which may
 adopt rules and procedures different from those applied in the High Court. This
 power was last used in 1987.
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, (composed entirely of
 South African judges), the High Court, and magistrates courts, which are independ-
 ent of executive and military control and free from intimidation by outside forces.
 The High Court has general jurisdiction over relatively serious civil and criminal
 cases. The magistrates' courts have jurisdiction over criminal cases punishable by
 not more than 2 years' imprisonment or a fine of not more than $130. In mag-
 istrates' courts, the defendant is entitled to counsel at his or her own expense.
 Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital cases or when difficult points of law
 are at issue. There are well-defined appeal procedures up to the Court of Appeals,
 the highest judicial body. Some members of the regular judiciary are appointed from
 the bars of other countries with compatible legal systems.
 In traditional courts, to which ethnic Swazis may be brought for relatively minor
 offenses and violations of traditional Swazi law and custom, formal legal counsel is
 not allowed. Defendants may speak on their own behalf and may be assisted by in-
 formal advisors. Sentences are subject to review and to appeal to the High Court
 and the Court of Appeals. Accused persons are guaranteed the right to have their
 cases transferred from the traditional courts. By law, the public prosecutor has the
 authority to determine which court should hear a case but in practice the police
 usually make the determination. Inadequate staffing of the High Court led to delays
 in the processing of some cases in 1993. A short work stoppag by the magistrates,
 who were unhappy with the appointment of a special ju dicia commission exacer-
 bated judicial deays and backlogs and contributed to public discontent witi the ju-
 dicial system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 generally requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or
 other premises. However, police officers with the rank of subinspector or higher
 have the right to search without a warrant if they believe evidence might be ost
 through delay in obtaining a warrant. The evidence obtained from searches con-
 ducted without warrants has been successfully challenged in court.
 No evidence has been produced that the Government systematically monitors pri-
 vate correspondence or conversations. Opponents of the Government who complain
 of unlawful searches and seizures have not sought judicial relief from these activi-
 ties.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There was some easing of restraints on freedom
 of speech, especially in political matters, in 1993 but significant restrictions re-
 mained. In dealing with the sensitive issues of the immediate royal family and na-
 tional security policy, the media, both government-controlled and private, tend to
 practice self-censorship. Reflecting the easing of some restraints, the two daily
 newspapers and the government-controlled television station continued to expand
 the range of sensitive topics, such as the parliamentary elections, that they were
 willing to address and to develop their role as forums for the expression of popular
 opinion.
 
 
 Swaziland's only privately owned paper also became a more energetic advocate of
 governmental accountability and democracy, challenging the Government when it
 believed the Government had not lived up to appropriate standards. The govern-
 ment-owned radio station exhibited less freedom than did the other media. Private
 companies and church groups publish several newsletters and magazines. One
 church group owns and operates a radio station that broadcasts throughout the re-
 gion.
 Although no formal constraints on academic freedom exist, the prohibition on po-
 litical gatherings, the hiistorical intolerance of dissent, and concern over possible re-
 prisals have created an environment in which self-censorship is the norm.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law does not protect this
 freedom. Swazis have several traditional forums through which they can express
 discontent, including direct dialog with their chiefs, community meetings, and na-
 tional councils, in which all Swazis are permitted to participate. Many Swazis, how-
 ever, view these forums as ineffective means for expressing th.ir political views.
 King Sobhuza's 1973 decree prohibits political parties and meetings o a political na-
 ture and demonstrations in any public place without the consent of the Commis-
 sioner of Police. Permission to hold meetings was not generally granted in 1993, but
 political organizations often met without the required permission, with no legal con-
 sequences. On several occasions the authorities permitted leaders of the illegal polit-
 ical parties, including the People's United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO) and
 the Swaziland National Front (SWANAFRO), to speak out publicly at rallies and
 meetings, and the activities of these leaders were frequently reported in the mass
 media. However in several instances political activitists were arrested and charged
 with political ofienses for organizing political meetings without police permission for
 holding illegal demonstrations. In one incident, 62 PUDEMO supporters were ar-
 rested after attempting to attend a rally; the 62 were convicted an given suspended
 sentences of 3 months in jail on the condition they avoid similar offenses within the
 next 3 years. They have appealed the convictions and sentences. Following those ar-
 rests, few individuals dared to attend political meetings.
 Except for the ban on political parties, there are no formal legal barriers to free-
 dom of association. Trade associations, professional bodies, academic organizations,
 and rights advocacy groups exist and maintain relations with recognized inter-
 national bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Swaziland is hospitable to all religious believers. Orga-
 nized religions are free to establish places of worship and train clergy, to publsh
 religious texts, and to undertake religious travel outside the country. Proselytizing
 is legal, and no religious group is banned.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Swazis may travel and work freely wit in the country. However, for
 travel abroad, under traditional law a married woman requires her husband's per-
 mission to apply for a passport. A citizenship law passed in November 1992 removed
 many ambiguities relating to Swazi citizenship and enabled nonethnic Swazis to ob-
 tain passports and citizenship documents. Bureaucratic delays, however, plagued in-
 dividuals seeking these documents during the year. The new law enabled those
 wishing to register for the elections to do so with little problem.
 No formal barriers prevent the return of dissidents, although few have chosen to
 return to Swaziland to resume residence. Some did return for short visits in 1993
 and were not subject to harassment by the authorities.
 Swaziland's treatment of refugees is considered to be good by the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as by the various nongovern-
 mental organizations involved in the care of these groups. Most refugees are from
 Mozambique. Only about 24,000 of these are registered and receiving assistance,
 while another estimated 35,000 to 40,000 have settled spontaneously along the bor-
 der regions and in towns. The other significant refugee group is made up of about
 7,000 ethnic Swazis from the KwaZulu'%omeland" in South Africa.
 Approximately 160 people from countries such as Zaire, Ethiopia, Angola, and So-
 malia sought refuge in Swaziland during the first 8 months of 1993. (Arrivals from
 South Africa have stopped.) Swaziland permits these people to remain in the coun-
 try until their petitions can be heard by the Political Asylum Committee. This Com-
 mittee is made up of government andU.N. officials. The UNHCR's opinion about
 the merits of a person's claim to well-founded fear of persecution or physical danger
 if repatriated is a major factor in the Committee's decisionmaking process. There
 are no current disputes between Swazi and UNHCR authorities regarding claims to
 refugee status. Illegal aliens who cannot establish refugee status are usually de-
 ported.
 In August Swaziland, Mozambique, and the UNHCR signed an agreement govern-
 ing the voluntary repatriation of Mozambican refugees. While some spontaneous re-
 
 
 turn had already occurred, the controlled, organized repatriation effort began in Oc-
 tober. Although local sentiment favors as rapid a return of Mozambican refugees as
 possible, Swazi officials accept that the repatriation must be voluntary and at a pace
 that can be managed on the other side of the border.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1993 Swazi citizens exercised the right to change their government through a
 direct vote for the first time in 20 years, but a ban on political parties and restric-
 tions on political gatherings precluded the holding of truly democratic elections. The
 Government limited candidates' election campaigning to single, short sessions with
 groups of voters. Of the 65 members of the House of Assembly, 55 were directly
 elected by the people in a secret ballot vote; the remaining 10 were appointed by
 the King. Parliament includes also a Senate with 30 members, 20 of whom are ap-
 pointed by the King and 10 of whom are elected by the House of Assembly. Despite
 the ban on political parties, PUDEMO, SWANAFRO, and other parties used public
 meetings and the media to publicize their views.
 Although Swazi law calls for the House of Assembly to make law with the King,
 the previous House of Assembly used this power in only a limited fashion. The King
 retains ultimate legislative and executive power. After dissolving the House of As-
 sembly in October 1992 in preparation for elections, the King ruled the country "in
 council" with his Cabinet soliciting advice from the royal family, senior chiefs, and
 other interested parties. Legislation was promulgated by the Cabinet and submitted
 to the Monarch or assent. The King can legislate by decree, as well. The new House
 of Assembly is due to meet for the first time in early 1994.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While the Government does not encourage activities by domestic or international
 human rights organizations, local organizations exist. The most prominent, the
 Human Rights Association of Swaziland (HUMARAS), spoke out on human rights
 issues and worked as a mediator in land and labor disputes.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in Swazi society,
 and the dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights.
 Because traditional marriage is governed by uncodified Swazi law and custom, wom-
 en's rights are often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are
 interpreted. In both traditional and civil marriages, wives are legally treated as mi-
 nors, although those who marry under civil law may be accorded the legal status
 of adults, if stipulated in a signed prenuptial agreement.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions and urbanization, as well as the increasing
 rominence of women leaders in government and civic organizations, are slowly
 breaking down barriers to equality. Married women now routinely and successfully
 execute contracts and enter into a variety of transactions in their own names. How-
 ever, the husband's permission is still generally required for a woman to borrow
 money, open a bank account, leave the country, or, in some cases, take a job. Di-
 vorce is discouraged by families but is no longer uncommon. In traditional mar-
 riages, children are considered to belong to the father and to his family if the couple
 divorces. Children born out of wedlock are considered to belong to the mother. In
 traditional marriages, a man may take more than one wife. A man who marries a
 woman under civillaw may not have more than one wife, although in practice this
 restriction is sometimes ignored.
 Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems
 in determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent ques-
 tions of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death.
 Physical abuse of women, particularly wife beating, is common, despite traditional
 strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their husbands
 with assault under both the traditional and modern legal systems and frequently
 do so. The traditional courts, however, can be unsympathetic to "unruly" or "disobe-
 dient" women and are less likely than the modern courts to convict men for wife
 beating. Still, even in the modern courts, sentences frequently amount to no more
 than several months in jail or a fine, or both.
 Nongovernmental organizations provide support to groups affected by discrimina-
 tion or abuse. The Swaziland Council of Churches Legal Aid Center provides free
 information on issues such as marriage and maintenance laws. The Swaziland Ac-
 tion Group Against Abuse has establshed relations with other civic organizations
 
 
 290
 as well as the Government to provide forums to discuss spousal and child abuse and
 to educate the public on the rights of abuse victims.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of
 race, religion, sex, or political affiliation and requires equal pay for equal work.
 However, men's average wage rates by skill category often exceed those of women.
 L.sgal protection from sexual harassment is addressed in the Swazi Legal Code, but
 its provisions are vague and largely ineffective in halting this type of discrimination.
 Children.-The Government has created a task force to educate the public on the
 rights of children. A number of Swazi laws deal with the rights and welfare of chil-
 dren, including the Age of Majority Act, the Employment Act, the Child Care Serv-
 ice Order and the Maintenance Act. A study of legislation concerning children was
 conducted during 1993 to bring the legislation in conformance with the U.N. Con-
 vention on the Rights of the Child. The Association of Child Welfare, a Swazi non-
 governmental organization, was very active in 1993 promoting the rights and wel-
 fare of children.
 People with Disabilities.-The Ministry of Home Affairs has called for equal treat-
 ment of the disabled, but no legislation prohibits discrimination against them. The
 Government has not legislated or mandated physical accessibility to public buildings
 for the handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms
 the right of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely. Persons in all sec-
 tors of the economy, including the public sector, are permitted to join unions. Unions
 operate independently of government or political control, provided they act as eco-
 nomic, rather than political, organizations. Unions are free to draw up their own
 constitutions within the framework of the IRA. The Act specifies a number of provi-
 sions which must be addressed in a constitution. These include the election of offi-
 cers by secret ballot, annual meetings open to all members, fees, grounds for sus-
 p ension of members, and expenditure of union funds. The union constitution must
 e approved by the Labor Commissioner, who can strike out or amend provisions
 which violate the law. Unions may not be dissolved as long as they adhere to the
 regulations of the IRA. Unions that fail to maintain proper registration with the
 Labor Commissioner may be dissolved without recourse to judicial review, but this
 authority has never been exercised.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has
 noted discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on freedom of associa-
 tion and ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively, both
 ratified by Swaziland in 1978. The concerns of the COE include the powers accorded
 government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the ability of
 workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad. The
 Government, however, does not prohibit Swazi unions from having international af-
 filiations. The COE again in 1993 criticized IRA provisions, including the prohibi-
 tion on federations from carrying out political activities and the prohibition of the
 right to strike in the postal, radio, and teaching sectors. In late 1992, the World
 Confederation of Organizations of the Teaching Profession asked the ILO to inter-
 vene with the Swazi authorities in order to obtain the repeal of the IRA provision
 which classifies teaching as an essential service.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegal strike. The Act en:powers the Industrial Court to settle
 employment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. Conscious-
 ness of workers' rights is growing rpidly. When disputes arise, the Government
 often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a strike, which may not be legally
 called until all avenues of negotiation have been exhausted. The Labor Commis-
 sioner may then issue a 14-day postponement, which may be extended upon presen-
 tation of further documentation. Several strikes occurred during 1993, centered on
 the issue of pay. Strikes by the University of Swaziland Worker's Union, the Swazi-
 land Commercial and Allied Workers Union, the Swaziland Hotel and Catering Al-
 lied Workers Union, and the Swaziland Union of Financial and Allied Workers oc-
 curred in 1993 with modest wage and benefit increases being obtained by the
 unions.
 Several unions, dissatisfied with the leadership and role of the Swaziland Federa-
 tion of Trade Unions (SFTU), broke away from the SFTU in 1993 to form the Swazi-
 land Federation of Labor, which has yet to be recognized by the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Em-
 ployers are obliged to recognize a union when it achieves a 40-percent membership
 among employees.
 
 
 291
 Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Industrial Court, if nec-
 essary. The Court is limited by law with respect to granting relief in the case of
 unfair dismissal. It may not order reinstatement, and compensation only to the ex-
 tent of 6 months' salary may be awarded. Members of legally recognized unions
 must be allowed to attend union activities on company time.
 Although many employers resist recognition and force the issue to the Industrial
 Court, the Court has generally ruled in favor of the unions on recognition.
 While collective bargaining occurs, it is not widespread. Government directives on
 wage levels do not impede collective bargaining. The Industrial Court may refuse
 to register an agreement if it does not observe government directives on wage levels.
 The COE has criticized this as a violation of ILO Convention 98.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is legally prohibited
 and is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment Act of 1980 pro-
 hibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except
 in cases in which only family members are employed in the firm, or in technical
 schools in which children are working under the supervision of a teacher or other
 authorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be
 worked on schooldays and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per day or 33
 per week. Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary. However,
 children below the minimum age are frequently employed in the agricultural sector,
 Karticularly in the country's eastern cotton-growing region. The Ministry of Labor
 as enforcement responsibility, but its effectiveness is limited by personnel short-
 ages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Swaziland has a legally mandated sliding scale
 of minimum wages, depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 provide a worker and family with an adequate standard of living within the context
 of Swazi society. Most workera receive a minimum of 14 days annual leave. The
 Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector. The minimum monthly
 wage for a domestic employee is approximately $50, for an unskilled worker about
 $60 and for a skilled worker approximately $110.
 There is a labor/management/government-negotiated maximum 48-hour workweek
 in the modern sector, except for security guards, who work up to six 12-hour shifts
 per week. All workers are entitled to 1 day of rest per week under the Employment
 Ict and the Wages Act. Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety, and
 workers have the legal right to remove themselves from a dangerous work situation
 without jeopardy to continued employment. The Government sets safety standards
 for industrial operations and encourages private companies to develop accident pre-
 vention programs. Recent growth in industrial production has required more govern-
 ment action on safety issues. Few safety inspections by the Labor Commissioner's
 office have taken place in the last several years because of staffing deficiencies.
