 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive, legisla-
 tive, and (with some limitations)judicial powers ultimately vested in the King (pres-
 ently Mswati o). The King rules according to unwritten Swazi law and cusom, in
 conjunction with an electedParliament andan accompanying structure of publised
 laws, implementing agencies, and an independent judiciary. Despite the 1993 par-
 liamentar elections, the election of regional and local councils in September and
 October of 1994, and municipal elections in the spring, political power continues to
 rest largely with the King and his circle of traditional advisers. The 1968 Constitu-
 tion, originally suspende by the p resent King's father in 1973, remained in suspen-
 sion. The King occasionally issued decrees, based upon this 1973 suspension, which
 crry the force of law.
 Both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the Royal Swaziland Police olgr-
 ate under civilian control and are responsible for external and internal security. he
 police harassed and arrested political activists from prohibited political organize-
 
 
 260
 tions. There were credible accusations of excessive force, abuse, and torture by the
 police in the interrogation of criminal suspects.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture, although a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 formal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, especially the soft
 drink concentrates, sugar, and wood pulp industries, composed primarily of large
 firms with predominantly foreign ownership. A governmental organization main-
 tains large investments in all major sectors of the industrial, agricultural, and serv-
 ices economy.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation. Citizens are not
 able to change their government. The Government restricted freedom of assembly,
 continued prohibitions on political activity and parties, harassed journalists from
 both the ony independent newspaper and the government newspaper, and detained
 or arrested members of political groupings. Police continued to use excessive force,
 especially during the interrogation of criminal suspects, and the authorities rarely
 punishedoffenders. The Government's frequent use of a nonbailable offense provi-
 sion, strengthened by act of Parliament in 1994, continued to cause overcrowding
 in detention facilities. Prison conditions are poor. The Government framed new in-
 dustrial relations legislation, containing draconian penalties for various violations of
 the law, which both unions and organized business rejected. Legal and cultural dis-
 crimination and violence against women, and abuse of children, remained serious
 problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial KIdling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 There were credible reports by criminal defendants of the use of torture during in-
 terrogation. A number of defendants accused police of employing the "Kentucky"
 method of interrogation, where suspects are made to squat, their hands cuffed be-
 hind their knees, a thin pole run between hands and knees, and the suspect hung
 between two desks. Officers then kick the suspect until a confession is extracted.
 Other forms of police brutality continued to be a major problem. Criminal suspects
 routinely complained that peice beat them in the course of interrogations, and occa-
 sionally complained of being suffocated through use of a tube around the face and
 mouth. The Government failed to prosecute or otherwise discipline police officers for
 such abuses. Courts did, however, throw out confessions induced through such phys-
 ical abuse. On two occasions, the Government charged police officers with the rape
 of a criminal suspect both cases ended in the officers' acquittal.
 The Government finally released the report of an official inquiry into the 1990
 "Black Wednesday" incident when police and army units beat University of Swazi-
 land student protesters. The report condemned the actions of the police, finding the
 use of force "brutal and excessive," and recommended the criminal prosecution of
 the then assistant commissioner of police, who directed the beatings. The Govern-
 ment has so far taken no action against the former assistant commissioner. Student
 commemoration of this event in November 1994 led to accusations of property dam-
 age and harassment of nonparticipants, the early closure of the University at year's
 end, and student protests and a hunger strike by expelled students in January and
 Februay. University life returned to normal after the King ordered the reinstate-
 ment of all students and the commencement of classes in February.
 Prison conditions are poor but not life threatening. Food is generally adequate,
 although sometimes family members must bring food to supplement the sparse pris-
 on diet. Medical care is inadequate. Use of the nonbail provision led to continued
 overcrowding in government remand centers, where suspects are held during pre-
 trial detention (see Section 1.d.). Women and juveniles are held in separate prison
 facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-he law requires warrants for arrests in
 most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect will flee. Detainees may consult with a lawyer of
 their choice and must be charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable
 time, usually 48 hours, or, in remote areas, as soon as the judicial officer appears.
 The authorities generally respect these rights in practice.
 The Government continued to limit provisions for bail for crimes appearing in the
 Nonbailable Offenses Order, effective August 24, 1993. The Minister of Justice may
 
 
 261
 amend the list, which currently has 10 offenses, by his own executive act. An 11th
 offense, involving narcotics, is reportedly in the preparation stage, because of grow-
 ing concern regarding drug use and drug dealers in Swaziland. The mere charge of
 the underlying offense, without any evidentiary showing that the suspect is in-
 volved, is sufficient to employ the nonbailable provision.
 In January police arrestcl 12 members of a banned political organization, the
 People's United Democracy Movement (PUDEMO), when members attempted to
 hold a political rally in Piggs Peak. The 12 were released after a weekend in jail,
 with no charges fied.
 The Government does not use exile for political purposes. There are no formal
 barriers to prevent the return of dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Judcial powers are vested in a dual system, one
 independent and based on Western law, the other based on a system of national
 courts which follows unwritten, traditional law and custom. In treason and sedition
 cases, the King can circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special tribu-
 nal, which may adopt rules and procedures different from those applied in the High
 Court. However, this power was last used in 1987.
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, (composed entirely of expa-
 triate, usually South African judges), the High Court, and magistrates' courts, which
 are independent of executive and military control and free from intimidation from
 outside forces. The expatriate judges, often distinguished members of their respec-
 tive bars, serve on the basis of 2-year, renewable contracts. Local judges serve in-
 definitely on good behavior. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is entitled to coun-
 sel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital cases
 or when difficult points of law are at issue. There are well-defined appeal proce-
 dures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body."
 Most citizens who encounter the legal system do so through the traditional courts.
 The authorities may bring ethnic Swazis to these courts for relatively minor offenses
 and violations of traditional law and custom. In traditional courts, defendants are
 not permitted formal legal counsel but may speak on their own behalf and be as-
 sisted by informal advisers. Sentences are subject to review by traditional authori-
 ties andto appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. By law, the public
 prosecutor has the authority to determine which court should hear a case, but in
 practice the police usually make the determination. Accused persons have the right
 to transfer their cases from the traditional courts.
 In April the Government arrested seven members of PUDEMO in Piggs Peak
 when they attempted to mark the 22nd anniversary of the suspension of the Con-
 stitution with a public commemoration. The seven were held for 10 days and then
 released on bail. Originally charged with contravening the 1973 Emergency Procla-
 mation for holding a political meeting without a permit, the Government later
 dropped this charge and accused the seven of various minor offenses relating to
 their arrest. At trial six of the seven were acquitted for lack of evidence, and the
 seventh convicted of malicious damage to police property. The court postponed sen-
 tencing, allowing for restitution by the defendant to the Government. The trial of
 49 members of PUDEMO and its sister organization, the Swaziland Youth Congress
 (SWAYOCO), arrested by police in late December 1994 when the two groups staged
 a public rally in Siteki, has been delayed by the court several times. The 49 have
 been charged by the Government with holding a political meeting without a permit,
 possession of political pamphlets, and disturbing traffic.
 Tighter Judicial Service Commission (JSC) supervision of magistrates and the in-
 stitution of a training and inspection magistrate group to supervise courtroom per-
 formance led to sigmficant reductions in judicial delay in 1994. However, delays in
 bringing cases to court this year led to several brief sit-down strikes by criminal de-
 tainees protesting their continuing detention without trial.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or other
 premises, and police generally respect this requirement in practice. However, police
 officers with the rank of subinspector or higher have the right to search without a
 warrant if they believe evidence might be lost through delay in obtaining a warrant.
 While searches without warrants occur occasionally, the issue of legality of evidence
 rarely arises in court.
 There is no evidence that the Government systematically monitors private cor-
 respondence or conversations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech, especially on political mat-
 ters, remains limited, including in the Parliament. The media, both government-con-
 
 
 trolled and private, practice self-censorship in regard to the immediate royal family
 and national security policy. On three occasions the Government prosecutor ordered
 the arrest of newspaper personnel. In March four journalists of the government
 newspaper were arrested and briefly detained for the publication of allegedly con-
 fidntial information regarding a rape case before the local courts. In June four jour-
 nalists, two from each of the daily newspapers, the government-owned one and the
 privately owned one, were arrested and briefly detained for technical violations of
 the Books and Newspaper Act of 1963. The Government prosecutor unsuccessfully
 attempted to close the newspapers as a condition of the granting of bail for the four
 men. The government journalists, after a short trial in July, were found guilty of
 the various technical offenses of the Newspaper Act, and of publishing confidential
 information in the rape case, and sentenced to fines or short jail terms. The paper
 has appealed the convictions, and the journalists remain free on bail. Following a
 printed apology by the independent newspaper in August, the Government dropped
 the charges against that paper's journalists. Also in August, the Government ar-
 rested three journalists of the government newspaper and briefly detained them for
 the publication of allegedly defamatory material, and for contempt of court, concern-
 ing published remarks directed at a judge and prosecutor. No formal charges have
 yet been filed in the case, and the defendants remain free on bail.
 The day after the story appeared, the paper ran an apology, and suspended the
 editor who wrote the allegedly defamatory piece. The Government showed its hos-
 tility to the press in other ways as well: the Government continued to refuse to
 grant the expatriate owner and publisher of the independent newspaper a renewal
 of his work permit (now pending for over a year), and in an incident in June, a
 member of the royal family assaulted a photographer for the independent paper tak-
 ing pictures of a vocational student protest at the royal palace. Nearby police ob-
 served the assault but did not intervene. Despite the harassment, both papers con-
 tinued to treat a wide range of sensitive topics, and to criticize government corrup-
 tion, inefficiency, and waste. The government-owned television and radio stations-
 the most influential media in reaching the public-generally followed official policy
 positions. Private companies and church groups own several newsletters, magazines,
 and one radio station that broadcasts throughout the region, but these avoid politi-
 cal controversy.
 The practice of self-censorship and the prohibition of political gatherings limits
 academic freedom. After a student-led commemoration of Black  aednesda at the
 university in November 1994 led to accusations that student activists had damaged
 property, and harassed nonparticipants the University Senate voted to close the
 university. The university then establised an informal inquiry panel to interview
 students and pass judgment on their fitness to attend class, and in January denied
 entry to a number of students who refused to sign an agreement governing student
 behavior. After renewed protests by the student body, and a hunger strike by the
 students concerned, all students were admitted to class on order of the King, and
 classes resumed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-King Sobhuza's 1973 decree
 prohibits political parties, as well as meetings of a political nature, processions, or
 demonstrations in any public place without the consent of the Commissioner of Po-
 lice. The authorities did not generally grant permission to hold meetings but did not
 rigidly enforce the 1973 decree. Political organizations often met without the re-
 quired permission, without repercussions, inciuding PUDEMO and the SWAYOCO.
 However, the threat of police intervention is pervasive, and on at least two occasions
 police harassed political groups taking part in political activities such as peaceful
 meetins, rallies, and demonstrations (see Sections 1.d. and Le.). in June riot police
 used wips and batons to break up a march on the royal palace by vocational stu-
 dents protesting inferior classroom conditions. Police have also on several occasions
 monitored a re.ional discussion group formed among senators from the Parliament.
 Several traditional forums exist for the expression of opinion, including commu-
 nity meetings, national councils, and direct dialogue with village chiefs, but they de-
 pend on the sufferance of leaders and are ineffective channels for expressing real
 political dissent.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Followers of all religious faiths are free to worship with-
 out government interference or restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Fore' a Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Swazis may travel and work freely within the country. However, for
 travel abroad, under traditional law, a married woman requires her husband's per-
 mission to apply for a passport, and unmarried single women require the permission
 of a close male relative. A new Citizenship Law passed in 1992 removed several am-
 biguities relating to Swazi citizenship and nominally enabled nonethnic Swazis
 obtain passports and citizenship documents. Bureaucratic delays, however, plagued
 
 
 263
 individuals seeking these documents during the year, in part due to the common
 perception that nonethnic Swazis are not real Swazis. Mixed race citizens in par-
 ticular are sometimes subject to unfair and discriminatory treatment.
 The Government treats several thousand ethnic Swazis from the former homeland
 of KwaZulu in South Africa as virtually indistinguishable from local Swazis and
 routinely grants them travel and citizenship documents.
 Swaziland's treatment of refugees is considered good by the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as well as the various nongovernmental orga-
 nizations (NGO's) involved in the care of these groups. The LNHCR officially reg-
 istered several hundred refugees in Swaziland, the majority coming from east and
 central Africa.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens are not able to exercise this right. The King retains ultimate executive
 and legislative authority, and political parties are prohibited. Passage of legislation
 by Parliament requires the King's assent to become law, which he is not obliged to
 give. When Parliament is not in session, the King may legslate by decree under his
 residual emergency powers. The King chooses the Prime Minister and, in consulta-
 tion with the Prime Minister, the Cabinet.
 The King has been under increasing public pressure, including from within his
 own Government, to modernize the political system. In September the King publicly
 announced the need for a new constitution, and promised early consultation and
 drafting of such a document.
 Women have full legal rights to participate in the political process. In the Par-
 liament, two women were elected to the 65-member House of Assembly, and four
 women elected-and two appointed-to the 30-member Senate. There are no women
 in the Cabinet. Three women serve as principal secretaries, the most senior civil
 service rank in the ministries.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits domestic human rights groups to operate. In 1995 two
 local human rights groups spoke out on human rights issues and served as a medi-
 ators in land and labor disputes. The groups criticized the Government on a number
 of occasions, including the Government's handling of university student protests, the
 arrest of journalists, and the lack of accountability and transparancy in government
 circles. There were no visits by international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The 1968 Constitution remains suspended. However, the Employment Act of 1980
 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex, or political affili-
 ation. Under the Act employees may bring suit against employers for discrimination,
 and there are also provisions for criminal prosecutions. However, there is no record
 of any suits or prosecutions. Reportedly, the Act has been used on occasion to bring
 moral suasion against employers.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, is frequent, despite
 traditional strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their
 husbands with assault under both the traditional and modern legal systems and fre-
 quently do so, usually in extreme cases when intervention by extended family mem-
 bers fails to end such violence. The traditional courts, however, can be unsympa-
 thetic to "unruly" or "disobedient" women and are less likely than the modern courts
 to convict men for wife beating. In one well-publicized case, a husband received a
 $135 fine (500 emalangeni) for beating his wife to death. Rape is also a common
 crime and is regarded by many men as a minor offense. Even in the modern courts,
 sentences frequently amount to no more than several months in jail or a fine, or
 both. The Legal Code addresses legal protection from sexual harassment, but its
 provisions are vague and largely ineffective.
 Several NGO's provide support to groups affected by discrimination or abuse, in-
 cluding the Swaziland Action Group Against Abuse which has relations with other
 civic organizations as well as the Government. They provide forums to discuss
 spousal and child abuse and to educate the public on the rights of abuse victims.
 Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in Swazi society, and the
 dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights. As tra-
 ditional marriage is governed by uncodified law and custom, women's rights are
 often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are interpreted. In
 both traditional and civil marriages, wives are legally treated as minors, although
 
 
 264
 
 those who marry under civil law may be accorded the legal status of adults, if stipu-
 lated in a signed prenuptial agreement.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions urbanization, and the increasing prominence
 of female leaders in goyernment and civic organizations are slowly breaking down
 barriers to equality. Wives now routinely and successfully execute contracts and
 enter into a variety of transactions in their own names. Nevertheless, despite the
 1980 Employment Act re1i1g eual pay for equal work, men's average wage rates
 by skill category usually exceed those or women. Moreover, a woman generally re-
 quires her husband's permission to borrow money, open a bank account, leave the
 countr, gain access to land, or, in some cases, take a job.
 Traditional marriages consider children to belong to the father and to his family
 if the couple divorces. Children born out of wedlock are viewed as belonging to the
 mother. In traditional marriages, a man may take more than one wife. A man who
 marries a woman under civil law legally may not have more than one wife, although
 inpractice this restriction is sometimes ignored. Under the Citizenship Act of 1992
 a Swazi woman married to a noncitizen does not automatically pass her citizenship
 to their children.
 Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems
 in determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent ques-
 tions of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death.
 Children.-The Government is concerned with the rights and welfare of children,
 and a number of laws directly address children's issues. Examples including the
 Adoption of Children Act of 1952, with a number of provisions for protecting chil-
 dren under consideration for adoption, and the Maintenance Act of 1970, which in-
 cludes various provisions regarding the enforcement of maintenance decrees for the
 benefit of women and children. Child abuse is a serious problem in Swaziland. A
 government task force continued to educate the public on children's issues. In June
 the Government ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government, through the Ministry of Home Affairs,
 has called for equal treatment of the disabled but has not initiated legislation to
 prohibit discrimination against them. For example, there are no laws mandating ac-
 cessibility for the disabled to buildings, transportation, or government services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms
 the right of trade unions to organize and associate freely. It permits workers in all
 sectors of the economy, including the public sector, to join unions. Unions operate
 independently of government or political control, provided they act as economic,
 rather than political organizations. The main trade union federation is the Swazi-
 land Federation of rade Unions (SFTU). The Swaziland Federation of Labor, a
 breakaway federation formed from the SFTU in 1993, gained formal recognition
 from the Government in 1994.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The Act specifies a number of provisions which must be addressed in a con-
 stitution, including the election of officers by secret ballot. The Labor Commissioner
 must approve the union constitution, and he can strike out or amend provisions
 which violate the law. The Government may dissolve unions which fail to maintain
 proper registration with the Labor Commissioner without recourse to judicial re-
 view, but it has never exercised this authority. The law prohibits strikes in "essen-
 tial" services, which cover electricity, water, fire, health, sanitary, telephone, tele-
 graph and broadcast, and teaching services, and many civil service positions.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegal strike. The Act empowers the Industrial Court to settle
 employment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. When dis-
 putes arise, the Government often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a
 strike, which may not be legally called until all avenues of negotiation have been
 exhausted. The Labor Commissioner may then issue a 14-day postponement, which
 may be extended upon presentation of further documentation.
 There were a number of strikes, usually over wages and benefits, or dismissal of
 fellow workers. In March the SFTU called a mass stay away in regard to 27 de-
 mands presented to the Government in 1994. These demands addressed a wide
 range of issues, including recognition of affirmative action, a national uniform mini-
 mum wage, ending discrimination against women, housing for workers, and inclu-
 sion of workers in constitutional discussions. The stay away ended after 2 days,
 when the Government agreed to negotiate with unions and business over the 27 de-
 mands. In April the Government tabled a new draft Industrial Relations Act, which,
 while answering some of the union demands, also contains stiff penalties for mass
 stay aways and other labor action that violate the new Act. After government foot-
 
 
 265
 dragininegotiations, the SFTU threatened a renewed labor stay away in July.
 The overnment, labor, and business agreed at the last moment to a formal nego-
 tiating sequence involving the 27 demands and the new Industrial Relations Act,
 and the SFTU called off its new stay away. In the fall negotiations continued among
 the three parties.
 Against this backdrop of heightened labor discord, the Government moved to strip
 the SFTU leader of his citizenship, but relented under considerable local and inter-
 national pressure. SFTU leadership made credible accusations of government sur-
 veillance and intimidation of union activists. SFTU leadership reported receiving
 numerous threats, including death threats, from anonymous sources. In August the
 SFTU leader was kidnaped and robbed while driving along a remote highway, and
 briefly held in the trunk of his car. Union leadership accused the Government of
 involvement, which the Government denied.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Exports (COE) has
 noted discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Associa-
 tion and ILO Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively, both
 of which Swaziland ratified in 1978. The COE concerns include the powers accorded
 government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the ability of
 workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad. The
 Government tolerates the unions' international affiliations but does not recognize
 them.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Col-
 lective bargaining is widespread; approximately 80 percent of the formal private sec-
 tor is unionized. The Industrial Court may refuse to register agreements in the
 event of nonobservance of government directives on wage levels. The COE has criti-
 cized this as a violation of ILO Convention 98. The law obliges employers to recog-
 nize a union when it achieves a 40 percent membership among employees. Disputes
 are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Industrial Court, if necessary. Em-
 ployers must allow members of legally recognized unions to attend union activities
 on company time. Although many employers resist recognition and force the issue
 to the Industrial Court, the Court has generally ruled in favor of the unions on rec-
 ognition.
 The law limits the Industrial Court with respect to granting redress in the case
 of unfair dismissal. The Court may not order reinstatement and may award com-
 pensation only to the extent of 6 months' salary. Union leadership have on a num-
 ber of occasions made credible charges that management in various industries have
 summarily dismissed workers for union activity. The Government sometimes insti-
 gates such dismissals.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment Act of 1980 pro-
 hibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 years in an industrial undertaking,
 except in cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or in technical
 schools where children are working under the supervision of a teacher or other au-
 thorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be worked
 on schooldays and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per day or 33 per week.
 Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary.
 However, children below the minimum age are frequently employed in the agricul-
 tura sector, particularly in the country's eastern cotton-growing region. Children
 are also employed as domestic workers, and as herd boys in rural areas. The Min-
 istry of Labor is responsible for enforcement, but its effectiveness is limited by per-
 sonnel shortages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Swaziland has a legally mandated sliding scale
 of minimum wages depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 provide a worker and family with an adequate standard of living within the context
 of Swazi society. The minimum monthly wage for a domestic worker is approxi-
 mately $50 (180 emalangeni), for an unskilled worker $75 (280 emalangeni), and for
 a skilled worker $125 (450 emalangeni).
 Labor, management, and government representatives have negotiated a maximum
 48-hour workweek in the modern sector, except for security guards, who work up
 to six 12-hour shifts per week. The Employment Act and the Wages Act entitle all
 workers to one day of rest per week. Most workers receive a minimum of 14 days
 annual leave. The Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector.
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety in Swaziland. The Govern-
 ment sets safety standards for industrial operations and encourages private compa-
 nies to develop accident prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial produc-
 
 
 266
 tion has necessitated more government action on safety issues. However, the Labor
 Commissioner's Office has conducted few safety inspections in recent years because
 of staffing deficiencies. Workers have no formal statutory rights to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work places without jeopardizing their jobs; nor do any collec-
 tive bargaining agreements address the matter.
