 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive, legisla-
 tive, and (with some limitations) judicial powers ultimately vested in the King (pres-
 ently Mswati III). The King rules according to unwritten Swazi law and custom, in
 conjunction with a newly e    Parliamenta    an accompanying structure of pub-
 lished laws, implementing agencies, and an independent judiciary. Despite the 1993
 parliamentary elections and the election of regional and local councils in September
 and October, political power continues to rest largely with the King and his circle
 of traditional advisers. The 1968 Constitution, originally suspended by the present
 King's father in 1973, remained in suspension. The Kin routinely issued decrees,
 based upon this 1973 suspension,which carry the force ofaw.
 Both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the Royal Swaziland Police oper-
 ate under civilian control and are responsible for external and internal security. The
 police harassed and arrested political activists from prohibited political organiza-
 tions. There were credible accusations of excessive force and abuse by the police in
 the interrogation of criminal suspects in 1994.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of Swazis are engaged in subsistence a iculture, although a rel-
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 formal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, especially the
 sugar industry, composed primarily of large firms with predominantly foreign own-
 elship. A governmental organization maintains large investments in all major sec-
 tors of the industrial, agricultural, and services economy.
 There was little change in the human rights situation in 1994. The Government
 restricted freedom of assembly, continued prohibitions on political activity and par-
 ties, moved to curtail the one independent newspaper, and detained or arrested
 members of political groupings, including seven members of the newly formed Swa-
 ziland Communist Party. Police continued to use excessive force, especially during
 the interrogation of criminal suspects, and the authorities rarely punished offenders.
 The Government's frequent use of a nonbailable offense provision, strengthened by
 act of Parliament in 1994, led to some ovex.crowding in detention facilities. Legal
 and cultural discrimination and violence against women remained a serious prob-
 lem.
 
 
 255
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of such
 killin.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappealance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of the use of torture, but police brutality continued to be a
 major problem. Criminal suspects routinely complained that police beat them in the
 course of interrogations. The Government failed to prosecute or otherwise discipline
 police officers for such abuses. Courts do, however, routinely throw out confessions
 induced through such physical abuse. On one occasion, the Government charged a
 police officer with the rape of a criminal suspect; at year's end, the case was ongo-
 mng. The Government continued to refuse to release the report of an official inu-iry
 into the 1990 "Black Wednesday" incident when police an[ army units beat Umver-
 sity of Swaziland student protestors. Student commemoration of this event in No-
 vember led to accusations of property damage and harassment of nonparticipants,
 and the early closure of the University.
 Prison conditions are poor but not life threatening. Food is generally adequate,
 although sometimes family members must bring food to supplement the sparse pris-
 on diet. Medical care is inadequate. The use of the new nonbail provision led to
 some overcrowding in government remand centers, where suspects are held during
 pretrial detention (see Section 1.d.). Women and juveniles are held in separate pris-
 on facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law requires warrants for arrests in
 most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect will flee. Detainees may consult with a lawyer of
 their choice and must be charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable
 time, usually 48 hours or, in remote areas, as soon as the judicial officer appears.
 The authorities generaly respect these rights in practice.
 The Government continued to limit provisions for bail by expanding the crimes
 appearing in the Nonbailable Offenses Order, effective August 24, 1993. The Order
 originally listed nine offenses ranging from murder to inciting to riot for which a
 defendant cannot be granted bail. In 1994 the Minister of Justice, who may amend
 the list by his own executive act, added a tenth offense, car theft, to the nonbailable
 list, after a rash of armed highjackings in urban areas. In June Parliament broad-
 ened the standard for the nonbailable act to apply from "involvement" in the offense
 to a mere "charge" of the underlying offense.
 In September police harassed and temporarily detained three members of a
 banned   political organization, the  People's  United  Democracy    Movement
 (PUDEMO), when the members were discovered distributing pamphlets advocating
 a boycott of local elections.
 The Government does not use exile for political purposes. There are no formal
 barriers to prevent the return of dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one
 independent and based on Western law, the other based on a system of national
 courts which follows unwritten traditional law and custom. In treason and sedition
 cases, the King can circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special tribu-
 nal, which may adopt rules and procedures different from those applied in the High
 Court. However, this power was last used in 1987.
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, (composed entirely of expa-
 triate, usually South African, judges), the High Court, and magistrates' courts,
 which are independent of executive and military control and free from intimidation
 from outside forces. The expatriate judges, often distinguished members of their re-
 spective bars, serve on the basis of 2-year, renewable contracts. Local judges serve
 indefinitely on good behavior. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is entitled to
 counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital
 cases or when difficult points of law are at issue. There are well-defined appeal pro-
 cedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 Most Swazis who encounter the legal system do so through the traditional courts.
 The authorities may bring ethnic Swazis to these courts for relatively minor offenses
 and violations of traditional law and custom. In traditional courts, defendants are
 not permitted formal legal counsel but may speak on their own behalf and be as-
 sisted by informal advisers. Sentences are subject to review by traditional authori-
 ties andto appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. By law, the public
 prosecutor has the authority to determine which court should hear a case, but in
 practice the police usually make the determination. Accused persons have the right
 to transfer their cases from the traditional courts.
 
 
 256
 On October 16, the Government arrested seven members of the newly formed
 Swaziland Communist Party who were picketing a workshop of a local democracy
 organization. The authorities charged them under the 1938 Sedition Act, a broadly
 written law, with committing subversive acts and being in possession of seditious
 materials. The trial marked the first use of this Act in approximately 2 years. The
 court acquitted the seven of the sedition charges after a 2-week trialrin November.
 It also acquitted six of the seven of the minor charge of staging a public demonstra-
 tion without a permit and gave the seventh, the party leader and founder, a sus-
 pended sentence on that charge. The Government arrested the party leader and one
 other for demonstrations without a permit the following week, releasing them on
 bail 3 days later. These two faced the possible imposition of a 2-month suspended
 sentence for a 1993 conviction on the same charge. The case against the two contin-
 ued at year's end.
 In 1993 credible reports of the existence of a "secret committee" led magistrates,
 concerned about possible inroads on their  dicial independence, to a brief strike.
 This "secret committee," which was allegedly formed to usurp the functions of the
 Judicial Service Commission (JSC) and to discipline wayward magistrates, report-
 edly disbanded in the wake of the strike and criticism from members of the legal
 profession. Tighter JSC supervision of magistrates and the institution of a training
 and inspection magistrate group to supervise courtroom performance led to signifi-
 cant reductions in judicial delay in 1994.
 The Government held no known political prisoners in 1994.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or other
 premises, and police generally respect this requirement in practice. However, police
 officers with the rank of submspector or higher have the right to search without a
 warrant if they believe evidence might be lost through delay in obtaining a warrant.
 While searches without warrants occur occasionally, the issue of legality of evidence
 rarely arises in court. Opponents of the Government complained of unlawful police
 searches and seizures but did not seek judicial relief in 1994.
 There is no evidence that the Government systematically monitors private cor-
 respondence or conversations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech, especially on political mat-
 ters, remains limited, including in the new Parliament. The media, both govern-
 ment-controlled and private, practice self-censorship in regard to the immediate
 royal family and national security policy. Despite these restrictions, there was an
 overall trend toward greater openness, and the two daily newspapers-one official,
 one private-treated a range of sensitive topics. However, the Government moved
 against its most outspoken critic, the expatriate owner and publisher of the sole
 independent newspaper, through nonrenewal of his business permit. While at year's
 end the publisher's case restedunder appeal with the Ministry of Home Affairs, the
 paper continued its critical coverage. The government-owned television and radio
 stations-the most influential media in reaching the public-generally followed offi-
 cial policy positions. Private companies and church groups own several newsletters,
 magazines, and one radio station that broadcasts throughout the region.
 The practice of self-censorship and the prohibition of political gatherings limits
 academic freedom. After a student-led commemoration of "Black Wednesday" at the
 university in November led to accusations that student activists had damaged prop-
 erty, harassed nonparticipants, and engaged in angry confrontations with university
 administrators, the university senate voted to close the university indefinitely. The
 university established an informal inquiry panel to interview students and pass
 judgment on their fitness to attend class.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-King Sebhuza's 1973 decree
 prohibits political parties and meetings of a political nature and processions or dem-
 onstrations in any public place without the consent of the Commissioner of Police.
 The authorities did not generally grant permission to hold meetings but did not rig-
 idly enforce the 1973 decree. Political organizations often met without the required
 permission, without repercussions, including PUDEMO and the Swaziland Youth
 Congress (SWAYOCO). However, the threat of police intervention is pervasive, and
 on at least four occasions police harassed groups taking part in political activities,
 such as peaceful demonstrations and distribution of political flyers (see Section i.e.).
 These incidents include the December arrest of 48 PUDEMO members for taking
 part in a protest march.
 Several traditional forums exist for the expression of opinion, including commu-
 nity meetings, national councils, and direct dialog with village chiefs, but they de-
 
 
 257
 pend on the sufferance of leaders and are ineffective channels for expressing real
 political dissent.
 c. Freedom of Relgion.-Followers of all religious faiths are free to worship with-
 out government interference or restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patiation.-Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. However, for
 travel abroad, under traditional law, a married woman requires her husband's per-
 mission to apply for a passport, and unmarried single women require the permission
 of a close male relative. A new Citizenship Law passed in November 1992 removed
 many ambiguities relating to Swazi citizenship and nominally enabled nonethnic
 Swazis to obtain passports and citizenship documents. Bureaucratic delays, how-
 ever, plagued individuals seeking these documents during the year, in part due to
 the common perception that nonethnic Swazis are not real Swazis.
 The Government treats about 7,000 ethnic Swazis from the former homeland of
 KwaZulu in South Africa as virtually indistinguishable from local Swazis and rou-
 tinely grants them travel and citizenship documents.
 Swaziland's treatment of refugees is considered good by the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as well as the various nongovernmental orga-
 nizations (NGO's) involved in the care of these groups. Largely under UNHCR aus-
 pices, more than 35,000 Mozambican refugees had returned home by year's end, and
 the UNHCR officially registered only several hundred refugees in Swaziland.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens are not able to exercise this right. The King retains ultimate executive
 and legislative authority, and political parties are prohibited. Passage of legislation
 by Parliament requires the Kings assent to become law, which he is not obliged to
 give. When Parliament is not in session, the King may legislate by decree under his
 residual emergency powers. The King chooses the Prime Minister and, in consulta-
 tion with the Prime Minister, the Cabinet.
 The King has been under increasing public pressure, including from within his
 own Government, to modernize the political system, especially the archaic system
 of indirect representation.
 Women have full legal rights to participate in the political process. In the new
 Parliament, there are two women elected to the House, and four women elected-
 and two appointed-to the Senate. There are no women in the Cabinet. Three
 women serve as principal secretaries, the senior civil service rank in the ministries.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits domestic human rights groups to operate and in April
 invited the most prominent group, the Human Rights Association of Swaziland
 (HUMARAS), to attend a government policy seminar. In 1994 HUMARAS continued
 to speak out on human rights issues and served as a mediator in land and labor
 disputes. HUMARAS criticized the Government on several occasions, including the
 Government's decision to close the university following the "Black Wednesday" stu-
 dent protests and the arrest and trial of the seven Communist Party members in
 November (see Section 1.e.).
 There were no visits by international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution remains suspended. However, the Employment Act of 1980 for-
 bids employers to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex, or political affili-
 ation.
 Women.-Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in Swazi society,
 and the dualistic nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights.
 As traditional marriage is governed by uncodified law and custom, women's rights
 are often unclear and change according to where and by whom they are interpreted.
 In both traditional and civil marriages, wives are legally treated as minors, al-
 though those who marry under civil law may be accorded the legal status of adults,
 if stipulated in a signed prenuptial agreement.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions urbanization, and the increasing prominence
 of women leaders in government and civic organizations are slowly breaking down
 barriers to equality. Wives now routinely and successfully execute contracts and
 enter into a variety of transactions in their own names. Nevertheless, despite the
 1980 Employment Act requiring equal pay for equal work, men's average wage rates
 by skill category usually exceed those of women. Moreover, a woman generally re-
 
 
 258
 
 quires her husband's permission to borrow money, open a bank account, leave the
 country, gain access to land, or, in some cases, take a job.
 Traditional marriages consider children to belong to the father and to his family
 if the couple divorces. They view children born out of wedlock as belonging to the
 mother. In traditional marriages, a man may take more than one wife. A man who
 marries a woman under civil law legally may not have more than one wife, although
 in practice this restriction is sometimes ignored. A Swazi woman may not pass citi-
 zenship to her children.
 Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems
 in determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent ques-
 tions of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, is common, despite traditional
 strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their husbands
 with assault under both the traditional and modern legal systems and frequently
 do so, usually in extreme cases when intervention by extended family members fails
 to end such violence. The traditional courts however, can be unsympathetic to "un-
 ruly" or "disobedient" women and are less likely than the modern courts to convict
 men for wife beating. Rape is also a common crime and is regarded by many men
 as a minor offense. Even in the modern courts, sentences frequently amount to no
 more than several months in jail or a fine, or both. The Swazi Legal Code addresses
 legal protection from sexual harassment, but its provisions are vague and largely
 ineffective.
 Several NGO's provide support to groups affected by discrimination or abuse, in-
 cluding the Swaziland Action Group Against Abuse which has relations with other
 civic organizations as well as the Government to provide forums to discuss spousal
 and child abuse and to educate the public on the rights of abuse victims.
 Children.-The Government is concerned with the rights and welfare of children,
 and a number of laws directly address children's issues. Child abuse is a serious
 problem in Swaziland. A government task force continued to educate the public on
 children's issues.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government through the Ministry of Home Affairs
 has called for equal treatment of the disabled but has not initiated legislation to
 prohibit discrimination against the disabled. For example, there are no laws man-
 dating accessibility for the handicapped to buildings, transportation, or government
 services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms
 the right of trade unions to organize and associate freely. It permits workers in all
 sectors of the economy, including the public sector, to join unions. Unions operate
 independently of government or political control, provided they act as economic,
 rather than political, organizations. The main trade union federation is the Swazi-
 land Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU). The Swaziland Federation of Labor, a
 breakaway union formed from the SFTU in 1993, gained formal recognition from the
 Government in 1994.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The act specifies a number of provisions which must be addressed in a con-
 stitution, including the election of officers by secret ballot. The Labor Commissioner
 must approve the union constitution, and he can strike out or amend provisions
 which violate the law. The Government may dissolve unions which fail to maintain
 proper registration with the Labor Commissioner without recourse to judicial re-
 view, but it has never exercised this authority. The law prohibits strikes in "essen-
 tial" services, which cover electricity, water, fire, health, sanitary, telephone, tele-
 graph and broadcast, and teaching services, and many civil service positions.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegal strike. The act empowers the Industrial Court to settle
 employment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. When dis-
 puts arise, the Government often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a
 strike, which may not be legally called until all avenues of negotiation have been
 exhausted. The Labor Commissioner may then issue a 14-dy postponement, which
 may be extended upon presentation of further documentation.
 There were a number of strikes in 1994, usually over wages and benefits. In Feb-
 ruary the SFTU called a general strike in regard to 27 demands presented to the
 Government. These demands addressed a wide range of issues, including recognition
 of affirmative action, a national uniform minimum wage, ending discrimination
 against women, housing for workers, and inclusion of workers in constitutional dis-
 cussions. The strike ended after 1 day when the Government agreed to establish a
 task force to investigat e 1927 demands. Since the February strike, occasional dis-
 
 
 259
 
 cussions between senior union and government officials ensued, and the task force
 completed its report. Another general strike threat for November 1 resulted in in-
 tensive negotiations between government, labor, and employers. Labor suspended
 the strike call when negotiators reached basic agreement on 16 of the 27 demands.
 As of year's end, none of the agreed-upon demands had yet been formally approved
 by Parliament or published by the Government, and the SFTU established a new
 deadline for the first week of February 1995.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has
 noted discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on freedon of associa-
 tion and ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively, both
 of which Swaziland ratified in 1978. The COE concerns include the powers accorded
 government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the ability of
 workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad. The
 Government tolerates the unions' international affiliations but does not recognize
 them.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Col-
 lective bargaining is widespread; approximately 80 percent of the formal private sec-
 tor is unionized. The Industrial Court may refuse to register agreements in the
 event of nonobservance of government directives on wage levels. The COE has criti-
 cized this as a violation of ILO Convention 98.
 The law obliges employers to recognize a union when it achieves a 40-percent
 membership among employees. Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner
 and the Industrial Court, if necessary. Employers must allow members of legally
 recognized unions to attend union activities on company time. Although many em-
 ployers resist recognition and force the issue to the Industrial Court, the Court has
 generally ruled in favor of the unions on recognition.                _
 The law limits the Industrial Court with respect to granting redress in the case
 of unfair dismissal. The Court may not order reinstatement and may award com-
 pensation only to the extent of 6 months of salary. Union leadership have on a num-
 ber of occasions made credible charges that management in various industries have
 summarily dismissed workers for union activity. The Government sometimes insti-
 gates such dismissals.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not known to exist. An ILO representative withdrew an earlier ILO accusa-
 tion that forced labor took place in Swaziland.
 d. Minimum Age for Emoment ofChildren.-The Employment Act of 1980 pro-
 hibits the hiring of a chil below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except
 in cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or in technical
 schools where children are working under the supervision of a teacher or other au-
 thorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be worked
 on schooldays and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per day or 33 per week.
 Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary.
 However, children below the minimum age are frequently employed in the agricul-
 tural sector, particularly in the country's eastern cotton-growing region. Children
 are also employed as domestic workers, and as herd boys in rural areas. The Min-
 istry of Labor is responsible for enforcement, but its effectiveness is limited by per-
 sonnel shortages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Swaziland has a legally mandated sliding scale
 of minimum wages depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 provide a worker and family with an a equate standard of living within the context
 of Swazi society. The minimum monthly wage for a domestic worker is approxi-
 mately $50 (180 Emalangeni), for an unskilled worker $70 (250 Emalangeni), and
 for a skilled worker $120 (430 Emalangeni).
 There is a labor/managementgovernment-negotiated maximum 48-hour workweek
 in the modern sector, except for security guards, who work up to six 12-hour shifts
 per week. The Employment Act and the Wages Act entitle all workers to 1 day of
 rest per week. Most workers receive a minimum of 14 days' annual leave. The Labor
 Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector.
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety in Swaziland. The Govern-
 ment sets safety standards for industrial operations and encourages private compa-
 nies to develop accident prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial produc-
 tion has necessitated more government action on safety issues. However, the Labor
 Commissioner's office has conducted few safety inspections in recent years because
 of staffing deficiencies. Workers have no formal statutory rights to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work places without jeopardizing their jobs; nor do any collec-
 tive bargaining agreements address the matter.
 
 
