 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is a modified traditional monarchy ruled currently
 by a queen regent in conjunction with advisers chosen from
 senior politicians and traditional leaders associated with the
 Swazi royal family, along with the ministers of the Cabinet.
 Swaziland's Government features both "modern" and
 "traditional" branches--a Cabinet, Parliament, and courts
 which follow Western law, and a tribal system with "national"
 courts, which follow Swazi law and custom. The Cabinet is
 appointed by the monarch after informal consultations with
 traditional advisors and is responsible to her. On the
 grounds that the 1968 constitution had introduced political
 practices i.e., parliamentary government, which are
 incompatible with the traditional Swazi way of reaching
 decisions by consensus, the late King Sobhuza II decreed its
 repeal in 1973, which resulted in repeal of the bill of rights
 as well. Parliament reopened in January 1979 with some
 members chosen through an indirect selection process, but the
 King continued to be vested with the country's executive
 authority. Since the death of King Sobhuza in 1982, there has
 been a dispute over the relative role and authority of the
 modern and traditional elements in government. This dispute
 resulted in the replacement of the prime minister and the
 eventual replacement of Queen Regent Dzeliwe by Queen Regent
 Ntombi. During the same period, Ntombi's son, Prince
 Makhosetive, was officially declared the heir to the Swazi
 throne and is expected to become King in April 1986 upon
 completion of certain traditional ceremonies.
 Swaziland has an open market economy with limited government
 intervention, centered on trade, agriculture, and forestry.
 The modern sector is dominatd by large export-oriented firms,
 which are frequently foreign-owned. The traditional farming
 sector employs about 80 percent of the population.
 Human rights are generally respected in Swaziland, despite the
 unusual amalgamation of old and new. The authority of the
 Swazi crown covers a wide spectrum of Swazi life but is
 limited in practice by a complex system of traditional rights
 and responsibilities, which requires that attention be paid to
 unwritten Swazi custom. Swazi custom does not allow public
 dissent against the Government, and those who publicly
 criticize the Government or demonstrate against the
 authorities have, on occasion, been suppressed. The royal
 Swazi police are widely regarded as being honest,
 professional, and efficient, but there are occasional reports
 of violence against suspected criminals. The judiciary is
 independent. Individuals are free to associate with others,
 pursue private interests, and hold property, but political
 activity is discouraged. Women and minorities suffer from
 little formal discrimination, and representatives of both
 groups occupy prominent places in Swazi public life, but
 tradition restricts the opportunities available to most
 women. With the exception of five former officials who were
 detained without charges for most of the year and the banning
 of two South African publications, no controversial human
 rights questions arose in 1985.
 
 
 333
 SWAZILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports or allegations of political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance occurring in the
 country in 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is, as a rule, not practiced in Swaziland. However,
 there were some reports of police threats and beatings in the
 handling of common criminals. Defendants often charge that
 confessions have been extorted by the police, especially in
 trials dealing with ritual murder. These charges by the
 defense are sometimes found to be substantiated by the judges.
 Corporal punishment is permitted under Swazi law, and caning
 is occasionally administered to youths involved in petty or
 violent crimes. Police jails are often overcrowded and
 unsanitary, with low nutrition standards, which probably
 reflects the country's economic limitations rather than any
 intent to inflict punishment. The country's main prison
 includes facilities for teaching manual trades. Prisoners are
 allowed visits from family members.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 A 1978 law permits the Government to detain any individual
 without charge for renewable periods of 60 days. A parallel
 law, apparently used in routine cases, allows the police to
 hold an individual for a "reasonable time" without charges.
 In some cases persons have been detained for up to several
 weeks. Detention is not subject to appeal to the courts,
 although it may be appealed directly to the monarch. While
 some prisoners are held incommunicado, immediate family
 members are usually allowed to visit detainees. Some
 attorneys have had difficulties in gaining access to their
 clients. Five former officials, held incommunicado throughout
 most of 1985, were released on December 31. They were Col.
 Ndzimandze, former army commander; former minister of finance
 Nxumalo; former commissioner of police Msibi; former deputy
 commissioner of Police Hillary; and Major Abednego Dlamini.
 Forced labor does not exist in Swaziland.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 generally honored in practice. The judiciary consists of a
 court of appeals, a high court, and various subordinate
 magistrates' courts. The Head of State appoints members of
 the court of appeals and the high court. Parallel to this
 modern government structure is a traditional structure
 consisting of the Liqoqo (a council which advises the Queen
 Regent), traditional courts, and 40 regional councils.
 
 
 334
 SWAZILAND
 In magistrates' courts, a defendant is entitled to counsel at
 his own expense. Court-appointed defense counsel is provided
 in capital cases. Defendants are made fully aware of the
 charges against them. Defendants and their lawyers are
 generally allowed to examine and discuss the evidence on which
 the charges are based. The courts are independent of
 executive and military control. Appeals from the magistrates'
 courts may be heard by the high court, and all final appeals
 are heard by the court of appeals, which is the highest
 judicial body. These rights are not guaranteed to persons
 held under the 1978 detention law or those persons charged
 with sedition. In traditional courts, where ethnic Swazis may
 be brought for relatively minor offenses and violations of
 Swazi traditional laws or customs, legal counsel is not
 allowed, but defendants are usually heard on their own
 behalf. Swazi traditional law has not been formally
 codified. Both offenses and punishments are limited and
 findings are subject to a review system and appeal to the high
 court and court of appeals. Accused who desire counsel can
 insist that their case be transferred from the traditional
 courts.
 Although legislation passed in 1983 would allow sedition cases
 to be held in camera, no one has yet been tried under that
 measure.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 Swazi custom places a high value on home and family. In
 general, Swazi law requires a warrant issued by a magistrate
 before police may search homes or other premises. However,
 senior police officers are permitted to search for evidence
 without a warrant if the suspected crime is of a serious
 nature, and this exception is frequently used. There is no
 evidence that the Government censors correspondence or commits
 other violations of the home.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. The Prime Minister and other
 officials have repeatedly directed that Swazis critical of the
 Government express their views only to their chiefs for
 discussion in traditional Swazi councils. Antigovernment
 demonstrations or leaflets are regarded as seditious and are
 treated accordingly. The Swazi radio and television stations
 are goverment-controlled. A private company publishes a daily
 newspaper with English and Siswati editions, and there is also
 a semigovernmental English-language paper. The Government
 does not precensor newspapers, but occasionally makes it known
 that certain stories should not be printed. The media, both
 government-controlled and private, practice self-censorship,
 refraining from critical comment on government activities or
 on problems dealing with the royal family. On several
 occasions in 1985, journalists were summoned before officials
 in connection with controversial stories. In one instance, a
 journalist was interrogated by the police and kept in custody
 overnight. The Government proscribes publications, including
 foreign publications, deemed to be prejudicial to the
 interests of defense, public safety or order, public morality,
 or public health. For example, in June two major South
 
 
 335
 SWAZILAND
 African publications were banned from Swaziland because of
 critical articles on Swazi domestic politics.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's proclamation of April 12, 1973, prohibits meetings
 of a political nature and processions or demonstrations in any
 public place without the consent, sometimes withheld, of the
 commissioner of police. Except for the prohibition of certain
 antigovernment activity, however, freedom of association is
 generally permitted. Trade associations and professional
 bodies exist in Swaziland and maintain relations with
 recognized international bodies in their fields.
 In labor matters, employees may and do organize. Under the
 Industrial Relations Act, unions are required to register with
 the Government and a number have done so. Unions are
 independent from government control and are fairly effective
 as representatives of their members, but since most Swazis are
 subsistence farmers, unions play a small role in Swazi
 economic life. Unions play no political role. The union
 umbrella organization, the Swaziland Federation of Trade
 Unions, participates in the International Labor Organization
 and is a member of the Organization of African Trade Union
 Unity.
 Collective bargaining is legal and, while employers have
 resisted actual collective bargaining, a number have entered
 into recognition agreements. The Government generally
 intervenes to reduce the likelihood of a strike, which cannot
 be legally called until all avenues of negotiation are
 exhausted. The labor commissioner can then issue a 14-day
 postponement which can be extended when additional
 documentation is presented. Where the national interest or
 welfare is concerned, the Minister of Labor can forbid a
 strike or can refer the dispute to the industrial court.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious
 beliefs, informally considers itself to be a Christian
 country, and permits a great variety of missionary activites.
 Following the death of King Sobhuza in August 1982, some
 difficulties developed between Jehovah's Witnesses and
 government officials over such items as the singing of the
 national anthem in schools. However, the question was brought
 to the courts and dismissed. In March of 1985, the Heads of
 the Anglican and Roman Catholic Churches circulated a joint
 pastoral letter criticizing social injustice, violence, and
 the use of arbitrary detention in Swaziland. Government
 officials objected that the churches were getting involved in
 politics, but the dispute subsided.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel freely within Swaziland and can generally
 obtain a travel document to travel throughout Southern
 Africa. Obtaining a passport is more difficult and more time-
 consuming. Occasionally the Government refuses to issue a
 passport if the applicant does not appear to have adequate
 means of support while abroad. Citizenship for nonethnic
 Swazis can be difficult to establish, creating problems in
 obtaining passports and other civil documents.
 
 
 336
 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is a signatory to the U.N. Protocol relating to the
 Status of Refugees. Swaziland accepts displaced persons from
 neighboring countries and treats them well. By far the
 largest number of refugees is from South Africa, primarily
 ethnic Swazis who fled Zulu administration in the black South
 African homeland of Kwazulu. In 1985, Swaziland also accepted
 over 2,000 refugees fleeing from military clashes in
 Mozambique. Refugees who leave Swaziland on U.N. travel
 documents are generally not allowed to return.
 In 1985, Swaziland police arrested a number of non-Swazi
 African National Congress activists. They were turned over to
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 representative for transfer to neighboring countries
 (primarily Tanzania) willing to receive them.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government.
 Swaziland is ruled by the King-in-Council. This means that
 ultimate decisions concerning matters such as political
 policy, the appointment of ministers, or issuance of decrees
 are taken by the Queen Regent after obtaining the advice of
 senior members of the royal family, the senior chiefs, the
 Cabinet, or Members of Parliament. Such consultation takes
 place in private, and public debate of political matters under
 consideration by the Monarch is rare. Legislation is passed
 by the Parliament and is then submitted to the Monarch for
 assent--which may be withheld. While political power is not
 confined to the royal family, it is concentrated there. This
 system is essentially a version of the traditional Swazi
 government as modified during the reign of King Sobhuza II.
 It provides for extensive consultation and depends on
 consensus-building. The people are encouraged to bring their
 views to their local chiefs in private or in meetings held to
 discuss various topics. The formation of opposition groups is
 discouraged.
 Political parties are outlawed, and an organized political
 opposition to the Government in the sense of a multiparty
 system does not exist. Members of Parliament (a 50-member
 House of Assembly, and a 20-member Senate) are chosen in an
 intricate manner involving the interactions of 40 regional
 councils, 80 electors, and the Monarch's appointive powers.
 The Parliament has served occasionally as a forum for
 examination and criticism of government policies, but matters
 are seldom pressed to a vote and, when they are, unanimity is
 usually the result. One of the ministers is a nonethnic
 Swazi, as are a number of Members of Parliament. Several
 women are also Members of Parliament.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 The Government of Swaziland does not normally respond
 substantively to inquiries from representatives of human
 rights groups concerning the welfare and whereabouts of
 individual political detainees. There are no organizations
 based within the country that observe, report, or contest
 human rights violations. In its 1985 Report, Amnesty
 International noted its concern about detention without trial
 of opponents of the Government. Amnesty International regards
 Douglas Lukhele, Arthur Khoza, Prince Sulumlomo Dlamini, and
 
 
 337
 SWAZILAND
 Prince Thunduluka Dlamini as prisoners of conscience. Freedom
 House rated Swaziland "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL. AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Swaziland's population in 1985 was estimated to be 671,000
 (though it may be higher) and growing by at least 3 percent
 per year. Given that growth rate, real per capita income has
 fallen over the past 5 years. Since independence in 1968,
 however, Swaziland's per capita gross national product (GNP)
 has risen from about $300 to an estimated $870 in 1983, but
 subsistence farmers, who comprise two-thirds of the
 population, have not kept pace. Total per capita income of
 rural homestead residents for crop year 1983/84 was
 approximately $375. In 1980, the World Bank estimated that
 nearly half the population was below the poverty line. The
 drought in 1982 and 1983 exacerbated the problem.
 Since independence, the Government has invested heavily in
 improving and expanding health care services. Although life
 expectancy at birth in 1985 was 54.6 years, the infant
 mortality rate was estimated in 1985 to be 130 per 1,000 live
 births. There is a lack of clean, disease-free water;
 estimates in 1985 showed only 37 percent of the country had
 access to safe water.
 The Government faces two interrelated and emerging economic
 challenges: The inability of traditional agriculture to
 generate consistent food surpluses or incomes comparable to
 those in the modern sector, and the decreasing ability to
 generate sufficient jobs in the modern sector. This is
 compounded by stagnant government revenues and the
 Government's own growing inefficiencies.
 By far the biggest constraint to truly indigenous development
 in virtually every area is the shortage of knowledgeable
 technical and administrative leaders, professionals, and
 appropriate institutions. The Government is attempting to
 address this problem through emphasis on education. About 85
 percent of primary school-age children are in school. The
 primary grades also have a substantial number of overage
 children. Standards have declined because emphasis has been
 placed on meeting the demand for additional school places,
 rather than on quality education. Intensive efforts have been
 made to increase the adult literacy rate. The World Bank
 estimated it at 45 percent in 1976; 1982 estimates show a 65
 percent adult literacy rate.
 There is extensive legislation protecting worker health and
 safety in Swaziland, and child labor receives special
 attention. The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to
 discriminate among employees based on race, religion, sex,
 marital status, or political affiliation. It requires equal
 pay for equal work. There are provisions covering the
 employment of children, maternity leave, and domestic
 employees. No one may employ a child below the age of 15 in
 an industrial profitmaking undertaking, except for cases where
 only family members are employed in the firm or in the case of
 technical schools where children are working under the
 supervision of a teacher or other authorized person.
 Legislation limits the number of hours which can be worked at
 night during school days, and in excess of 6 hours per day or
 33 hours per week. However, such provisions may be difficult
 to enforce due to the small size of the enforcement staff.
 
 
 338
 SWAZILAND
 Legally, women are not discriminated against in the job market
 but, in practice, discrimination occurs frequently. Around
 three-fourths of all wage-paying jobs are held by men and
 their average wage rate by skill category is higher than for
 females.
 Traditional values are a major influence on the role of women
 in Swazi society. Since men are away from their homesteads
 much of the time, women perform most agricultural tasks and
 have responsibility for virtually all child rearing and
 domestic chores. However, they are not given authority to
 make necessary decisions, to make expenditures to acquire
 additional capital, or to try innovative agricultural
 approaches. Women are, in some cases, not legally equal to
 men, and a married woman is virtually a minor. She is not
 responsible for contracts she signs, and she cannot own real
 property or inherit property under normal circumstances. She
 must obtain her husband's permission to borrow money, to leave
 the country, and often to take a job. A divorced women has no
 right to the custody of her children, although she may have to
 care for them-with.no support from their father. A small and
 growing number of women are beginning to participate in
 social, economic, and political life outside their traditional
 fields of teaching, nursing, and clerical work. Women have
 equal access to schools and constitute around half the student
 body in nearly all institutions.
 
 
 339
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SWAZILAND
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        8.0      7.6     8.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................     8.0      7.6     8.7
 A.AIO ....... ............     6.2      5.8     8.7
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    6.2      5.8      8.7
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) .          0.0     0.0      0.5
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.4      0.2     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...     . ..........  0.4     0.2     0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ...          0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       0.4      0.2     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.4     O.2      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..          1.4      1.6     0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.4      1.6     0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.4      1.6     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         0.0      0.1     0.1
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.1     0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.0      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         8.0      7.7      8.8
 LOANS ............... 0.0            0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................   8.0      7.7      8.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........     0.1     16.2     18.0    176.2
 13RD               0.0      5.6      8.6     79.8
 IFC                0.0      0.0      4.1     12.5
 IOA                0.0      0.0      0.0      7.8
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     10.0      5.3     42.9
 UNOP               0.1      0.0      0.0     11.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.6      0.0      2.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     19.0
 
 
 340
