 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with
 all executive, legislative, and judicial powers ultimately
 vested in the King. Advised by the Queen Mother, traditional
 figures, and cabinet ministers, he rules according to Swazi
 law and custom, never codified but ultimately determined by
 himself and his advisors. Swaziland's Government combines
 modern and traditional elements--a cabinet, parliament, and
 courts which follow Western law, and a tribal hierarchy with
 "national" courts which follow traditional Swazi law and
 custom. The Cabinet is appointed by the King from among
 Members of Parliament and is responsible to him. While
 Swaziland obtained a constitution containing a bill of rights
 at independence, it was repealed by King Sobhuza II in 1973 on
 the grounds that it introduced political practices which were
 incompatible with the Swazi tradition of decisionmaking.
 While not cited as a reason for repeal, the Constitution also
 contained restrictions on the King's executive authority.
 National defense is provided by the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense
 Force, consisting of fewer than 3,000 troops. The Royal
 Swaziland Police is the primary internal security
 organization. Both the police and the defense force are
 controlled by civilian authorities.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little
 government intervention in the marketplace. The majority of
 Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture. The economy
 relies heavily on the export sector, composed primarily of
 large, foreign-owned firms. Most imports come from South
 Africa.
 In 1990 there continued to be important restrictions on human
 rights, including those on free speech, assembly, fair trial,
 and political rights. Other human rights problems included
 mistreatment of prisoners, detention without charge, and
 discrimination (and violence) against women. In November,
 while on bail pending appeal of previous convictions, two
 political activists, Ray Russon and Sabelo Dlamini, requested
 temporary refuge at the U.S. Embassy because they feared
 arrest under Swaziland's 60-day detention order. Temporary
 refuge was not granted. Following their departure from the
 Embassy, and after a brief stay in South Africa, the two were
 arrested by Swazi authorities and briefly staged a hunger
 strike to protest their arrest.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no allegations of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c   Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is not generally practiced, but there are occasional
 reports by prisoners of police and military threats and
 
 
 400
 SWAZILAND
 beatings. Such complaints generally come from criminal, not
 political, prisoners. Defendants occasionally claim that
 confessions have been extorted by the police and that these
 confessions are sometimes accepted by the courts. Caning can
 be administered to youths involved in either petty or violent
 crimes.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests in all but certain
 exceptional circumstances. These exceptions, however, are
 poorly defined, and in practice police who have strong
 suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 Detainees are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their own
 choice, and provision for bail exists. During 1990 judges
 criticized police for frequently failing to charge arrestees
 within the 48 hours required by law. Magistrates dismissed a
 number of such cases, indicating they expected improved police
 performance.
 In another category known as administrative detention, a 1978
 law permits the Government to hold any person without charge
 or trial for a renewable period of 60 days. Detention under
 this law can only be appealed to the High Court under that
 Court's general power of review, but, as yet, such an appeal
 has never been heard. It is, therefore, unclear what form
 such an appeal would take since the law itself specifically
 prohibits any court appeal of a detention order. The only
 appeal available under the detention order is one made
 directly to the Monarch. In November the detention order was
 invoked again against five persons suspected of fomenting
 political activism on university campuses. The background to
 their case is described in Section 2. a. The law, invoked
 twice in 1989, and six times in 1990, has generally been used
 against political opponents viewed by the Government or the
 Monarch as threats to internal security or stability. On
 August 17, Prince Mfanasibili Dlamini was detained without
 charge under the 60 day detention order only moments after
 being acquitted of charges of treason by the High Court.
 Mfanasibili had been accused of plotting to escape from prison
 and overthrow the present King and Government while serving an
 earlier sentence imposed in 1986 on charges of obstructing
 justice. He remained in administrative detention at year's
 end
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, the
 High Court, and various subordinate magistrates' courts which
 are independent of executive and military control and free
 from intimidation from outside forces. However, in sedition
 cases the King has powers to circumvent the regular judiciary
 by appointing a special tribunal. The special tribunal may,
 if it deems it appropriate, adopt rules and procedures
 different from those applied in the High Court. In 1987 King
 Mswati III issued a decree that authorized a special tribunal
 to try offenses committed against the King and Queen Mother.
 This decree permits secret sessions, forbids the accused from
 having legal representation, and does not allow an appeal.
 There were no trials by special tribunal in 1990.
 Some members of the regular judiciary are not Swazi but are
 appointed from the bars of other countries with compatible
 legal systems. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is
 entitled to counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed
 
 
 401
 SWAZILAND
 counsel is provided in capital cases or when difficult points
 of law are at issue. There are well-defined appeal procedures
 up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body. The
 right of appeal, however, is not guaranteed to persons held
 under the 1978 administrative detention law or to those
 charged with sedition or an offense against the King.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 honored in practice, with the important exception of the
 special tribunals. Additionally, the court president can
 order a trial to be held in secret in certain (e.g., rape)
 cases, and the Prime Minister can require that a trial be held
 in private. This, however, is rare and was not done in 1990.
 In traditional courts, to which ethnic Swazis may be brought
 for relatively minor offenses and violations of Swazi
 traditional laws or customs, legal counsel is not allowed, but
 defendents may speak on their own behalf. Sentences are
 subject to a review system and to appeal to the High Court and
 the Court of Appeals. Accused persons who desire counsel can
 insist that their case be transferred from the traditional
 courts. There are occasional disagreements over which court
 system should have jurisdiction in a particular case. By law,
 the public prosecutor has the authority to determine which
 court should hear the case. However, there have been
 instances in which the police determined where a case should
 be tried. Unless the defendant, who may be unaware of his or
 her legal rights, protests the decision, cases may be tried in
 the wrong court system without-the error becoming known.
 Prisoners frequently complain of undue delays in their cases
 coming to trial. Such delays are generally the result of
 bureaucratic inertia rather than a deliberate policy. A
 shortage of trained magistrates and proper courtroom equipment
 regularly contributes to these delays.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The law generally requires that a warrant be issued by a
 magistrate before police may search homes or other premises.
 However, the law also provides police officers with the rank
 of subinspector or higher the right to search without a
 warrant if they have reasonable cause to believe evidence can
 be obtained that might otherwise be lost through delay in
 obtaining a warrant. While searches without warrants do occur
 relatively frequently, the issue of legality of evidence, or
 the method by which evidence is obtained, rarely arises in
 court.
 On February 5, police mounted an early morning raid on a
 teacher training college, apparently in search of allegedly  -
 seditious pamphlets critical of the King. Dormitory-rooms and
 the personal effects-of students were thoroughly searched. It
 was never clear whether the police were in possession of
 search warrants. Police did use a warrant in September, when
 the house of a former parliamentary leader was raided in
 search of similar materials.
 There is no evidence that the Government actively monitors
 private correspondence or conversation, but the Swazi police
 have been known to apprehend and interrogate persons reported
 to have made objectionable statements about the King during
 the course of private conversation or in telegraphic
 correspondence.
 
 
 402
 SWAZILAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including.
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. The Parliament serves as a
 lively forum for examination and criticism of government
 policies, but matters are seldom pressed to a vote and, when
 they are, unanimity is usually the result. A Swazi's main
 traditional forum for expressing discontent is through his or
 her chief, and public condemnation of certain policies and
 people is not permitted. Criticism of the royal family and of
 national security policy .is forbidden.
 The media, both government controlled and private, practice
 self-censorship, refraining from criticism of sensitive or
 controversial issues involving the royal family, but
 frequently openly criticize and question other actions of the
 Government and the business community. Swazi radio and
 television stations are government controlled, and there is
 also a semiofficial newspaper. Private companies and church
 groups publish several newspapers and magazines.
 In August the Government reinforced the practice of
 self-censorship by announcing new press guidelines that called
 for the self-censorship of any story which covered in advance
 the movements of the King or Prime Minister. The guidelines
 also broadly admonished the press to avoid any stories that
 would degrade the image of the King, sow division within the
 country, or cause an uprising against the King and the
 Government. This announcement may have been more a reminder
 of a longstanding unwritten understanding with the media
 concerning self-censorship than any new crackdown on press
 freedom.
 In June and July, 14 people were arrested in connection with
 the alleged publication and distribution of seditious
 pamphlets. The pamphlets were sharply critical of the King's
 policies and lifestyle and called for a democratic, multiparty
 political system. In directly related charges, the group was
 also accused of plotting to overthrow the Government and of
 forming a political party, the People's United Democratic
 Movement, or PUDEMO. Ultimately, 10 persons were brought to
 trial. Of these, four were acquitted of all charges, while
 the remaining six were found guilty on the minor charges of
 organizing and participating in political meetings without
 police permission. Four of the six were sentenced to 6-month
 jail terms and released because they had already served this
 time while awaiting trial. Two others were sentenced to
 consecutive 6-month terms, but were released on bail pending
 the appeal of their verdicts. In late November, 4 of the 10,
 plus 1 of the 14 original arrestees, were rearrested, this
 time without charges under the 60-day detention order. This
 occurred in connection with the outbreak of student unrest
 described in Section 2. b.
 The Government has occasionally proscribed publications,
 including foreign publications, deemed to be prejudicial to
 the interest of defense, public safety, or public health. No
 such bannings have occurred since 1985. In fact, the
 Parliament is presently considering unbanning two publications
 banned in the early 1980's. Academic freedom is also limited
 by the practice of self-censorship and the prohibition of
 overtly political gatherings. However, the academic community
 in the past year has sponsored several lively and
 
 
 SWAZILAND
 well-attended public debates on topics such as political
 expectations and human rights.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 King Sobhuza's 1973 decree prohibits meetings of a political
 nature and demonstrations in any public place without the
 consent of the Commissioner of Police. In practice, this law
 has not been extended to all public gatherings. However, the
 Government uses this power to stop meetings which might be
 embarrassing to it. In March, for example, police turned down
 the application for a public gathering by the Swaziland
 National Association of Unemployed People and thereby declared
 illegal the group's first attempt to hold a meeting. In the
 face of public criticism, however, the Government relented and
 granted the permit a week later.
 On November 14, Swazi police and paramilitary troops brutally
 broke up a sit-in at the University of Swaziland after
 students had boycotted classes because of discontent over a
 number of political and academic issues. Approximately 80
 students were injured, 5 seriously. There were confirmed
 reports that soldiers had targeted female students for the
 worst beatings. Five people suspected of encouraging illegal
 political activism on two campuses were detained without
 charges by the police.
 Political parties are prohibited by Swazi law under the King's
 1973 decree. It is on charges of contravening this law,
 together with the related charges of treason and sedition
 alluded to in Section 2.a., that the 14 alleged members of
 PUDEMO were tried.
 There are no formal legal barriers to freedom of association,
 other than the ban on political parties. However, groups seen
 as critical of the Government or as being involved in
 quasi-political activities are occasionally subjected to
 harassment by authorities. Trade associations and
 professional bodies exist and maintain relations with
 recognized international bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is hospitable to all religious beliefs, informally
 considers itself to be a Christian country, and permits a wide
 variety of foreign missionary activity. Organized religions
 are free to establish places of worship and train clergy, to
 publish religious texts, and to undertake religious travel
 outside the country. At the same time, the authorities
 promote the observance of Swazi customs. Problems arise when
 these customs conflict with religious beliefs. Church
 condemnation of traditional Swazi ceremonies, for example, has
 led in the past to the arrest and deportation of church
 figures. No such incidents occurred in 1990.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. Those who
 have left the country may freely return, and citizenship is
 not revoked for political reasons. Swazi men generally can
 obtain a travel document to travel in the region, but the
 Government occasionally refuses to issue a passport if the
 applicant does not appear to have adequate means of support
 
 
 404
 SWAZILAND
 while abroad. Married women require the husband's permission
 to apply for a passport.
 Swaziland treats displaced persons from neighboring states
 well. About 7,000 primarily ethnic Swazis from South Africa,
 who fled Zulu administration in the black South African
 homeland of KwaZulu, reside in Swaziland. Recent years have
 seen a large influx in the number of Mozambican refugees.
 While approximately 32,400 are officially registered by the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), it is
 believed that an additional 30,000 or more may be in Swaziland
 illegally. Swaziland permits the UNHCR to interview those who
 seek refugee status and grants asylum if the person can
 establish that he or she will face persecution if
 repatriated. Illegal aliens who cannot establish their
 refugee status, however, can be deported. In practice, many
 of those refugees identified for deportation end up serving
 extended time in detention while arrangements for their
 repatriation are made. This delay is due to the absence of an
 agreed repatriation procedure with Mozambique, rather than a
 policy to penalize illegal immigrants.
 In March a small number of young South Africans fleeing
 internecine violence in Natal began to arrive in Swaziland.
 The Government, together with the UNHCR, has worked to send
 these refugees on to their desired destinations, normally
 African National Congress (ANC) training centers in Zambia.
 On several occasions, these youths have damaged property or
 committed other petty crimes at the Malindza refugee camp
 where they are temporarily housed. Generally in such cases,
 they are arrested, declared prohibited immigrants, and then
 deported to Zambia once the UNHCR receives the funding to do
 SO.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Swazi citizens do not have the right to change their
 government through democratic means. Political parties are
 outlawed, and an organized political opposition does not
 exist. The King rules in conjunction with the Queen Mother.
 Traditionally, decisionmaking has been by consensus, with the
 King soliciting advice from the royal family, the senior
 chiefs, the Cabinet, Members of Parliament, and other
 interested parties. Still, the King's power is absolute, and
 he can accept or dismiss advice as he sees fit. Legislation
 is passed by the Parliament and is then submitted to the
 Monarch for assent--which may be withheld. The King can also
 legislate by decree. While public debate of political matters
 under consideration by the Monarch is rare, in 1990 all adult
 citizens were invited to participate in a "people's
 paLliament," an open air public debate in which certain of the
 Government's leaders and policies were sharply criticized.
 Swazis participate indirectly in the selection of Members of
 Parliament. Parliamentarians (50 in the House and 20 in the
 Senate) are chosen in a complex process involving the
 interaction of a 7-member electoral committee, 40 traditional
 districts, 80 electors, and the King's appointive powers. The
 King can dissolve the Parliament and call new elections,
 normally held every 5 years.
 
 
 SWAZILAND
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no organizations that exclusively promote human
 rights in Swaziland. However, the Law Society of Swaziland
 does provide information and services related to human rights
 concerns and issued appeals for a judicial inquiry into the
 November university campus incident. The Government does not
 encourage activities by international nongovernmental human
 rights organizations, and it received no requests for
 investigations from such organizations during the year.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race,'Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Swazi governmental and social traditions give rise to
 discriminatory treatment between ethnic and nonethnic Swazis.
 For example, ethnic Swazis from south Africa seeking political
 refuge in Swaziland are treated much like Swazi citizens and
 are often given work permits. Those who are not ethnic Swazis
 are treated as foreigners, and permits are given more
 reluctantly.
 Under traditional practices, women occupy a subordinate role
 in Swazi society, and the dualistic nature of the legal system
 complicates the issue of women's rights. A wife's legal
 rights, for example, differ substantially, depending on
 whether she is married under traditional or civil law. In a
 traditional marriage, a woman is treated as a minor under the
 law. She is not responsible for contracts she signs, and she
 cannot, except in rare instances, hold real estate or inherit
 property in her own name. She must normally obtain her
 husband's permission to borrow money, to leave the country,
 and, in some cases, to take a job. Divorce is almost never
 allowed, and children are considered to belong to the father
 and his family. In traditional marriages, a man can take more
 than one wife. In some cases, women are compelled by family
 pressure to marry without their consent, although this
 practice is decreasing over time. Women who are forced to
 marry do have legal recourse, but few resort to it, both out
 of ignorance of their rights and out of fear of ostracism by
 family members. Wives chosen by the King do not have legal
 recourse. Because traditional marriage is governed by
 uncodified Swazi law and custom, women's rights are often
 unclear and change according to where and by whom they are
 interpreted.
 Even under civil law, a married woman is treated as a minor
 unless the parties to the marriage sign a prenuptial
 agreement. With a prenuptial agreement, property can be
 separately maintained, and the wife can enter into contracts
 and legal proceedings without her husband's consent. A man
 who marries a woman under civil law legally cannot have more
 than one wife, although in practice this restriction is
 'sometimes ignored. Divorce does not automatically lead to
 loss of custody of children for the wife. Rather, custody is
 awarded according to the interests of the child, and
 maintenance for wives granted custody is generally provided.
 Marriage is further complicated by the fact that couples often
 marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating
 problems in determining which set of rules applies to the
 marriage and to subsequent questions of child custody and
 inheritance in the event of its termination. The Swaziland
 Council of Churches opened a legal aid center in 1988 which
 
 
 406
 SWAZILAND
 provides free information on issues such as marriage and
 maintenance laws.
 Physical abuse of women, particularly wife beating, is
 frequent. Customarily, a Swazi man has the right and duty to
 beat his wife and children when he deems it necessary to do
 so. Women have the right under the law to charge their
 husbands with assault, but few know that they can resort to
 legal remedies. The traditional courts are generally
 unsympathetic to "unruly" or "disobedient" women. The modern
 courts are more likely to convict wife beaters, but sentences,
 even when beating results in death, are frequently light.
 In the workplace, the Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers
 to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex or
 political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal work.
 However, around 75 percent of all private sector jobs are held
 by men, and their average wage rate by skill category is in
 some sectors three times that of women. The Swaziland
 Federation of Trade Unions has a special women's wing to
 address issues of discrimination in the workplace. This wing
 is focusing on the issues of wage discrimination and maternity
 benefits, as well as other sex-based discriminatory
 practices. In 1990 this organization helped bring to light
 the issue of sexual harassment of female employees by male
 employers. Legal protection from sexual harassment is
 addressed in the Swazi legal code, but its provisions are
 vague and therefore ineffective in halting this type of
 discrimination.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Industrial Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms the right
 of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely.
 Persons in all sectors of the economy, including the public
 sector, are permitted to join unions. Employers are obliged
 to recognize a union when it achieves 40-percent membership
 among employees. Unions are able, within limits, to operate
 independently of government or political control. This
 independence is contingent on their acting as economic, rather
 than political, organizations.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the
 framework of the IRA. The Act specifies a number of
 provisions which must be addressed in a constitution. These
 include provisions for election of officers by secret ballot,
 annual meetings open to all members, fees, grounds for
 suspension of members, and expenditure of union funds. The
 union constitution must be approved by the Labor Commissioner,
 who can strike out or amend provisions which violate the law.
 Unions cannot be dissolved as long as they adhere to the
 regulations of the IRA. Unions which fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner can be dissolved.
 For several years, including 1990, the International Labor
 Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has noted
 discrepancies between ILO Convention 87 on freedom of
 association which Swaziland ratified in 1978 and the IRA. The
 several concerns of the COE include the broad powers accorded
 government officials to control union activity and the
 strictures on the ability of workers to form unions and
 associate with other unions at home and abroad.
 
 
 SWAZILAND
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise,
 including what determines a legal or illegal strike. The Act
 empowers the Industrial Court, presided over by a High Court
 judge, to settle employment disputes. The Industrial Court
 hears and gives judgment on disputes and grievances and -may
 enjoin a union from striking. While historically strikes have
 been rare in Swaziland, consciousness of workers' rights is
 growing rapidly. When disputes arise, the Government tries to
 intervene to reduce the chances of a strike, which may not be
 legally called until all avenues of negotiation have been
 exhausted. The Labor Commissioner can then issue a 14-day
 postponement of a strike, which can be extended upon
 presentation of further documentation.
 A significant labor development was a threatened strike by the
 Swaziland National Association of Teachers and the Swaziland
 National Association of Civil Servants over a long simmering
 dispute with the Government over a pay raise and retroactive
 back pay. Such a strike would have been illegal since, under
 the IRA employees in services deemed essential by the
 Government, such as civil servants and teachers, are
 prohibited from striking. The issue was ultimately settled in
 favor of the unions outside of the IRA mechanism in complex
 negotiations between the Government, the King, and the twa
 unions. Workers at the Post and TeIecommunications
 Corporation threatened to strike over wage demands at year's
 end.
 The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU), the union
 umbrella organization is a member of the Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity. The SFTU also represents Swazi
 labor in the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 and the Southern Africa Trade Union Coordination Council.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The IRA provides for the right to organize and bargain
 collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Disputes
 in this area are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the
 Industrial Court, if necessary. Employers can prohibit
 employees from attending union meetings on company time if the
 union has not achieved the 40-percent membership level
 required for recognition. However, members of legally
 recognized unions must be allowed to attend union activities.
 Although many employers habitually resist recognition and
 force the issue into the Industrial Court, the Court generally
 rules in favor of the unions. The Government wishes to avoid
 labor confrontation and encourages voluntary negotiations
 between employers and .inions.
 While collective bargaining does occur, it is not widespread.
 The Government issues directives on wage levels and thus
 restricts the bargaining process. The Industrial Court may
 refuse to register agreements in the event of nonobservance of
 these government directives. The COE has criticized this as a
 violation of Convention 98.
 There are no export processing zones in Swaziland. Labor
 legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country.
 c   Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is legally prohibited and does not exist.
 
 
 SWAZILAND
 d. Minimum age for Employment of Children
 The Employment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child
 below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except in
 cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or
 in technical schools where children are working under the
 supervision of a teacher or other authorized person.
 Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be
 worked on schooldays and limits such work overall to 6 hours
 per day or 33 hours per week. Employment of children in the
 formal sector is not customary.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no overall minimum wage, but rather a sliding scale
 of minimum wages depending on the type of work. A casual
 laborer must legally earn $9 per week, a security guard at
 least $15 per week, and a laboratory technician, $62.
 Employees receive time and a half for overtime and double pay
 on Sundays or public holidays. Most workers receive a minimum
 of 14 days' annual leave after each period of 12 months of
 continuous service. These standards are generally upheld in
 the formal sector.
 While wage levels are low by Western standards, most Swazis
 employed in the formal sector do relatively well. Most Swazi
 families also farm and graze cattle so that even those at the
 low end of the wage scale generally are able to maintain a
 decent standard of living.
 There is a maximum 48-hour workweek in the modern sector,
 except for security guards, who work up to six 12-hour shifts
 per week.
 There is extensive legislation, notably in The Employment Act
 of 1980, protecting worker health and safety in Swaziland.
 The Government sets safety standards for industrial operations
 and encourages private companies to develop accident
 prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production
 has necessitated more government action on safety issues. In
 1986 only 20 safety inspections took place, none in
 manufacturing industries. By 1989, this figure had risen to
 108, with 11 inspections of industrial operations. There were
 1,030 industrial accidents reported to the Ministry of Labor
 in 1989, lower than the figure for 1988 (1,075), and still
 lower than the 1,275 reported in 1984. Given the rapid growth
 in industrial employment, this slight decline in the level of
 industrial accidents indicates progess in observance of safety
 measures.
 
 
