 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with executive, legisla-
 tive, and (with some limitations) judicial powers ultimately vested in the King (-pres-
 ently Mswati InI). The King rules according to unwritten Swazi law and custom, in
 conjunction with an elected parliament and an accompanying structure of published
 laws, implementing agencies, and an independent judiciary. Despite the 1993 par-
 liamentary elections, the election of regional and local councils in 1994, and munici-
 pal elections in 1995, political power continues to rest largely with the King and
 his circle of traditional advisers. The 1968 Constitution was suspended by the
 present King's father in 1973; however, there were demands that the suspension be
 ifted. Based upon the 1973 suspension, the King has the authority to issue decrees
 that carry the force of law (although he did not exercise this authority in 1996). In
 April the King formally announced a constitutional initiative, involving a review of
 the suspended 1968 Constitution and the establishment of a constitutional commis-
 sion to draft a new constitution. Members of the Constitutional Review Commission
 were announced in late July, and it met in September. The Commission has 2 years
 to complete its report.
 Both the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force and the Royal Swaziland Police oper-
 ate under civilian control and are responsible for external and internal security. The
 police harassed and arrested political activists from prohibited political organiza-
 tions. Some members of the olice use excessive force and abuse in the interrogation
 of criminal suspects.
 Swaziland has a free market economy, with relatively little government interven-
 tion. The majority of Swazis are engaged in subsistence agriculture, although a rel-
 
 
 275
 
 atively diversified industrial sector now accounts for the largest component of the
 fornal economy. The economy relies heavily on the export sector, especially the soft
 drink concentrate sugar, and wood pulp industries, which are composed primarily
 of large firms with predominantly foreign ownership. A governmental organization
 maintains large investments in all major sectors of the economy, including industry,
 agriculture, and services.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation. Despite the con-
 stitutional initiative, citizens are still not able to change their Government. The
 Government restricted freedom of speech and assembly and continued prohibitions
 on political activity. The media practiced self-censorship. A journalist from the gov-
 ernment newspaper, members of political groupings, and labor union leaders were
 detained or arrested. Some members of the police continued to use physical abuse
 and excessive force, especially during the interrogation of suspects, and the authori-
 ties rarely punished those who committed such acts. The Government's use of a non-
 bailable offense provision, strengthened by act of Parliament in 1994, continued to
 cause overcrowding in detention facilities. Prison conditions are poor. The Govern-
 ment adopted revised industrial relations legislation, containing draconian penalties
 for various violations of the law, which both unions and organized business rejected.
 Legal and cultural discrimination and violence against women, as well as abuse of
 children, remained problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-At the height of the January mass
 labor action, police shot and killed a female protestor in Manzini.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports by criminal defendants of the use of torture during in-
 terrogation. A number of defendants accused police of employing the "tube" style of
 interrogation, in which police suffocate suspects through use of a rubber tube
 around the face and mouth. Police routinely beat criminal suspects in the course of
 interrogations. The Government failed to prosecute or otherwise discipline police of-
 ficers for such abuses. Courts did, however, throw out confessions induced through
 such physical abuse.
 In January police used excessive force in breaking up a protest by street vendors,
 injuring scores of people (see Section 2.b.). In the same month police and army units
 assaulted students attempting to hold a meeting (see Section 2.b.). In October police
 detained over 20 students protesting in Big Bend, beat them, and threatened them
 with prosecution and the loss of scholarships.
 Prison conditions are poor. Food is generally adequate, although sometimes family
 members must bring food to supplement the sparse prison diet. Medical care is in-
 adequate. Use of the nonbail provision led to continued overcrowding in government
 remand centers, where suspects are held during pretrial detention (see Section 1.d.).
 Women and juveniles are held in separate prison facilities. The Government permits
 prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law requires warrants for arrests in
 most circumstances, except when police observe a crime being committed or have
 reason to believe that a suspect will flee. Detainees may consult with a lawyer of
 their choice and must be charged with violation of a statute within a reasonable
 time, usually 48 hours, or, in remote areas, as soon as the judicial officer appears.
 The authorities generally respect these rights in practice.
 The Government continued to limit provisions for bail for crimes appearing in the
 Nonbailable Offenses Order, effective August 24, 1993. The Minister of Justice may
 amend the list, which currently has 10 offenses, by his own executive act. An lith
 offense, involving narcotics, is reportedly in the preparation stage, because of grow-
 ing concern regarding drug use and drug dealers. The mere charge of the under ying
 ofense, without any evidentiary showing that the suspect is involved, is sufficient
 to employ the nonbail provision.
 Overcrowding, poor diet, and delays in bringing cases to court led to a brief hun-
 ger strike by criminal detainees in February protesting their continuing detention
 without trial.
 In January police detained a journalist for the government newspaper for
 photogaphing police assaulting street vendors (see Section 2.a.).
 In January the Government arrested and held incommunicado three labor leaders
 during the nationwide mass stay away conducted by the Swaziland Federation of
 Trade Unions (see Section 6.a.). The unionists were care with inciting public vio-
 lence under the Public Order Act, a nonbailable offense (see Section 6.a.). The lead-
 
 
 ers were released after 3 days' detention; all charges were dropped. In March the
 Government charged the three men with various offenses under the Industrial Rela-
 tions Act for alleged illegal acts stemming from the same mass stay away. The case
 was subsequently postponed indefinitely by the High Court.
 The Government does not use forced exile. There are no formal barriers to prevent
 the return of dissidents.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent; however the King
 has certain judicial powers.Judicial powers are vested in a dual system, one inde-
 pendent and based on Western law the other based on a system of national courts
 that follows unwritten traditional law and custom. In treason and sedition cases,
 the King can circumvent the regular judiciary by appointing a special tribunal,
 which may adopt rules and procedures different from those applied in the High
 Court. However, this power was last used in 1987.
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, (composed entirely of expa-
 triate, usually South African, judges), the High Court, and magistrates' courts, all
 of which are independent of executive and military control and free from intimida-
 tion from outside forces. The expatriate judges, often distinguished members of their
 respective bars, serve on the basis of 2-year, renewable contracts. Local judges serve
 indefinitely on good behavior. In magistrates' courts, the defendant is entitled to
 counsel at his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital
 cases or when difficult points of law are at issue. There are well-deined appeal pro-
 cedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body.
 Most Swazis who encounter the legal system do so through the traditional courts.
 The authorities may bring ethnic Swazis to these courts for relatively minor offenses
 and violations of traditional law and custom In traditional courts, defendants are
 not permitted formal legal counsel but may speak on their own behalf and be as-
 sisted by informal advisers. Sentences are subject to review by traditional authori-
 ties andt appeal to the High Court and the Court of Appeals. By law the public
 prosecutor has the authority to determine which court should hear a case, but in
 practice the poice usually make the determination. Accused persons have the right
 to transfer their cases from the traditional ourts. Deilays in trials are common.
 The court has delayed the trial of 49 members of the People's United Democracy
 Movement (PUDEMO) and its sister organization, the Swaziland Youth Congress
 (SWAYOCO), for nearly 2 years. They were arrested by police in late December
 1994 when the two groups staged a public rally in Siteki. The 49 have been charged
 by the Government with holding a political meeting without a permit, possession
 of political pamphlets, and disturbing traffic. While the case remains pending, the
 defendants are free on bail but must report to the courtroom on a regular basis.
 There were no reports of ]litical prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires a warrant from a magistrate before police may search homes or other
 premises, and police generally respect this requirement in practice. However, police
 officers with the rank of subinspector or higher have the right to search without a
 warrant if they believe evidence might be lost through delay in obtaining a warrant.
 While searches without warrants occur occasionally, the issue of legality of evidence
 rarely arises in court.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech, especially on political mat-
 ters, remains limited, including in the Parliament. The media, both government-con-
 trolled and private, practice self-censorship in regard to the immediate royal family
 and national security policy. In January police detained a photographer for the gov-
 ernment newspaper for taking photographs of police assaulting street vendors dur-
 ing a protest in Manzini. The photographer was released the same day. In June the
 Minister of Broadcasting interrupted the evening news broadcast of the government
 television station and radio station and prevented the reading of news items con-
 cerning the ongoing labor turmoil in the country. The Government continued to
 refuse to grant the expatriate owner and publisher of the independent newspaper
 a renewal of his work permit, now pending for over 2 years. After publishing a re-
 port critical of the alleged financial dealings of the King, a senior editor of the inde-
 pendent newspaper was forced under pressure and alleged threats of arrest to issue
 a gublic apology.
 aoth government-owned and independent newspapers continued to treat a wide
 variety of sensitive topics and to criticize government corruption, inefficiency, and
 waste. The government-owned television and radio stations--the most influential
 media in reaching the public-generally followed official policy positions. Private
 companies and church groups own several newsletters, magazines, and one radio
 station that broadcasts throughout the region, but these avoid political controversy.
 
 
 277
 The practice of self-censorship and the prohibition of political gatherings limit
 academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-King Sobhuza's 1973 decree
 prohibits political parties, as well as meetings of a political nature, processions, or
 demonstrations in any public place without the consent of the Commissioner of Po-
 lice. The authorities did not generally grant permission to hold meetings but did not
 rigidly enforce the 1973 decree. Political organizations, including PUDEMO and
 SWAYOCO, often met without the required permission without repercussions. How-
 ever, the threat of police intervention is pervasive, and on several occasions police
 harassed political and labor groups taking part in political activities, such as peace-
 ful meetings, rallies, and demonstrations. Police in January broke up a protest
 march by street vendors in Manzini with baton charges, firing tear gas and live am-
 munition. Scores of people were injured, including two shot by police.
 Also in January police and army units assaulted students with batons at the Uni-
 versity of Swaziland when students attempted to hold a meeting concerning the on-
 going nationwide strike by trade unions. A number of students were injured by po-
 lice.In April a SWAYOCO activist was convicted of subversive activities and public
 violence for hauling down the Swazi flag during the nationwide union strike in Jan-
 uary. The activist received a suspended sentence. In June police broke up another
 student meeting at a public park in Manzini, where the students were attempting
 to rally in favor of striking teachers. In September and October police and military
 personnel prevented a public meeting called by PUDEMO and the Swazi Democratic
 Alliance to discuss matters regarding the Constitutional Review Commission.
 A revised Industrial Relations Act severely restricts the ability of trade union or-
 ganizations to participate in the social and political affairs of the nation. The Act
 prohibits unions from striking or agitating over such issues (see Section 6.a.).
 There was no progress in the case of the 49 members of PUDEMO and
 SWAYOCO who were arrested for staging a public rally in December 1994 (see Sec-
 tion i.e.).
 Several traditional forums exist for the expression of opinion, including commu-
 nity meetings, national councils, and direct dialog with village chiefs, but they often
 depend on the sufferance of leaders and are not effective channels for expressing
 real political dissent.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-Followers of all religious faiths are free to worship with-
 out government interference or restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Swazis may travel and work freely within the country. However, under
 traditional law a married woman requires her husband's permission to apply for a
 passport for travel abroad, and unmarried women require the permission of a close
 male relative. A Citizenship Law passed in 1992 removed several ambiguities relat-
 ing to Swazi citizenship and nominally enabled nonethnic Swazis to obtain pass-
 ports and citizenship documents. Bureaucratic delays, however, plagued individuals
 seeking these documents during the year, in part due to the common perception that
 mixed race and white Swazis are not real Swazis. Mixed race citizens in particular
 are sometimes subject to unfair and discriminatory treatment.
 The Government treats several thousand ethnic Swazis from the former homeland
 of KwaZulu in South Africa as virtually indistinguishable from local Swazis and
 routinely grants them travel and citizenship documents.
 Swaziland's treatment of refugees is considered excellent by the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as well as the various nongovernmental
 organizations (NGO's) involved in the care of these groups. The UNHCR officially
 registered several hundred refugees in Swaziland, the majority coming from east
 and central Africa. The issue of provision of first asylum has not arisen in recent
 years.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens are not able to exercise this right. The King retains ultimate executive
 and legislative authority, and political parties are prohibited. Passage of legislation
 by Parliament requires the King's assent to become law, which he is not obliged to
 give. When Parliament is not in session, the King may legislate by decree under his
 residual emergency powers. The King chooses the Prime Minister and, in consulta-
 tion with the rime Minister, the Cabinet, as well as many senior civil servants,
 and heads of government offices.
 Pressure has been building to modernize the political system. In July the King
 chose the members of a Constitutional Review Commission, to examine the sus-
 pended 1968 Constitution, and begin work on a new document. However, the exact
 
 
 278
 duties of the Commission remained unclear. The Commission has 2 years to com-
 plete its work.
 Women have full legal rights to participate in the political process. There are 2
 women in the 65-member House of Assembly, and 6 women hold seats in the 30-
 member Senate. There are no women in the Cabinet. Three women serve as prin-
 cipal secretaries, the most senior civil service rank in the ministries. There are
 women on the 30-person Constitutional Review Commission.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government permits domestic human rights groups to operate. In 1996 two
 local human rights groups spoke out on human rights issues and served as medi-
 ators in land and labor disputes. The groups criticized the Government on a number
 of occasions, including the Government's handling of labor disputes, detention of
 labor leaders, and the lack of accountability and transparency in government circles.
 There were no visits by international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The 1968 Constitution remains suspended. However, the Employment Act of 1980
 forbids employers to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex, or political affili-
 ation. Under the act employees may bring suit against employers for discrimination,
 and there are also provisions for criminal prosecutions. However, there is no record
 of any suits or prosecutions. Reportedly, the act has been used on occasion to bring
 moral suasion to bear against employers. Mixed race citizens. sometimes experience
 discrimination.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, is frequent, despite
 traditional strictures against this practice. Women have the right to charge their
 husbands with assault under beth the traditional and modern legal systems and fre-
 quently do so, usually in extreme cases when intervention by extended family mem-
 bers fails to end such violence. The traditional courts, however, can be unsympa-
 thetic to "unruly" or "disobedient" women and are less likely than the modern courts
 to convict men for wife beating. Rape is also a common crime and is regarded by
 many men as a minor offense. Even in the modem courts, sentences frequently
 amount to no more than several months in jail, a fine, or both. The Legal Code ad-
 dresses legal protection from sexual harassment, but its provisions are vague and
 largely ineffective.
 Several NGO's provide support to groups affected by discrimination or abuse, in-
 cluding the Swaziland Action Group Against Abuse, which has relations with other
 civic organizations as well as the Government. They provide forums to discuss
 spousal and child abuse and to educate the public on the rights of abuse victims.
 Women have traditionally occupied a subordinate role in society, and the dualistic
 nature of the legal system complicates the issue of women's rights. As traditional
 marriage is governed by uncodified law and custom, women's rights are often un-
 clear and change according to where and by whom they are interpreted. In both tra-
 ditional and civil marriages, wives are legally treated as minors, although those who
 marry under civil law may be accorded the legal status of adults, if stipulated in
 a signed prenuptial agreement.
 Changing socioeconomic conditions, urbanization, and the increasing prominence
 of female leaders in government and civic organizations are breaking down barriers
 to equality. Wives now routinely and successfully execute contracts and enter into
 a variety of transactions in their own names. Nevertheless, despite the 1980 Em-
 ployment Act requiring equal pay for equal work, men's average wage rates by skill
 category usually exceed those of women. Moreover, a woman generally requires her
 husband's permission to borrow money, open a bank account, leave the country, gain
 access to land, or, in some cases, take a job. Unmarried women require a male rel-
 ative's permission to obtain a passport (see Section 2.d.).
 Traditional marriages consider children to belong to the father and to his family
 if the couple divorces. Children born out of wedlock are viewed as belonging to the
 mother. In traditional marriages, -a-man may take more than one wife. A man who
 marries a woman under civil law legally may not have more than one wife, although
 in practice this restriction is sometimes ignored. Under the Citizenship Act of 1992,
 a Swazi woman does not automatically pass citizenship to her children.
 Couples often marry in both civil and traditional ceremonies, creating problems
 in determining which set of rules applies to the marriage and to subsequent ques-
 tions of child custody and inheritance in the event of divorce or death.
 
 
 279
 The Government has committed itself to various women's initiatives in the wake
 of the 1995 Beiing Conference on Women, and the Ministry of Home Affairs coordi-
 nates women's issues.
 Children.-The Government is concerned with the rights and welfare of children,
 and a number of laws directly address children's issues. The Adoption of Children
 Act of 1952 includes a number of provisions for protecting children under consider-
 ation for adoption, and the Maintenance Act of 1970 includes various provisions re-
 garding the enforcement of maintenance decrees for the benefit of women and chil-
 dren. A government task force continued to educate the public on children's issues.
 Child abuse is a problem in Swaziland. Children convicted of crimes sometimes
 are caned as punishment. In May two 10-year-olds were caned for housebreaking.
 Fueled by demographic and social pressure, there are growing numbers of street
 children in Mbabane and Manzini.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government, through the Ministry of Home Affairs,
 has called for equal treatment of the disabled but has not initiated legislation to
 prohibit discrimination against the disabled. For example, there are no laws man-
 dating accessibility for the disabled to buildings, transportation, or government serv-
 ices.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The new Industrial Relations Act (IRA), a revision
 of the 1980 act, affirms the right of trade unions to organize and associate freely
 in the context of traditional trade union concerns. However, it imposes harsh crimi-
 nal penalties for union activity in favor of social or political issues outside core
 union concerns. Although the Act permits workers in all sectors of the economy, in-
 cluding the public sector, to join unions, their ability to express themselves is se-
 verely restricted. Unions can operate independently of government or political con-
 trol, provided that they act as economic, other than political, organizations. The
 main trade union federation is the Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions (SFTU).
 The Swaziland Federation of Labor, a breakaway federation formed from the SFTU
 in 1993, gained formal Government recognition in 1994.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the framework of the
 IRA. The act specifies a number of provisions that must be addressed in a constitu-
 tion, including the election of officers by secret ballot. The Labor Commissioner
 must approve the union constitution, and he can strike out or amend provisions that
 violate the law. The Government may dissolve unions that fail to maintain proper
 registration with the Labor Commissioner without recourse to judicial review, but
 it has never exercised this authority. The law prohibits strikes in "essential" serv-
 ices, which cover electricity, water, firefighting, health, sanitary, telephone, tele-
 graph, and broadcast, as well as many civil service positions. The teaching profes-
 sion was removed from the list of essential services.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise, including what de-
 termines a legal or illegal strike. The act empowers the Government to mediate em-
 ployment disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking. When dis-
 putes arise, the Government often intervenes to try to reduce the chances of a
 strike, which may not be legally called until all avenues of negotiation have been
 exhausted and a secret ballot of union members has been conducted.
 The act forbids labor federations or their officers to engage in any act that "causes
 or incites" the slowdown or cessation of work or economic activity, or to act in any
 way that might be construed as a "restraint of trade." The maximum penalty for
 violation of these provisions is 5 years' imprisonment. The Act also provides that
 any labor federation that devotes more of its funds and officers' time to issues of
 "public policy or public administration" than to union activities may be suspended
 or closed down. In September the Prime Minister noted his Government's readiness
 to consider amending the IRA; however the Government had taken no steps to do
 so by year's end. In October a panel of legal experts advised that the IRA was im-
 properly adopted, raising questions regarding its legal validity. The matter was
 under court review at year's end.
 There were a number of strikes, usually over wages and benefits, or dismissal of
 fellow workers. In January the SFTU conducted a mass stay away related to 27 de-
 mands presented to the Goverent in 1994 and to calls or fundamental political
 change. These demands and calls addressed a wide range of issues, including rec-
 ognition of affirmative action, a national uniform minimum wage, an end to dis-
 crimination against women, the provision of better housing for workers, inclusion
 of worker representatives in constitutional discussions, and the lifting of the 1973
 decree that suspended the Constitution and outlawed political parties. The stay
 away, which shut down the economy and large parts of the Government, ended after
 8 days upon a command from the King that workers return to their workplaces or
 
 
 face the use of force. At the height of the stay away, police shot and killed a woman
 demonstrator in Manzini; arrested three top SFTU leaders, charged them with vio-
 lations of the Public Order Act, and held them incommunicado for several days. The
 Government then released the leaders and dropped all charges. In March the Gov-
 ernment reopened the case against the three leaders, this time alleging violation of
 the IRA. After a single hearing on the charges, the High Court indefinitely post-
 poned the case. In July one of the three leaders, charged with fraud in connection
 with his former employment by a parastatal government insurance corporation, was
 acquitted. (These charges were filed in the aftrmath of the January stay away).
 Also in July the Government ied an approximately $1 million claim against the
 SFTU for losses incurred during the January stay away.
 In June the Swaziland National Association of Teachers (SNAT), and the Swazi-
 land National Association of Civil Servants (SNACS) went on nationwide strikes for
 higher wages. In July both organizations suspended their strikes, after the King
 agreed to investigate their wage demands.
 Me International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) has
 noted discrepancies between the IRA and ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Associa-
 tion and ILO Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively, both
 of which Swaziland ratified in 1978. The COE concerns include the powers accorded
 government officials to control union activity and the strictures on the ability of
 workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home and abroad. The
 Government tolerates the unions' international affiliations but does not recognize
 them.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides for the
 right to organize and bargain collectively and outlaws antiunion discrimination. Col-
 lective bargaining is widespread; approximately 80 percent of the formal private sec-
 tor is unionized. The Industrial Court may refuse to register collective bargaining
 agreements in the event of nonobservance of any requirement of the IRA. The law
 obliges employers to recognize a union when it achieves over 50 percent membership
 among employees. Disputes are referred to the Labor Commissioner and the Indus-
 trial Court, if necessary. Employers must allow representatives of legally recognized
 unions to conduct union activities on company time. Althou h many employers re-
 sist recognition and force the issue to the Industrial Court, the Court has generally
 ruled in favor of the unions on recognition.
 In the case of unfair dismissal, the Court may order reinstatement and may
 award compensation of up to 24 months' salary. Union leaders made credible
 charges that management in various industries summarily dismissed workers for
 union activity. The Government sometimes instigates such dismissals.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment Act of 1980 pro-
 hibits the hiring of a child below the age of 15 years in an industrial undertaking,
 except in cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or in technical
 schools where children are working under the supervision of a teacher or other au-
 thorized person. Legislation limits the number of night hours that can be worked
 on schooldays and limits children's work hours overall to 6 per day or 33 per week.
 Employment of children in the formal sector is not customary.
 However, children below the minimum age are frequently employed in the agricul-
 tural sector, particularly in the eastern cotton-growing region. Children are also em-
 ployed as domestic workers, and as herd boys in rural areas. The Ministry of Labor
 is responsible for enforcement of child labor regulations, but its effectiveness is lim-
 ited by personnel shortages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Swaziland has a legally mandated sliding scale
 of minimum wages depending on the type of work. These minimum wages generally
 provide a worker and family with an adequate standard of living within the context
 of Swazi society. The minimum monthly wage for a domestic worker is approxi-
 mately $40 (180 emalangeni), for an unskilled worker $65 (280 emalangeni), and for
 a skilled worker $100 (450 emalangeni).
 Labor, management, and government representatives have negotiated a maximum
 48-hour workweek in the industrial sector, except for security guards, who work up
 to six 12-hour shifts per week. The Employment Act and the Wages Act entitle all
 workers to 1 day of rest per week. Most workers receive a minimum of 12 days an-
 nual leave. The Labor Commissioner enforces standards in the formal sector.
 Extensive legislation protects worker health and safety. The Government sets
 safety standards for industrial operations and encourages private companies to de-
 velop accident prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production has ne-
 cessitated more government action on safety issues. However, the Labor Commis-
 
 
 sioner's Office has conducted few safety inspections in recent years because of staff-
 ing deficiencies. Workers have no formal statutory rights to remove themselves from
 dangerous work places without jeopardizing their jobs; nor do any collective bargain-
 ing agreements address the matter.
