 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is populated almost entirely by ethnic Swazis and
 governed as a modified traditional monarchy. All executive,
 legislative, and judicial powers aTe'vested in the King, who
 is advised by the Queen Mother, both of them traditional
 figures, and the-Ministers of the Cabinet. The King rules
 according. to traditional Swazi law and custom, never codified
 but ultimately determined by the.King and his advisors. Great
 emphasis is placed on obtaining consensus as the basis for
 executive decision. Swaziland's Government features both
 "modern" and "traditional" branches--a cabiaet, parliament,
 and courts whick" follow Western law, rand a tribal hierarchy
 with "national" courts &ihivh follow traditional Swazi law and
 custom. The modern Cabinet is appointed by the King from
 among Members of Parliament and is responsible to him.
 Political -parties are outlawed, and an organized political
 opposition to the Government in the sense of a multiparty
 system does not exist. Parliament, which has limited
 authority, consists of the House of Assembly and the Senate.
 There is no constitution in effect. Swaziland's 1965
 Constitution, which contained a bill of rights at independence,
 was repealed by King Sobhuza II in 1973 on the grounds that it
 introduced.political practices which were incompatible with
 the Swazi tradition of decisionmaking by consensus.
 National defense is provided by the Umbufto Swaziland Defense
 Force, consisting of fewer than 3,000 troops. The Royal Swazi
 Police are the primary internal security-force. These forces
 are not able to cope with the spillover from the southern
 African regional conflicts. Both African National Congress
 (ANC) militants and South African security forces created
 difficulties in 1987, the former attempting to use Swaziland
 as a base, the latter entering Swaziland to attack the ANC.
 Swaziland has an open, free economy with large export firms
 that are frequently foreign owned. The Government continues
 to promote private sector development and free enterprise.
 Eighty percent of the population is engaged in subsistence
 farming.
 There are significant restrictions on the exercise of human
 rights in Swaziland, including on freedom of speech and
 assembly and political rights. The Government is sensitive to
 negative or potentially insulting remarks about the King and
 Swazi traditions. In 1987 the Government responded to the
 publication of an article critical of the Incwala, a
 traditional royal ceremony, by arresting four persons involved
 in writing, translating, printing, and distributing the
 article and charged them with sedition. They were tried
 before the High Court in late September but had not been
 sentenced by the end of 1987. Following the death of King
 Sobhuza II in 1982, a schism developed within the Swazi royal
 family revolving around the replacement of the former King's
 designated Queen Regent and Prime Minister in August 1983.
 This dispute came to a head in 1987 when 12 influential
 decisionmakers thought to be connected with the events of 1983
 were detained.
 
 
 305
 SWAZILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There Were no reports or allegations in 1987 of political
 killings by agents of the Government. However, several
 incidents involving ANC targets occurred during the year which
 were reminiscent of those committed by South African forces in
 1986. On May 22, three people, including one ANC member, were
 killed when their car was attacked. On July 9, two persons,
 later confirmed to be ANC members by the National Executive
 Committee of the ANC, were killed by unidentified gunmen
 shortly after arriving in Swaziland.
 During the year, incidents of violence and major robberies
 increased, some involving fatal shootings which have been
 blamed on Mozambicans illegally in Swaziland. In response to
 these incidents, the Swazi Prime Minister issued a statement
 in July calling on neighboring states to respect Swaziland's
 independence and territorial integrity. Illegal entry and
 violence perpetrated across Swazi borders are beyond the
 ability-of Swaziland's small security forces to control.
 b. Disappearance
 There was one report of a disappearance in 1987. According to
 local press reports and ANC statements, an ANC member was
 kidnaped from her home outside Mbabane on May 23 and taken to
 South Africa by South African police agents. The Swazi police
 report no record of this incident. South African authorities
 confirmed in 1987 that an ANC member abducted in 1986 from
 Swaziland is in prison'in South Africa facing charges of
 treason and terrorism. The South African Government denies,
 however, that'the South African police were involved in the
 abduction as alleged.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture, as a rule, is not practiced in Swaziland. However,
 there were some reports of police threats and beatings in the
 handling of common criminals and suspects. In one case, a
 high court judge, after acquitting two-wardens of having
 beaten to death an inmate at the Matsapha central prison,
 noted that, although the crown prosecutor had failed to
 provide adequate evidence to prove guilt, evidence suggested
 that the prisoner was murdered in prison. Defendants often
 charge that confessions have been extorted by the police,
 especially in trials dealing with ritual murder. These
 charges by the defense are sometimes found to be substantiated
 by the judges. Caning is occasionally administered to youths
 involved in either petty or violent crimes. Prisons are often
 unsanitary and have low nutritional standards for the
 prisoners, a condition which probably reflects the country's
 economic limitations rather than any intent to inflict
 punishment. Prisoners are allowed visits from family members,
 and the main prison includes facilities for teaching manual
 trades.
 
 
 306
 SWAZILAND
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests in all but certain
 exceptional circumstances. These exceptions, however, are
 poorly defined, 'and in practice police who have strong
 suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 The police are allowed to hold a person for a *reasonable
 time" without charge. In some cases, this has led to persons
 being detained without charge for considerable periods. Such
 detainees are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their own
 choosing, though some attorneys have had difficulty gaining
 access. Provision for bail exists.
 A 1978 detention law permits the Government to detain any
 person without charge for a renewable period of 60 days. This
 law, not utilized since 1985, was invoked several times in
 1987. In May the Swazi police arrested 12 leading figures in
 Swazi society on the basis of a 60-day detention order signed
 by the Prime Minister. The Swazi Cabinet, shortly after the
 arrests, announced that the 12 were suspected of involvement
 in the 1983 replacement of the late King's designated Queen
 Regent. Detention orders for 11 of the 12 were subsequently
 extended for additional 60-day periods. The 11 detainees were
 charged with high treason before a special tribunal on November
 20, 1987. The twelfth original detainee was sentenced in July
 for illegal possession of mandrax and is not charged with
 treason. One detainee was released in July due to poor health
 on the condition that he would stand trial together with other
 detainees when charges are filed. These detainees reportedly
 have been carefully attended to while in prison.
 On May 19, the leader of a local religious organization, the
 Rhema Church, was arrested for having written an article in a
 monthly church publication deemed to be insulting to the King.
 He was charged with sedition under the 1938 Sedition and
 Subversive Activities Act, as amended in 1983, and granted
 bail by the High Court on May 22. On May 25, he was again
 arrested, this time under a 60-day detention order which was
 extended for an additional 60 days in August. No additional
 charges were filed after the issuance of the detention order.
 The bail posted to gain release on May 22 has not been
 returned. In June and July, three additional persons involved
 in the translation, printing, and distribution of the Rhema
 Church article were arrested and expeditiously charged with
 sedition and granted bail. None has been rearrested. In
 October the High Court of Swaziland convicted three of the
 four persons charged with sedition in connection with the
 Rhema Church publication. In passing judgment, the Court
 ruled that persons may be deemed to have committed a seditious
 act, although such may not have been their intention, if the
 objective effect of their action is to induce hatred of or
 contempt for the King, his heirs, or the Government of
 Swaziland. This interpretation makes it easier to obtain
 convictions and increases the effective scope of the Act.
 Detention under the 1978 detention law is not subject to
 appeal to the courts, though it may be appealed directly to
 the Monarch. In some instances, detainees have been held
 incommunicado under this law.
 Forced labor does not exist in Swaziland.
 
 
 307
 SWAZILAND
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 honored in practice, although the-court president can order a
 trial to be'held ih camera in certain cases (e.g., rape). The
 Prime Minister can also require that a trial be held in
 private, but this is rare and has not been done for several
 years " Those accused are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty.     -
 In sedition cases, the Prime Minister, if he is of the opinion
 that the security of,Swaziland may be involved, may order that
 proceedings be held in camera before a special tribunal
 appointed by the King. The special tribunal may, if it deems
 appropkiate, adopt rules and procedures apart from those
 applied in the High Court. This special tribunal has never
 been convoked. However, in November the Xing further expanded
 the power of the Government by convoking a second special
 tribunal to judge the 11 persons charged with treason (l.d.
 above). The judgments of the special tribunals are not
 subject to appeal, and the persons tried are not entitled to
 legal representation but must gonduct their own defense.
 Penalties provide for imprisonent for a period not to exceed
 20 years,- a fine not exceedilfg 20,000 emalangeni
 (approximately $10,000), or "any penalty recognisable under
 Swazi law and custom."
 The modern judiciary consists of a Court of Appeals, a High
 Court, and various subordinate magistrates' courts which are
 independent of executive and military control and free from
 intimidation from-outside forces. Many members of the
 judiciary tre appointed from the bars of other countries with
 compatible legal systems. The current Chief Justice, for
 example, is an-Englishman. In magist-rates' courts, the
 defendant is entitled to counsel at his or her own expense.
 Court-appointed counsel is provided in capital cases or where
 difficult points of law are at issue. There are well defined
 appeal procedures up to the Court of Appeals, the highest
 judicial'body.
 In traditional courts, where ethnic Swazis may be brought for
 offenses and violations of Swazi traditional laws or customs,
 legal counsel is not allowed, but defendants may speak on
 their own behalf. Swazi traditional law has not been codified.
 Findings are subject to a review system and appeal to the High
 Court and the Court of Appeals. Accused persons who desire
 counsel can insist that their cases be transferred from the
 traditional courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Swazi custom places a high value on home and family. In
 general, Swazi law requires a warrant issued by a magistrate
 before police may search homes or other premises. However,
 senior police officers are permitted to search for evidence
 without a warrant if the suspected crime is of a serious
 nature. This exception is frequently used. While there is no
 evidence that the Government actively monitors private
 correspondence or conversation, the Swazi police have been
 known to apprehend and interrogate persons who reportedly had
 made objectionable statements about the Xing during the course
 of private conversation and in telegrams.
 
 
 308
 SWAZILAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. The previous Prime Minister
 stated that Swazis critical of the Government should express
 their views only to their chiefs for discussion in traditional
 Swazi councils. Academic freedom does not extend to permitting
 direct attacks on government figures or policy. Antigovernment
 demonstrations or leaflets are regarded as seditious. Swazi
 radio and television stations are government controlled, and
 there is also a semiofficial newspaper. Private companies and
 church groups publish several newspapers and magazines.
 The media, both government controlled and private, practice
 self-censorship, refraining from critical comment on sensitive
 government activities or on controversial issues involving the
 royal family. The arrest of four persons in connection with
 an article published by the Rhema Church highlights the
 resolve of the Government to control written commentary on
 issues directly affecting the Monarchy. The Government has
 occasionally proscribed publications, including foreign
 publications, deemed to be prejudicial to the interests of
 defense, public safety, or public health. Two major South
 African publications, banned in 1985 because of critical
 articles on Swazi domestic politics, remain excluded. No new
 bannings occurred in 1987.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 King Sobhuza's proclamation of April 12, 1973, reaffirmed by
 King Mswati's proclamation amendment decree of 1987, prohibits
 meetings of a political nature and processions or
 demonstrations in any public place without the consent,
 sometimes withheld, of the Commissioner of Police. In
 practice, however, no permit is required for most gatherings.
 Except for the prohibition of certain antigovernment activity,
 freedom of association is generally permitted. Trade
 associations and professional bodies exist in Swaziland and
 maintain relations with recognized international bodies in
 their fields.
 The Industrial Relations Act (IDA) of 1980 reaffirms the right
 of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely. It
 also provides for an Industrial Court for the settlement of
 employment disputes. A High Court judge presides. The
 Industrial Court is empowered to hear and decide trade
 disputes and grievances, to register collective agreements,
 and to enjoin organizations from striking or continuing to
 strike. Strikes are rare--although several occurred in
 1987--and are generally considered to be "un-Swazi" by the
 Government and most of the population. The Government
 generally intervenes to reduce the likelihood of a strike,
 which may not be called legally until all avenues of
 negotiation have been exhausted. The Labor Commission can
 then issue a 14-day postponement, which can be extended if
 additional documentation is presented. Where the national
 interest or welfare is concerned, the Minister of Labor can
 forbid a strike or can refer the dispute to the Industrial
 Court.
 Trade unions have widened the scope of their activities since
 1981 but, since most Swazis are subsistence farmers, unions
 are unimportant in the economy and have little political
 influence. They are able, within limits, to operate
 
 
 309
 SWAZILAND
 indepefidently of government or political control. The
 Government is, however, sensitive to international influences
 on Swazi unions and refused in 1986 to allow an international
 meeting of trade unionists to take place in Swaziland. The
 Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions, the union umbrella
 organization', participates in the International Labor
 Organization and is a member of the Organization for African
 Trade Union Unity.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is traditionally hospitable to all religious
 beliefs, informally considers itself td be a Christian
 country, and permits a wide variety of foreign missionary
 activity. Organized religions are free to establish places of
 worship and traih clergy. No licenses are required for such
 organizations 6r in-order to publish religious texts, nor are
 there any bars to religious travel outside the country. At
 the same time, the'authorities promote the bbservance of Swazi
 customs, where adherents reap an advantage in public life.
 When these customs conflict with religious beliefs, there are
 occasional difficulties. In the past, the Government has
 insisted that pastoral letters criticizing social injustice
 constituted p0litical interference.
 d. Freedom ofUMovement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigiration, and Repatriation
 Swazis -miy travel and work freely iwthin Swaziland.
 Citizenship is not irevoked for political reasons. -Swazis
 generally'can obtain a travel document to travel to some
 states in'sodthern Africa" but the Government occasionally
 refuses to issue a passport if the applicant does not appear
 to have adequate means of support while abroad. Citizenship
 for nonethnic Swazis and persons of mixed heritage can be
 difficult to establish, cfeating problems in obtaining
 passports and other civil documents.
 Swaziland'is a signatory to the -U N. Protocol Relating to the
 Status'of Refugees and treats diiplaced persons from
 neighboring states well. The largest number of recognized
 refugees is the 7,000 primarily ethnic Swazis from South
 Africa who fled Zulu administration in the black- South African
 homeland of kwazulu. In recent yearsi a large number of
 Mozambicans have entered Swaziland illgally :to escape the
 drought and the escalating civil conflict ih-Mozambique and to
 seek employment. Approximately 35,000 displaced Mozambicans
 currently reside in Swaziland, of whom approximately 5,500
 have been recognized by the Government as refugees and granted
 asylum. In most cases, Swaziland periits the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to interview the asylum
 seeker first and grants asylum if the person can argue
 convincingly that hd'or 'she will face'persecution if
 repatriated. In some cases, apprehended illegal iozambicans
 are deported. Refugees who leave Swaziland on U.N. travel
 documents (e.g.,-for study abroad) are sometimes not allowed
 to return. As in'previous years, the Swazi police arrested a
 number of ftozf-Swazi ANC activists in 1987. They were turned
 over to the local UNHCR representative for transfer to
 countries (primarily Tanzania and Zambia) willing to receive
 them.
 
 
 310
 SWAZILAND
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In practice, Swaziland is ruled by the King-in-Council. This
 means that ultimate policy decisions are made by the Monarch
 after obtaining the advice of the royal family, the senior
 chiefs, the Cabinet, Members.of Parliament, and various
 interested parties. This consultation takes place in private,
 and public debate of political matters under consideration by
 the Monarch is rare. Legislation is passed by the Parliament
 and is then submitted to the Monarch for assent--which may be
 withheld. While political power is not confined to the royal
 family, it is concentrated there. This system is essentially
 a version of the traditional Swazi form of government. It
 provides for extensive consultation and depends on slow
 consensus building. It also places a premium on Swazi ethnic
 descent and especially on royal or other traditionally prized
 connections. The second most powerful person in the Kingdom
 is traditionally the Queen Mother, and other women are
 prominent as well. After the death of the King, the heir to
 the throne is chosen from among the King's sons by senior
 members of the royal family.
 While Swazi citizens are unable to change their top executive
 or political system via the electoral process, they do
 participate in democratic selection of representatives.
 Members of Parliament (50 in the House of Assembly and 20 in
 the Senate) are chosen in a complex process involving the
 interaction of a 7-member electoral committee, 40 traditional
 districts, 80 electors, and the King's appointive powers.
 King Mswati III dissolved the present Parliament on September
 25, 1987 and new elections were held on November 5, 1 year
 earlier than they would have occurred had Parliament run its
 usual 5-year term. The Parliament serves as a forum for
 examination and criticism of government policies, but matters
 are seldom pressed to a vote and, when they are, unanimity is
 usually the result.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There is no organization in Swaziland which actively
 investigates human rights matters as part of its normal
 activities. However, the Swaziland Conference of Churches and
 the Anglican and Catholic Bishops in Swaziland have sometimes
 looked into and commented on human rights matters.
 The Government is not known to have received any requests for
 investigation or information from international human rights
 organizations in 1987.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Unique Swazi governmental and social traditions unavoidably
 create differences between ethnic and nonethnic Swazis.
 Nevertheless, Swaziland makes a special effort to welcome the
 full participation of non-ethnic Swazis in its life. A
 significant expatriate community exists, especially
 concentrated in the business and missionary areas. The
 population's needs and aspirations are met on a generally
 nondiscriminatory basis.
 
 
 311
 SWAZILAND
 Traditional values are a major influence on the role of women
 in Swazi society. Since men are away from their homesteads
 much of the time, women perform most agricultural tasks and
 have responsibility for virtually all child rearing and
 domestic chores. However, they are not given authority to
 make family decisions, and, in some cases, are not legally
 equal to men. A married woman, unless her position had been
 defined by a prenuptial agreement, is virtually a minor under
 the law. She is not responsible for contracts she signs, and
 she cannot, except in rare instances, hold real estate or
 inherit property in her own name. She must normally obtain
 her husband's permission to borrow money, to leave the country,
 and, in some cases, to take a job. A woman divorced in a
 traditional court has no right to the legal custody of her
 children, although she may have to care for them with no
 support from their father. In the modern or statutory courts,
 custody is awarded according to the interests of the child,
 and maintenance for wives granted custody is generally
 provided.
 The Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers to discriminate
 among employees because of race, religion, sex, marital
 status, or political affiliation. It requires equal pay for
 equal work. Even so, around 75 percent of all wage-paying
 jobs are held by men, and their average wage rate by skill
 category is higher than for women. However, women have access
 to schools and constitute around half the student body in
 nearly all institutions. There has been a significant
 increase in the number of women who are lawyers, medical
 doctors, and members of other professions.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 There is extensive legislation, notably in the Employment Act
 of 1980, protecting worker health and safety, with child labor
 receiving special attention. The workweek in the modern
 sector is 48 hours per week. There is no overall minimum
 wage. The following are examples of minimum wages currently
 in effect for certain job sectors based on the presumption of
 a 48-hour workweek: casual labor, $0.21 per hour; cementer
 $0.34 per hour; store clerk, $0.42 per hour; machine operator,
 $0.45 per hour; laboratory technician, $1.52 per hour.
 The Employment Act contains provisions covering the employment
 of children, maternity leave, and domestic employees. No one
 may employ a child below the age of 15 in an industrial
 undertaking, except in cases where only family members are
 employed in the firm, or in technical schools where children
 are working under the supervision of a teacher or other
 authorized person. Legislation limits the number of night
 hours which can be worked on school days and limits such work
 overall to 6 hours per day or 33 hours per week. However,
 such provisions may be difficult to enforce due to the small
 size of enforcement staff. In 1987 the Ministry of Labor and
 Public Services conducted a safety survey of 28 industrial
 establishments and determined the average yearly accident rate
 to be too high. Consequently, the Ministry of Labor and
 Public Services directed employers to introduce accident
 prevention programs and reminded them of their responsibility,
 under the Workmen's Compensation Act of 1983, to report all
 accidents to the Swazi Labor Office within 7 days of
 occurrence.
 
 
 312
