 SWAZILAND
 Swaziland is governed as a modified traditional monarchy with
 all executive, legislative, and judicial powers ultimately
 vested in the King. Advised by. the Queen Mother, traditional
 figures, and cabinet ministers,'he rules according to Swazi
 law and custom, never"codified but ultimately determined by
 himself and his advisors. Swaziland's Government features
 both "modern" and "traditional" branches--a cabinet,
 parliament, and courts whicb follow Western law, and a tribal
 hierarchy with."national" couirts which follow traditional
 Swazi law-and c~istom. The Cabinet is appointed by the King
 from among >Meibers of Parliament and is responsible to him.,
 While Swaziland obtained 5 constitution containing a bill of
 rights at independence, it was repealed by King Sobhuza II in
 1973 on the grounds that it introduced political practices
 which were incompatible with the Swazi tradition of
 decisionmaking.
 National defense is provided by the Umbutfo Swaziland Defense
 Force, consisting of fewer than 3,000 troops. The Royal
 Swaziland Police is the primary internal security
 organization. These forces must cope with the spillover from
 southern African regional conflicts. The use of Swaziland by
 the Africah Nptional Congress (ANC) as a transit corridor into
 South Africa has led to occasional,confrontations involving
 ANC members, South Afiican security forces, and Swazi
 authorities. The influx of Mozambican refugees has placed an
 additional strain on the Swazi security apparatus. Both the
 police ano.the defense force answer to civilian authorities.
 Swaziland has a free-market economy, with felativelyjlittle
 government intervention in the marketplace. The majority of
 Swazi s are engaged in subsistence agriculture. The success of
 the economy depends largely on the export sector, which is
 composed primarily of large, foreign-owned firms. Most
 imports come from South Africa.
 While human rights are 'enerally respected in Swaziland, there
 are important restrictions on free speech, assembly, and
 political rights. Other human rights problems include abuse
 of prisoners, arbitrary detention, and discrimination
 (including violence) against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political. and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports or allegations in 1989 of such killings
 by agents of the Swazi Government. However, in February three
 South Africans, believed to be ANC-affiliated, were shot to
 death in what was thought to be a politically motivated
 killing. There were unsubstantiated charges, that agents of
 the South African security forces were responsible; the
 murders remain unsolved. In June an ANC member was convicted
 of murdering a Swazi citizen. The ANC member claimed he had
 shot in self-defense, mistaking the victim for a South African
 Defense Force agent.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance in 1989.
 
 
 374
 SWAZILAND
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture, as a rule, is not practiced in Swaziland. However,
 there are occasional allegations made by prisoners of police
 and military threats and beatings. Complaints generally come
 from criminal, not political, prisoners. Police have also
 been accused of transporting persons they have arrested in the
 trunks of their cars. Defendants occasionally claim that
 confessions have been extorted by the police and that these
 confessions are sometimes accepted by the courts. Caning can
 be administered to youths involved in either petty or violent
 crimes.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Swazi law requires warrants for arrests in all but certain
 exceptional circumstances. These exceptions, however, are
 poorly defined and, in practice, police who have strong
 suspicions about a suspect do not normally seek a warrant.
 Detainees are allowed to consult with a lawyer of their own
 choice, and provision for bail exists. A 1978 law permits the
 Government to detain any person without charge for a renewable
 period of 60 days. Detention under this law cannot be
 appealed to the-courts, though it may be appealed directly to
 the Monarch. The law, invoked several times in 1988, was
 again used in 1989.
 In February nine persons were detained under 60-day orders for
 their suspected involvement in a prison escape plot with
 political overtones. Six of the detainees were released after
 60 days, while three had their detentions renewed for an
 additional 60 days before being released. Two of the
 detainees were subsequently charged for assisting in the
 escape and brought to trial.
 In July a 60-day detention order was invoked against the
 Secretary General of the Swaziland Union of Financial and
 Allied Workers. He was released after 4 days in detention
 following a public outcry against his arrest.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The modern judiciary consists of the Court of Appeals, the
 High Court, and various subordinate magistrates' courts which
 are independent of executive and military control and free
 from intimidation from outside forces. Some members of the
 judiciary are not Swazi but are appointed from the bars of
 other countries with compatible legal systems. In
 magistrates' courts, the defendant is entitled to counsel at
 his or her own expense. Court-appointed counsel is provided
 in capital cases or where difficult points of law are at
 issue. There are well-defined appeal procedures up to the
 Court of Appeals, the highest judicial body. The right of
 appeal, however, is not guaranteed to persons held under the
 1978 detention law or to those charged with sedition or an
 offense against the King.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and is
 honored in practice, although the court president can order a
 trial to be held in camera in certain (e.g., rape) cases. The
 Prime Minister can also require that a trial be held in
 private, but this is rare. In sedition cases, the Prime
 
 
 375
 SWAZILAND
 Minister may order that proceedings be held in camera before a
 special tribunal appointed by the King. -The special tribunal
 may, if it deems it appropriate, adopt rules and procedures
 apart from those ppplied in the High Court. In 1987 King
 Mswati III issued the tribunal decree, which permitted the
 formation of a special-tribunal to try offenses committed
 against the King and Queen Mother. This decree permits in
 camera sessions and forbids the accused from having legal
 representation. The decisions of the tribunal cannot be
 appealed. There were no trials by special tribunal in 1989.
 Amnesty lntefiational's 1989 Report criticizes the 1987-88
 treason trial of 10'persons before the special tribunal on the
 gzoundsthe defendants were not permitted legal -representation
 and wate denied any right of appeal. Nine of the 10 persons
 were given royal pardons in 1988, but one, Prince Mtanasibdi
 Dlamini,'femained in prison at the end of 1989, serving an
 earlier pentence imposed for obstructing justice.
 In traditional courts, where ethnic. Swazis may be brought for
 relatively minor offenses and violations of Swazi traditional
 laws or customs, legal counsel is not allowed, but defendants
 .nay speak.on theix own, behalf. Sentences are subject to a
 review systm and appeal to the High Court dnd the Court of
 Appeals, Accused::persons who desire counsel can insist that
 .their case be transferred from the traditional aourts. There
 are-occasional disagreements over which court system should
 have jurisdiction_inm particular case. By-law, the public
 prosecutor.has the buthority to determine which court should
 hear the case. However, there'-hae been instances of the
 .police determining- where a case should be tried. Unless the
 defendant, who may be unaware of his or her legal rights,
 protests th decision, cases may betried in the wrong court
 system, and this, fact never comes to light.
 Prisoners'frequently complain of undue delays in their cases
 coming to trial'. Such delays aregenerally the result of
 bureaucratic inertia rather-than a deliberate policy. A
 prisoner charged with motor vehicle theft went on a hunger
 strike in-;April to protest a 6-month delay in his case being
 .tried. He was tried and sentenced 2 weeks later.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Coxrespondence
 The law. generall-y requires that a warrant be issued by a
 magistrate before.police may search homes or other premises.
 However, the law also provides police officers with the rank
 of subinspector or. higher the ight to search without a
 warrant if they have reasonable cause to do so. Generally,
 this provision is meant to- allow the police to obtain evidence
 that might otherwise be lost through delay in obtaining a
 warrant. While searches without warrants do occur relatively
 frequently in Swaziland, the issue of legality of evidence, or
 of the method by whichevidence is obtained, rarely arises in
 court. While there is no evidence that the Government
 actively monitors private correspondence or conversation, the
 Swazi police have been known to apprehend and interrogate
 persons reported to have made objectionable statements about
 the King during the course of private conversation or in
 telegraphic correspondence.
 In response to an increase in criminal activity, police
 occasionally erect roadblocks and conduct generalized,
 unannounced house searches in attempts to seize weapons and
 
 
 376
 SWAZILAND
 illegal immigrants. One such sweep in April resulted in some
 248 arrests on charges ranging from illegal immigration status
 to possession of weapons and drugs.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is limited. A Swazi's main traditional
 forum for expressing discontent is through his or her Chief,
 and public condemnation of certain policies and people is not
 permitted. Criticism of the royal family and of national
 security policy is forbidden. The media, both
 government-controlled and private, practice self-censorship,
 refraining from criticism of sensitive government activities
 or commenting on controversial issues involving the royal
 family. Swazi radio and television stations are government
 controlled, and there is also a semiofficial newspaper.
 Private companies and church groups publish several newspapers
 and magazines.
 In March four persons were arrested for possession of
 allegedly seditious literature published by an illegal
 political party, the People's Democratic Movement (PUDEMO).
 They included the outspoken leader of the defunct Ngwane
 National Liberatory Congress (the sole opposition party before
 the abolition of political parties in 1973) and a trade
 unionist. The four denied membership in PUDEMO and maintained
 that they had received the pamphlets unsolicited. Charges
 against the four were eventually dismissed.
 The Government has occasionally proscribed publications,
 including foreign publications, deemed to be prejudicial to
 the interests of defense, public safety, or public health.
 Two major South African publications, banned in 1985 because
 of critical articles on Swazi domestic politics, remained
 excluded in 1989. No new bannings occurred in 1989.
 Academic freedom is also limited; direct attacks against the
 royalty or government ministers are not permitted, and certain
 aspects of government policy (i.e., security) may not be
 discussed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The King's 1973 proclamation prohibits meetings of a political
 nature and demonstrations in any public place without the
 consent of the commissioner of police. In practice, no permit
 is required for most gatherings. Nevertheless, in 1989 police
 used this power to stop meetings which were embarrassing to
 the Government. In March, citing failure to obtain a permit,
 police broke up a meeting which had been called by residents
 of a government housing project to protest rent increases.
 Also in March, the police closed a meeting of the Swaziland
 National Association of Civil Servants because the
 organization had not obtained a permit to hold the meeting.
 Freedom of association is generally permitted, provided that
 the organization has no political agenda. Trade associations
 and professional bodies exist in Swaziland and maintain
 relations with recognized international bodies in their fields.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 
 
 377
 SWAZILAND
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Swaziland is hospitable to all religious beliefs, informally
 considers itself to be a Christian country, and permits a wide
 variety of foreign missionary activity. Organized religions
 are free to establish places of worship and train clergy. No
 licenses are required for such organizations or in order to
 publish religious texts, nor are there any bars to religious
 travel outside the country. At the same time, the authorities
 promote the observance of Swazi customs. When these customs
 conflict with religious beliefs, problems occasionally arise.
 Church condemnation of traditional Swazi ceremonies in the
 past has led to the arrest and deportation of church figures.
 In 1989 there were several cases of individual chiefs in the
 rural dreas creating difficulties for Jehovah's Witnesses. In
 one case, a chief ordered the eviction of two families of
 Jehovah's Witnesses from his territory, claiming that they had
 sown dissent among his people.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Swazis may travel and work freely within Swaziland. Those who
 have left the country may freely return, and citizenship is
 not revoked for political reasons. Swazis generally can
 obtain a travel document to travel in the region, but the
 Government occasionally refuses to issue a passport if the
 applicant does not appear to have adequate means of support
 while abroad. Citizenship for nonethnic Swazis and persons of
 mixed heritage can be difficult to establish, creating
 problems in obtaining passports and other civil documents.
 Swaziland treats displaced persons from neighboring states
 well. About 7,000 primarily ethnic Swazis from South Africa,
 who fled Zulu administration in the black South African
 homeland of Kwazulu, reside in Swaziland. The last few years
 have seen a large influx in the number of Mozambican refugees
 living in Swaziland. While approximately 16,000 were
 officially registered by the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR), it is believed that an additional 30,000
 or more may have been in Swaziland illegally. Swaziland
 permits the UNHCR to interview those who seek refugee status
 and grants asylum if the person can establish that he or she
 will face persecution if repatriated. Illegal aliens who
 cannot establish their refugee status, however, can be
 deported. In practice, many of those refugees indentified for
 deportation end up serving extended time in detention while
 arrangements for their repatriation are made. This delay is
 due to the absence of an agreed repatriation procedure with
 Mozambique, rather than a policy to penalize illegal
 immigrants.
 As in previous years, the Swazi police arrested a number of
 ANC activists (primarily South Africans) in 1989. They were
 turned over to'the local UNHCR representative for transfer to
 countries '(usually Zambia or Tanzania) willing to receive them.
 Section a Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government ,
 Swazi citizens do not have the right to change their
 government through democratic means. Political parties are
 outlawed, and an organized political opposition does not
 exist. The King rules in conjunction with the Queen Mother.
 Traditionally, decisionmaking has been by consensus, with the
 
 
 378
 SWAZILAND
 King soliciting advice from the royal family, the senior
 chiefs, the Cabinet, Members of Parliament, and other
 interested parties. Still, the King's power is absolute, and
 he can accept or dismiss advice as he sees fit. Public debate
 of political matters under consideration by the Monarch is
 rare. Legislation is passed by the Parliament and is then
 submitted to the Monarch for assent--which may be withheld.
 The King can also legislate by decree.
 Swazis participate in the selection of Members of Parliament.
 Parliamentarians (50 in the house and 20 in the senate) are
 chosen in a complex process involving the interaction of a
 7-member electoral committee, 40 traditional districts, 80
 electors, and the King's appointive powers. The King can
 dissolve the Parliament and call new elections, normally held
 every 5 years. The Parliament serves as a forum for
 examination and criticism of government policies, but matters
 are seldom pressed to a vote and, when they are, unanimity is
 usually the result.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Swaziland prefers to keep a low profile in dealing with
 nongovernmental human rights organizations. There are no
 organizations which exclusively promote human rights in
 Swaziland. The Government was not the subject of any
 resolutions by official international organizations in 1989.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Unique Swazi governmental and social traditions unavoidably
 create differences between ethnic and nonethnic Swazis. For
 example, ethnic Swazis from South Africa seeking political
 refuge in Swaziland are treated much like Swazi citizens and
 are often given work permits. Those who are not ethnic Swazis
 are treated as foreigners, and permits are given more
 reluctantly. A significant expatriate community exists,
 composed primarily of businessmen and missionaries.
 Traditional values are a major influence on the role of women
 in Swazi society, and the dualistic nature of the legal system
 complicates the issue of women's rights. A wife's legal
 rights, for example, differ substantially depending on whether
 she is married under traditional or civil law. In a
 traditional marriage, a woman is treated as a minor under the
 law. She is not responsible for contracts she signs, and she
 cannot, except in rare instances, hold real estate or inherit
 property in her own name. She must normally obtain her
 husband's permission to borrow money, to leave the country,
 and, in some cases, to take a job. A woman divorced in a
 traditional court has no right to the legal custody of her
 children. In traditional marriages, a man can take more than
 one wife. In some cases, women are compelled by family
 pressure to marry without their consent, although this
 practice is decreasing over time. Women who are forced to
 marry do have legal recourse, but few resort to it, both out
 of ignorance of their rights and out of fear of ostracism by
 family members. Wives chosen by the King do not have legal
 recourse. Because traditional marriage is governed by
 uncodified Swazi law and custom, women's rights are often
 unclear and change according to where and by whom they are
 interpreted.
 
 
 379
 SWAZILAND
 Even under civil law, marriage is governed by Swazi law and
 custom unless the parties to the marriage sign a prenuptial
 agreement. With a prenuptial agreement, property can be
 separately maintained, and the wife can enter into contracts
 and legal proceedings without her husband's consent. A man
 who marries a woman under civil law legally cannot have more
 than one wife, although in practice this restriction is
 sometimes ignored. Divorce does not automatically lead to
 loss of custody of children for the wife. Rather, custody is
 awarded according to the interests of the child, and
 maintenance for wives granted custody is generally provided.
 Marriage is further complicated by the fact that a man can
 legally marry a woman in both civil and traditional
 ceremonies, creating problems in determining which set of
 rules applies to a marriage. The Swaziland Council of
 Churches opened a legal aid center in 1988 which provides free
 information on issues such as marriage and maintenance laws
 Physical abuse of women, particularly wife beating, is
 frequent. Customarily, a Swazi man has the right and duty to
 beat his wife and children. Women have the right under the
 law to charge their husbands with assault, but few know that
 they can resort to legal remedies. The traditional courts are
 generally unsympathetic to "unruly" or "disobedient" women.
 The modern courts are more likely to convict wife beaters, but
 sentences, even when beating results in death, are frequently
 light.
 In the workplace, the Employment Act of 1980 forbids employers
 to discriminate among employees based on race, religion, sex,
 or political affiliation. It requires equal pay for equal
 work. Even so, around 75 percent of all private sector jobs
 are held by men, and their average wage rate by skill category
 is in some sectors three times that of women (1986).
 The Swaziland Federation of Trade Unions announced in August
 that it would be forming a special women's wing to address
 issues of discrimination in the workplace. This wing will
 focus on the issues of wage discrimination and maternity
 benefits, as well as other sex-based discriminatory practices.
 In August the Ministry of Labour and Public Service announced
 a new housing policy disadvantageous to women. It stated that
 married women occupying government houses would have to vacate
 the houses and live with their husbands, if the husband was
 not a government employee. Women challenged the regulation as
 discriminatory, and no effort has yet been made to enforce it.
 Discrimination on the basis of religion, language, or social
 status does not occur to any significant degree in Swaziland.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Industrial "Relations Act (IRA) of 1980 affirms the right
 of trade unions to exist, organize, and associate freely.
 Persons im all.sectors of the economy, including the public
 sector, are permitted to join unions. Employers are obliged
 to recognize a union when it achieves 40 percent membership
 among employees. Unions are able, within limits, to operate
 independently of government or political control. This
 independence is contingent on their acting as economic, rather
 than political, organizations.
 Unions are free to draw up their own constitutions within the
 
 
 380
 SWAZILAND
 framework of the IRA. The Act specifies a number of
 provisions which must be addressed in a constitution. These
 include provisions for election of officers by secret ballot,
 annual meetings open to all members, fees, grounds for
 suspension of members, and expenditure of union funds. The
 constitution must be approved by the labor commissioner, who
 can strike out or amend provisions which violate requirements
 of the law. Unions cannot be dissolved as long as they adhere
 to the regulations of the IRA. Unions which fail to maintain
 proper registration with the labor commissioner can be
 dissolved.
 For several years, including in 1989, the International Labor
 Organization's Committee of Experts (COE) has noted
 discrepancies between ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of
 Association and the IRA. The several concerns of the COE
 include the broad powers accorded government officials to
 control union activity and the strictures on the ability of
 workers to form unions and associate with other unions at home
 and abroad. The COE has called on the Government to bring its
 legislation into conformity with the Convention it ratified in
 1978.
 The IRA details the steps to be followed when disputes arise,
 including what determines a legal or illegal strike. The Act
 provides for an industrial court, presided over by a High
 Court judge, for the settlement of employment disputes. The
 industrial court is empowered to hear and give judgment on
 disputes and grievances and to enjoin a union from striking.
 Historically, strikes have been rare in Swaziland. However,
 consciousness of workers' rights is growing rapidly. When
 disputes arise, the Government tries to intervene to reduce
 the chances of a strike, which may not be legally called until
 all avenues of negotiation have been exhausted. The labor
 commissioner can then issue a 14-day postponement of a strike,
 which can be extended upon presentation of further
 documentation. In October 300 employees of the Manzini town
 council were fired after going out on strike in contravention
 of the Industrial Relations Act. Where the national interest
 is concerned, the Minister of Labor can outlaw a strike or
 refer the dispute to the industrial court.
 In June the Swaziland Union of Financial and Allied Workers
 (SUFIAW) announced its intention to strike for a salary
 increase after negotiations had failed to result in an
 agreement. The industrial court issued an injunction against
 the strike which the union accepted. Shortly after the
 injunction order, however, the Secretary General of SUFIAW was
 detained under 60-day detention orders. A public outcry
 against his arrest led to his release 4 days later. The
 industrial court eventually helped negotiate an agreement on
 wages between SUFIAW and the bankers' organization. In August
 500 workers at an agricultural operation were fired when they
 refused to abandon an illegal strike. There were several
 wildcat strikes during the year which were resolved without
 recourse to the industrial court.
 The Swaziland Federation of Trade Union (SFTU), the union
 umbrella organization, is a member of the Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity. The SFTU also represents Swazi
 labor in the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 and the Southern Africa Trade Union Coordinating Council.
 
 
 381
 SWAZILAND
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Industrial Relations Act of 1980 provides for the right to
 organize and bargain collectively; While collective bargaining
 -does occur, it is not widespread. The IRA has provisions
 outlawing interference and antiunion discrimination. Disputes
 in this area are referred to the labor commissioner and the
 industrial court, if mecessary. Employers can prohibit
 employees from attending union meetings if the union has not
 achieved the 40-percent membership level required for
 recognition. However, members of legally recognized unions
 must be allowed to attend union activities. Although many
 employers habitually resist recognition and force the issue
 into the industrial court, the court generally rules in favor
 of the unions. The Government wishes to avoid labor
 confrontation and encourages voluntary negotiations between
 employers and unions.. While not antiunion, the Government
 publicly expresses its concern that labor unrest threatens
 Swaziland's image as a stable and attractive place for foreign
 investment.
 The ILO COE has remarked on discrepancies between national
 legislation and Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and
 Bargain Collectively which Swaziland also ratified. The COE
 specifically noted the absence of provisions respecting the
 protection of workers' organizations against acts of
 interference by employers and the compulsory registration of
 collective agreements by the industrial court, which may
 refuse registration in the event of nonobservance of
 government directives on wages.
 There are no export processing zones in Swaziland. Labor
 legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Swaziland, and such labor is
 legally prohibited.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Employment Act of 1980 prohibits the hiring of a child
 below the age of 15 in an industrial undertaking, except in
 cases where only family members are employed in the firm, or
 in technical schools where children are working under the
 supervision of a teacher or other authorized person.
 Legislation limits the number of night hours which can be
 worked on school days and limits such work overall to 6 hours
 per day or 33 hours per week. Employment of children in the
 formal sector is not customary in Swaziland.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of work
 There is extensive legislation, notably in the Employment Act
 of 1980, protecting worker health and safety in Swaziland.
 There is a maximum 48-hour workweek in the modern sector,
 except for security guards, who work up to six 12-hour shifts
 per week. There is no overall minimum wage, but rather a
 sliding scale of minimum wages depending on the type of work.
 A casual laborer must legally make $9 a week, while a security
 guard must be paid at least $15 per week. The minimum wage
 for a clerk is $19, and for a laboratory technician, $62.
 Employees receive time and a half for overtime worked.
 Employees who work on Sundays or public holidays receive
 
 
 382
 SWAZILAND
 double pay. Workers receive a minimum of 14 days' annual
 leave after each period of 12 months of continuous service (21
 days for security guards). These standards are generally
 upheld in the formal sector.
 While wage levels in Swaziland are low by Western standards,
 by African standards most Swazis employed in the formal sector
 do relatively well, although this is certainly not the case
 for persons on the lower end of the scale, such as security
 guards or casual laborers. Most Swazi families also farm and
 graze cattle on Swazi national land on which their homesteads
 are erected and from which family income also derives. When
 this source of income is taken into account, most Swazis can
 be said to earn a decent living.
 The Government sets safety standards for industrial operations
 and encourages private companies to develop accident
 prevention programs. Recent growth in industrial production
 has necessitated more government action on safety issues. In
 1986 only 20 safety inspections took place, none in
 manufacturing industries. By 1988 this figure had risen to
 83, with 11 inspections of industrial operations. There were
 1,070 industrial accidents reported to the Ministry of Labor
 in 1988, higher than the figure for 1986 (923), but lower than
 the 3,275 reported in 1984. Given the rapid growth in
 industrial employment, the relatively static level of
 industrial accidents is a sign that safety measures are
 generally observed.
 
 
 383
