 SEYCHELLES
 President France Albert Rene, who took power in June 1977 in a
 military coup d'etat, heads the Government and the only
 authorized political party in the.Seychelles. In 1979 the new
 Government adopted a Constitution which abolished all
 political opposition to the ruling Socialist party, the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), and established
 a strong presidency which appoints ministers, and a People's
 Assembly of 23 elected party members and several appointed
 members.' In the 1987 Assembly elections-more than one
 candidate vied for some seats, but all candidates were
 members of.,the SPPF. President Rene was the only candidate in
 the June 1989 presidential election, winning more than 96
 percent of the vote for a third 5-year term.
 Seychelles has a defense force of about 800 army personnel, a
 300-man presidential protection unit, a 200-man navy, a 50-man
 air force, a uniformed police force of 500, and a people's
 militia of about-2,000. Collectively, these units amount to 5
 percent of the total population.
 The Government, through the Seychelles marketing board, other
 state organizations, and banking regulations, controls the
 importation, licensing, and distribution of virtually all
 goods and services and exercises significant control over all
 phases of the economy. Tourism is the most important sector,
 accounting for 11 percent of gross domestic product.
 Approximately 80,000 tourists visited Seychelles during.1989.
 Seychelles has made progress toward diversifying its economy
 by granting fishing licenses to a number of foreign fishing
 vessels, and it services this fleet at expanded port
 facilities in Victoria, which were financed by foreign donor
 assistance.
 Human rights, including political rights, continued to be
 circumscribed in 1989. The Constitution does not provide for
 fundamental human rights, but rather includes them in a
 preamble as the goal of the people 6f Seychelles. The threat
 of the President invoking the Public Security Act, which
 allows for indefinite detention in security cases, serves to
 intimidate real and potential opposition elements. The
 Government also uses exile as a means of suppressing dissent,
 and it has continued a program for acquiring real property
 belonging to Seychellois residing overseas and known to be
 opposed to the Government. There were no reported instances
 of political arrests or detentions in 1989.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no .confirmed instances of killing for political
 motives in 1989.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 
 
 308
 SEYCHELLES
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture. However, there
 were credible reports of abusive practices on the part of the
 Seychelles police, particularly its Police Mobile Unit (PMU).
 These activities primarily involved severe beatings, often
 with wooden batons (hence the PMU's local nickname, the Garde
 Baton), and occurred with disturbing frequency during 1989.
 The objects of these beatings are, for the most part,
 suspected drug users, unemployed youths, and the like. The
 beatings themselves generally do not occur in connection with
 detentions. Criminal complaints brought against individual
 officers for such practices are invariably dismissed, and no
 policemen have been discharged as a result of these activities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Penal Code provides that persons arrested must be brought
 before a magistrate within 48 hours. In nonpolitical cases
 this provision is applied in practice. Bail is available in
 most cases. The Government, however, has used criminal
 charges such as drug possession to hit at perceived opponents,
 e.g., the case of Royce Dias.
 There were no confirmed reports in 1989 of persons being
 arrested and detained under the Public Security Act (PSA),
 which was passed in December 1981 in the aftermath of an
 attack by mercenaries. The Act allows for indefinite
 detention in security cases and has been used in the past
 under questionable circumstances, e.g., the arrest of
 Phillippe Boulle, the leading human rights activist in the
 country in June 1986. Under the authority of the Penal Code,
 police sometimes hold persons for 24 hours for "questioning"
 regarding alleged antigovernment activities. In particular,
 persons who seek to mobilize public opinion against the
 Government run a serious risk of being held for
 "questioning." In late 1989, the Attorney General determined
 that the period of initial detention could be extended to 48
 or even 72 hours, provided that an active investigation was
 being conducted "with reasonable dispatch." The defense
 attorney has excellent access to the detainee and to the
 police and can readily ascertain whether there is an active
 investigation. At the end of 1989, there were no known
 political detainees or prisoners.
 In the past, the Government has directly urged opponents to
 emigrate, an option that many have chosen over the years. It
 has also taken other actions to encourage potential opponents
 to leave the country, including dismissals from government
 service and social and economic harassment against businessmen
 and professionals.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is patterned on English common law (e.g.,
 public trial by jury) but is also influenced by the Napoleonic
 civil law (e.g., torts and contracts). The judiciary includes
 the Supreme Court and an Appeals Court. Judges are provided
 under arrangements with the British Commonwealth and, except
 for past security cases, they have exhibited considerable
 independence from both the executiye and legislative
 branches. Defendants in nonpolitical (both civil and
 
 
 309
 SEYCHELLES
 criminal) cases have access to counsel and enjoy speedy and
 fair trials. The Chief Justice, who is appointed by the
 President, has stressed on several occasions that it is the
 judiciary's responsibility to impose sentences as required by
 law and that it should reflect the will of the legislature.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. He not only
 has appointment authority but also has broad detention
 authority where public security is involved. Seychelles law
 requires that a member of the armed forces be tried by
 court-martial unless the President decrees otherwise.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure
 without a wairant, and the Mobile Police Unit is particularly
 active in excercising such power. During 1989, for example,
 an M PU force in excess of 12 members (all male), acting
 without a warrant, 9mashed down the door of a local woman's
 home, strip-searched her in her own home, and ransacked that
 home in what was alleged to be a search for drugs. No drugs
 were found.
 Legislation exists which, allows the Government to open mail,
 domestic as well as international, and it is widely believed
 that it does so regularly. Many persons complain that
 applications for immigration to other countries are
 confiscated.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the 1979 Constitution,
 freedom of speech is exercised sparingly. There is no
 criticism of the President or the Government in Parliament,
 although specific issues are debated and reported in the media.
 The Government controls the major newspaper in the country, as
 well as all radio and television broadcasting. Legislation
 provides up to 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who with
 intent to bring the President'into hatred, ridicule, or
 contempt, publishes any defamatory or insulting matter whether
 in writing, print, or by word of mouth, or in any other
 manner." This same legislation authorizes a 2-year sentence
 for anyone who "prints, supplies, distributes, reproduces, or
 has in his possession or control" any publication banned by
 the Government for security reasons. The Government has
 sought to preyent the importation of pamphlets printed by its
 opposition abroad. There'were noknown arrests for
 distribution or importation of "seditious literature" in 1989.
 In general, foreign publications are imported and sold without
 hindrance.
 The President has kept his promise not to interfere with the
 right of religious groups to speak out freely on religious and
 social matters. The Catholic Church publishes a lively paper,
 Echo Des Isles, which is not subject to government censorship
 and which carries some articles obliquely critical of the
 Government. The two largest religious denominations in the
 country, the Roman Catholic and the Anglican churches, are
 each provided 2 hours of free, uncensored broadcasting time a
 month. Both churches have taken advantage of the monthly
 
 
 310
 SEYCHELLES
 broadcasts to comment on social and political issues. In 1988
 the Government issued a new, 25-year broadcasting license to
 the Far East Broadcasting Association (FEBA), a radio
 missionary organization which has broadcast the Christian
 gospel to Asia and Africa from Seychelles for the past 18
 years.
 Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to and are uncensored.
 However, the Government has increased its range of available
 controls over broadcasts and telecommunications originating in
 Seychelles through the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Act
 of 1988. This Act authorizes the Government to restrict the
 transmission of messages, to prohibit the broadcast of any
 material which in the Government's opinion is objectionable,
 and to permit the entry of government officials onto any
 premises and to examine any apparatus in connection with
 provisions of the Act.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While there were no incidents in 1989, the Government has in
 the past been quick to move against unauthorized
 demonstrations and has made arrests under an old British
 colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without a
 government permit. All associations, clubs, and other
 organizations require government permission to organize, which
 is usually granted for nonpolitical groups only.
 For a discussion of freedom-of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no religious persecution in Seychelles, and church
 services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic, Anglican,
 and other Christian denominations thrive, and Muslims and
 Hindus are unrestricted in their religious practices.
 There is a clear separation between church and state, and
 religious instruction in public schools has been limited.
 Responding to religious institutions' complaints, the
 Governmeht now permits children (ages 14-17) in the National
 YouthTService (NYS) to attend church by allowing services to
 be held at the NYS camps.
 d. Freedom ofMovement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Passports may
 be acquired by any citizen, although-Seychellois traveling
 abroad for study at government expense are required to sign a
 bond which enables the Government to recoup the cost of their
 education if they fail to return. Persons who are "bonded"
 must obtain government permission to travel abroad following
 their return. There are no known cases in which passports are
 currently being withheld. There are no restrictions on
 voluntary repatriation for Seychellois willing to accept the
 present one-party political system, though it is widely
 assumed that former President James Mancham and certain former
 members of his government will not be permitted to return to
 Seychelles.
 
 
 311
 SEYCHELLES
 Secbion a Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 .to Change Their  overnment
 Since 1979 there has been only one legal political party, the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF). Citizens cannot
 legally and peacefully-change this one-party system, and
 therefore cannot change the party in power. President France
 Albert'Rene, both as President of the country as well as the
 Secretary General of the party, wields considerable power and
 influence. During the last SPPF Congress held in December
 1987, the President was again unopposed and was elected
 unanimously to a fourth 3-year term as Secretary General of
 the Party. Opponents of the party can neither organize nor
 express public opposition. The party has 23 regional offices
 called'"branches," which are responsible for organizing and
 supervising.discussion about current government policies. The
 party- encourages these branches to report public opinion in
 their regions, but this does not often result in policy
 changes.
 ThetGovernment uses various means to stifle political
 opposition. In June 1983, -it embarked on a campaign to
 nationalize private land, ostensibly to claim unused
 agricultural acreage. On March 13, 1987, the Government
 implemented a vigorous program of acquiring many parcels of
 Seychelles real estate owned by Seychellois abroad known to
 oppose the Government.. The acquisitions are made under the
 Land Acquisition Act'of 1977. Compensation-, supposedly at
 market value, is usually in the form of bonds and paid to the
 owners over a period of 20 years. Under the law, it is
 impossible to challenge the acquisition itself--it is only the
 amount of compensation which can be applealed in court.
 -Acquisitions continued at a high rate during 1989, not only of
 properties belonging to nonresident Seychellois, but also of
 properties belonging to foreign nationals, including one
 American citizen, and of resident Seychellois not known to
 oppose the Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Requests for information are sent to the Chief-Justice of the
 Supreme Cimrt, who acts as an.interlocutor between human
 rights groups; such as Amnesty Iifternational, and the
 Government. In the -past, inquiries have-led to the release of
 some detainees. However, the Government has not been
 responsive .to a report of the U.N. Human Rights Commis~ion
 ,concerning three outstanding disappearance cases dating back
 to 1977 and 1984. There are no private human rights groups in
 Seychelles.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is fto discrimination in housing, employment, education,
 or other social services -based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high
 status in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the
 same legal, political, economic, and social-rights as men.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, does occur
 in Seychelles, but, according to medical personnel, it is not
 widespread and is not tolerated by the Government or the
 courts. Under Section 31 of Seychelles Criminal Procedure
 
 
 312
 SEYCHELLES
 Code, a private civil complaint may be brought before a
 magistrate, free of charge, to impose a bond "to keep the
 peace" of up to approximately $200 against someone using or
 threatening violence against another. This provision in the
 Code is used by women against their harassers, and it is quite
 effective. Married women can easily obtain exclusion orders
 against abusive husbands and frequently do. On the criminal
 side, violence against women is prosecuted as assault cases to
 the full extent of the law, including spouses if that is the
 case. Police have no hesitation in intervening in domestic
 disputes where violence has occurred or is threatened.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join unions of their
 own choosing in Seychelles, nor are they independent of the
 Government or the ruling party. All workers (except for some
 temporary workers) belong to the National Workers Union (NWU)
 by virtue of the fact that a percentage of their social
 security contributions is given to the NWU. The SPPF controls
 the NWU's funds and appoints its leaders. Workers and their
 leaders have no legal right to strike or initiate any
 industrial action except with the permission from the SPPF
 Central Committee. There were no strikes in 1989. In August
 1989 party Deputy Secretary General James Michel said that the
 SPPF viewed the NWU as a "transmission belt which links the
 party with the working people."
 Workers are permitted to elect their shop stewards (also
 called Works Committee Members), but all candidates are
 screened by the NWU Executive Secretariat, which has the power
 to dismiss an elected shop steward.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) expressed again in 1989, as in previous
 years, its concern over the Government's unwillingness to
 implement ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Association, which
 Seychelles has ratified. The NWU's only international
 affiliation is with the Organization of African Trade Union
 Unity, but it maintains close relations with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. While
 not prohibiting the NWU or the Employers' Federation from
 participating in regional ILO conferences, the Government does
 not encourage participation in the annual ILO conference in
 Geneva, which occurs at the same time as national "liberation"
 (coup anniversary) celebrations in Seychelles.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 In the one-party, one-trade union confederation structure,
 there are serious limitations on worker rights to organize.
 The NWU constitution does protect union members "from
 victimization in the carrying out of legitimate trade union
 activity" and requires its executive board to investigate shop
 steward dismissals so as to verify that the dismissal is not
 based on union-related activities. In the event of a
 disagreement between the NWU and a company over a shop
 steward's dismissal, the party would make the final
 determination.
 Free collective bargaining generally is not practiced in
 Seychelles. The Government has the right to review and
 approve all collective agreements from the private and public
 
 
 313
 SEYCHELLES
 sectors. Authority for establishing and enforcing employment
 terms, conditions,'and benefits is vested in the Ministry of
 Employment and Socl Services by the Employment Act of 1985,
 Seychelles' basic labor law. While revision of the 1985
 Employment Act is expected soon, no modification of the
 Government's dominant role in setting terms and conditions of
 employment is expected.
 There are no export processing zones in Seychelles, and labor
 laws are appl-ed uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not
 exist  n. practice.'
 d. Minimum Age -for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 15. Children are required
 to attend school bntil the age of 15. The Government
 encourages children to attend 2 years of National Youth
 Service (NYS)'before entering the work force at the age of 18
 or going to the polytechnic for vocational training,'and it
 discourages public or private sector employment of workers
 under 18 years old. The Government offers voluntaiy
 short-term (up to 6 months) work employment programs for
 school leavers not participating in the NYS. Children in
 these programs receive a training salary which is below the
 minimum wage. The Government effectively enforces its child
 labor laws through regular inspections by the Ministry of
 Employment and Social Affairs (see below).
 e. Acbeptable Conditions of Work
 Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage scale which depends
 upon'job classifications. The legislated minimum wages range
 from over $190 per month for an unskilled laborer to over
 $1,000 per month for a high-level civil servant. Given the
 free public services that are available, primarily in the
 areas of health and education, a single salary at the low end
 of the pay scale does provide a family with a decent, if
 Spartan, standard of living, Many families deal with
 Seychelles' high cost of living through two or more incomes.
 The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs has
 responsibility for enforcing minimum wage regulations. Due to
 a labor shortage, the de facto minimum wage is considerably
 higher than what is legally required. It is unlikely that
 anyone would accept less than the minimum wage, and the
 Ministry counts on the workers themselves to complain should a
 prospective employer make such an offer.
 The maximum workweek is 48 hours (or 9 hours per day).
 Included in this is a mandatory half-hour's break per day.
 All full-time workers are legally entitled to a minimum of 21
 days of paid annual leave per year. Workers are permitted to
 work overtime up to 12 hours a day. These ceilings are
 enforced by the Government, though it is possible that some
 occasional abuses do occur. Under the 1978 Occupational
 Safety and Health Decree, the Ministry of Employment and
 Social Affairs is responsible for enforcing the Government's
 rigorous occupational safety and health standards. In March
 1989, the decree was amended to cover government workplaces.
 These standards are rigorously enforced by inspectors who make
 regular workplace visits'. In 1989 there were 1 work-related
 fatality and 40 work-related injuries in Seychelles.
 
 
 314
