 SEYCHETLES
 President France Albert Rene and his Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF) have governed the Seychelles since a 1977 military coup. In the 1990's the
 SPPF guided the return to a multiparty political system, which culminated in July
 1993 in the country's first free and fair presidential and parliamentary elections
 since 1977. President Rene won reelection, and the SPPF won 27 of the 33 National
 Assembly seats, 21 by election and 6 by proportional representation. Despite the
 elections, the President and the SPPF continued to dominate the country through
 a pervasive system of political patronage and control over jobs, government con-
 tracts, and resources.
 The President has complete control over the security apparatus, which includes
 a national guard force, the army, and the police. There is also an armed para-
 military Police Mobile Unit (PMU). Security forces used excessive force in a number
 of instances, although police brutality is not widespread. The authorities inves-
 tigated complaints of police abuse and punished officers found guilty.
 in recent years, the Government accelerated its program to privatize the economy,
 imposed deep cuts in domestic spending to improve its foreign exchange position,
 and passed laws with tax cuts and abatements to encourage private businesses to
 expand and attract foreign investment. In addition, the Government moved to re-
 duce the high dependence on tourism-approximately 70 percent of hard currency
 earnings-by promoting the development of fishing, farming, and small-scale manu-
 facturing. Despite these efforts, the public and quasi-public sectors continued to
 drive the economy, and the Government through the Seychelles Marketing Board,
 other state organizations, and the use of banking regulations, continued to dominate
 most aspects of the economy.
 The human rights situation continued to improve, and the Government generally
 respected the rights of its citizens. However, despite parliamentary formalities, the
 President continued to wield power virtually unchecked. There was one incident in
 which police beat and tortured an employee of the Seychelles Broadcasting Com-
 pany. Violence against women and child abuse remained serious problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudiciol Klling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture, but there have been instances of exces-
 sive use of force by police. The authorities have investigated and punished offenders
 in the past. However, in February   lice re  rtedly tortured an employee of the
 Seychelles Broadcasting Company (SBC) an detained him without charge for 14
 days. (He was suspected of involvement in a break-in at the radio station.) Police
 reportedly beat the man on his face, back, and sexual organs in order to coerce a
 confession, but the authorities never formally charged him with a crime. The police
 did not take disciplinary action against the perpetrators of this abuse, and at year's
 end the SBC employee had begun a civil action against the Government for dam-
 ages.
 Conditions at Police Bay prison are Spartan, but not life-threatening. Family
 members are allowed weekly visits, and prisoners are given access to reading mate-
 rials. There is no regular system of independent monitoring of prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Penal Code provides that persons ar-
 rested must be brought before a ni trate within 48 hours. This provision is ap-
 plied in practice to the extent possiabe (residents of the outer isand are detained
 for longer than 48 hours, as the boat trip to Victoria, where the courthouse is lo-
 cated, can take 3 or more days from such islands as Assumption and Aldabra). De-
 tainees have access to legal counsel, and free counsel is provided for the indigent.
 
 
 218
 The law provides for judicial review of the legality of detention, and bail is available
 for most offenses.
 Other than the case of the SBC employee (see Section 1.c.), there were no reports
 of arbitrary arrest or unlawful detention. There were no political detainees or cases
 of forced exile. A number of former exiles who returned were able to reacquire their
 property. However, there were some instances in which the Government rejected
 valid compensation claims for confiscated properties of returning exiles, apparently
 for political reasons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system includes magistrate's courts
 the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Court, and the Court of Appeals. Criminal
 cases are heard by a magistrate's court or the Supreme Court, depending on the
 gravity of the offense. A jury is used in cases involving murder or treason. Trials
 are public, and the accused is considered innocent until proven guilty. Defendants
 have the right to counsel, to be present at their trial, to confront witnesses, and to
 appeal. The Government provides free counsel to the indigent, although there are
 only a few well-trained Seychellois lawyers. The Constitutional Court convenes
 twice a year to consider constitutional issues only.
 Defendants generally have the right to a fair trial. However, the judiciary has
 been criticized for not prosecuting senior-level government officials, and there are
 questions about the judiciarys independence. Judges are appointed through the
 Constitutional Appointments Authority (CAA) system, and the President appoints
 the CAA chairman. The current chairman is a staunch SPPF supporter, and the
 President's influence extends to judicial appointments. All judges are appointed for
 5 years and were hired from other Commonwealth countries; none is Seychellois.
 Some observers criticized expatriate judges for a lack of sensitivity on issues such
 as domestic violence.
 There were no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary In.e.erence With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy and freedom from arbitrary searches.
 The law requires a warrant for police searches, and the authorities generally re-
 spected this requirement in practice.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, but it also provides for restrictions on speech "for protecting the rep-
 utation, rights, and freedoms of private lives of persons" and "in the interest of de-
 fense, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health." Both freedom
 of speech and the press are thus constrained by the ease with which legal action
 can be taken to penalize journalists for alleged libel through civil law suits. In most
 instances, citizens speak freely, including in Parliament, although the President is
 rarely criticized.
 The Government has a near monopoly on the media, owning the only television
 and radio stations, the most important means for reaching the public, and the only
 daily newspaper (the Nation). The official media adhere closely to the Governments
 position on policy issues and give the opposition only limited coverage.
 In 1994 there were four independent weeklies, which in the past have criticized
 official policies and the President's closest advisers. However, at year's end, the
 most important independent weekly, the Regar, had suspended publication due to
 a libel action brought by the Deputy Commander of the army against the news-
 paper's publisher. On_ December 12, the Supreme Court found the Regar guilty of
 defamation and awarded the Deputy Commander damages of $34,879 (SR 173,000).
 The newspaper is appealing the judgment. Also, a second weekly, the Independent,
 shifted to monthly publication in late December, reportedly due to low circulation
 and financial constraints.
 Academic freedom is limited. There are no universities; secondary school teachers
 are largely apolitical. The Government controls access to the Polytechnic, the most
 prestigious learning institution, by requiring all students to participate in the Na-
 tionalYouth Service (NYS), a year-long program which now emphasizes educational
 instruction, although in the past it has stressed paramilitary training and SPPF
 ideology. In September students at the NYS held a series of demonstrations to pro-
 test budgetary cuts. The demonstrations escalated into violence, which resulted in
 extensive property damage. In response, the political opposition proposed legislation
 in the National Assembly to abolish the NYS. The President opposed the legislation,
 and the measure was defeated.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these freedoms and in practice the Government permitted peaceful assembly and
 association without interruption or interference. The police handled student dem-
 onstrations at the NYS camp with professional restraint.
 
 
 219
 
 In addition to the SPPF, there are a number of other political parties. The Gov-
 ernment regularly granted permits required for all public gatherings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and
 this right is respected in practic.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigrat ion, and Re-
 atriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and there wa no
 nonardg ement of domestic or international travel. Although it was not "used
 in 1994, the  991 Passport Act allows the Government to deny passports to any citi-
 zen if the Minister of Defense finds such denial "in the national interest"n here
 were no known requests for asylum in 1994 and no refugees in the Seychelles.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercised the right to change their government in the July 1993
 National Assembly and presidential elections, which were judged by international
 and national observers to have been free and fair. HoweverPresident Rene and the
 SPPF dominated the electoral process and continued to rule-as they have since
 1977. The elections served to provide a voice to other parties. The main opposition
 party, the Democratic Party is led by Sir James Manchani, the country's first elect-
 ed president who was forced into a 15-year exile in 1977.
 The President's SPPF party has utilized its political resources to develop a nation-
 wide organization that extends to the village level. The opposition parties have been
 unable to match the SPPF's organization and patronage, in part because of resource
 limitations.
 There are no legal restrictions against the participation of women or minority
 groups in politics. Women hold 3 ministerial positions in the 11-person Cabinet and
 8 seats in the National Assembly. The white minority of Seychelles continues to
 dominate governmental institutions, but some Creoles (African Seychellois) have
 risen to senior positions of responsibility, particularly in the military. Of the six
 members of the efence Forces Council, four are Creole.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices. However, the churhes have been strong voices for human rights and de-
 mocrtization, and the Government has not interfered with their activities. There
 were no known requests by international human rights groups to visit the
 Seychelles.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution affirms the right to be free from all types of discrimination, but
 does not specifically prohibit discrimination. In practice, there is no overt discrimi-
 nation in housing, employment, education, or other social services based on race,
 sex, ethnic, national, or religious identification.
 Women.-Seychelles is a largely matriarchal society, and women have the same
 le gal, poitical, economic, and social rights as men. There is no discrimination in
 eucation or employment, and women are fairly well represented in the political
 process and in business.
 According to law enforcement sources, violence against women, particularly wife
 beating, is common. Police seldom intervene in domestic disputes, ualess the dispute
 involves a weapon or major assault. The few cases that reach a prosecutor are often
 dismissed, or if a case reaches court, a perpetrator is usually given only a light sen-
 tence. There is a lack of societal concern about domestic violence, and there are no
 nongovernmental groups that address this issue.
 Children.-The Constitution provides for the rights of minors but the Government
 has failed to address effectively key issues such as child abuse.
 Sexual abuse of young girls usually in low-income families, is a serious problem.
 While the total dimension of the problem is not known, Ministry of Health data and
 press reports indicate that there are a significant number of rape cases of girls
 under the age of 15. Very few child-abuse cases are actually prosecuted in court.
 The strongest public advocate for young victims is a semiautonomous agency, the
 National Counil for Children, not the Government. The press has also begun to ad-
 dress the issue, calling for suitable facilities to house abused children, including fos-
 ter homes, as well as increased public awareness of the problem.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There is a historical educational gap be-
 tween Creoles (Seychellois of African origin) and Seychellois of white or Asian ori-
 gin, which has been a factor in the continuing political and economic domination of
 Seychelles by whites and Asians. Despite a significant Creole majority, the Presi-
 
 
 220
 dent, the Health Minister, the Foreign Minister, most principal secretaries, and al-
 most the entire merchant and financial class are white or Asian. The Government
 is attempting to close this gap through universal access to public education, but the
 formalization and teaching of Creole has made it more difficult for Creole students
 to learn English and French at a competitive level. Further the political domination
 by whites seems unyielding since the elected leadership of the majority party, and
 that'of most of the several opposition parties, is white.
 People With Disabilities.- The Government does not discriminate against people
 with disabilities in housing, obs, or education. However, there is no legislation pro-
 viding for access to public buildings, transportation, or government services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Under the 1993 Trade Union Industrial Act, which
 took effect in February, workers have the right to form and join unions of their own
 choosing. Police and fire employees may not unionize. Under the Act, the former
 government-controlled union, the National Workers Union (NWU), lost its monopoly
 position, and durng the year, workers formed six new unions all registered, orga-
 nized, and run by former officials of the NWU. In addition in June the Government
 recognized and registered the Public Service Union (PSU), with a membership of
 236 teachers, airport employees, and plice civilian employees, among others. The
 Government refused to recognize another proposed union, the Seychelles Union of
 Public Employees (SUPE), objecting to its goal of organizing all state employees.
 The six new unions formed after the demise of the NWU continue to be dominated
 bry the Government and the SPPF. The Trade Union Industrial Act prohibits ret-
 ribution against strikers, but the Government has not enforced the law. For in-
 stance, in May stevedores formerly employed by the Union Lighterage Company
 (UL ) were locked out by the new private owners of the port facility. As the new
 owners reduced the work force they refused to honor the workers' claim that under
 their contract, they were entitled to 1 hour's pay per each day of work lost due to
 the privatization. The ULC claimed that the workers had gone on strike and refused
 them further work or the pay claimed. The workers are planning to challenge the
 decision ia court.
 Unions can freely affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1993 Trade Union Indus-
 trial Act gives workers the legal right to engage in collective bargaining. However,
 in practice _free collective bargaining does not normally take place. The Government
 has the right to review and approve all collective bargaining agreements in the pub-
 lic and private sectors. There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. In the public
 sector, which employs about 70 percent of the labor force, the Government sets man-
 datory wage scares for employees. Wages in the private sector are generally set by
 the employer in individual agreements with the employee, but in the few larger
 businesses, wage scales are subject to the Government's right of review and ap-
 proval. Private employers frequently pay more than the Government in order to at-
 tract qualified workers.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union members.
 The Government may intervene to redress such complaints but has not done so for
 members of unions that do not have governmental approval.
 The Employment Act of 1985 which remains the basic labor law, authorizes the
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs to establish and enforce employment
 terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have frequently obtained recourse against
 their employers through the Ministry.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and it does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 15, and children are required to attend school until the 10th grade or the age of
 17, whichever occurs first. The Government stron ly encourages children to fulfill
 a year of National Youth Service before entering the work force at the age of 16 or
 the Polytechnic School for Vocational Training, and it discourages public or private
 sector employment of workers under 16 years of age. The Government offers vol-
 untary short-term (up to 6 months) work programs for those who leave school and
 do not participate in NYS. Children in these programs receive a training stipend
 which is below the minimum wage. The Government effectively enforces its child
 labor laws through regular inspections by the Ministry of Employment and Social
 Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage
 &cale, which is administratively regulated by the Government; it covers the public
 and state-owned sectors and differentiates among various job classifications. The
 
 
 221
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs enforces minimum wage regulations. The
 official minimum wage is about $320 (1,600 Seychelles rupees) a month. Given the
 free public services that are available, primarily in the areas of health and edu-
 cation, a single salary at the low end of the pay scale provides a family with a de-
 cent, if Spartan, standard of Jiving.
 Many families deal with the high cost of living by earning two or more incomes.
 However, due to a labor shortage, the prevailing wage rates in the private sector
 are considerably higher than the legal minimum, andworkers have little reason to
 accept a lower than minmum wage. In recent years there has been a growing trend
 for the Government to import foreign workers, primaril"y from India and Asia, to
 work in the construction and industrial fishing sector. Although it is difficult to de-
 termine the living and working conditions of these workers, there is strong empiri-
 cal evidence that the labor laws are routinely flouted by their employers, with the
 Government's knowledge. These workers are paid lower wages and forced to work
 S     an      ellois.
 elegan     miu  m workweek varies from 45 to 52 hours, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector. Each full-time worker is entitled to a half-hour break per day and a
 minimum of 21 days of paid annual leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime
 up to 60 additional hours per month. The Government generally enforces these ceil-
 ings. As noted above, foreign workers do not enjoy the same legal protections.
 The Govenent issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing these regulations. Occupational injuries are most common in
 the construction, marine, and port industries. A worker who removes himself from
 a potentially dangerous situatio n on the job is considered to have resigned. Safety
 and health inspectors do not visit job sites. In June two teenagers working in a
 large metal storage tank expressed to their employers fear of some loose mea gird-
 ers falling on them but were ignored. A girder later fell on them, resulting in severe
 injuries requiring hospital stays of 2 months. The parents of one of the youths has
 fleed suit in court.
