 SEYCHELLES
 President France Albert Rene and his Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF) have governed since a 1977 military coup. In the 1990's, the SPPF guided
 the return to a multiparty political system, which culminated in July 1993 in the
 country's first free and fair residential and parliamentary elections since 1977.
 President Rene was continued in power, and the SPPF won 27 of the 33 National
 Assembly seats, 21 by direct election and 6 by proportional representation. Despite
 the elections, the President and the SPPF continued to dominate the country
 through a pervasive system of political patronage and control over government jobs,
 contracts, and resources. The judiciary's independence has been questioned. The
 Constitution was amended in 1995 to allow for the appointment of a vice president.
 The judiciary is inefficient, lacks resources, and is subject to executive interference.
 The President has complete control over the security apparatus, which includes
 a national guard force, the army, and the police. There is also an armed para-
 
 
 military Police Mobile Unit. There were several credible reports that the security
 forces abused persons in custody.
 The economy provides the country's 75,000 residents an average per capita income
 of more than $6,000 per year and generally adequate social services. The Govern-
 ment has successfully begun to diversify the economy and move it away from its
 heavy reliance on tourism. Revenues from fishing rights and fish processing have
 grown sharply in recent years. Overall growth has remained sluggish, however, due
 largely to shortages of foreign exchange and the pervasive presence of inefficient
 state enterprises. Progress toward privatization has been slow. The Seychelles' ap-
 plication to join the World Trade Organization has forced it to consider reforming
 its trade and foreign exchange regimes, but it has made few substantive changes
 to date.
 The human rights situation continued to improve, and the Government generally
 respected the rights of its citizens. However, despite parliamentary formalities, the
 President continued to wield power virtually unchecked. Security forces used exces-
 sive force in a few instances, although police brutality was not widespread. The au-
 thorities investigated complaints of police abuse. Violence against women and child
 abuse remained problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture, but there have been instances of exces-
 sive use of force by police. The authorities have investigated and punished offenders
 in the past.
 Conditions at Long Island prison are Spartan. Family members are allowed
 monthly visits, and prisoners have access to reading but not writing materials.
 There is no regular system of independent monitoring of prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides that persons
 arrested must be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours. This provision is ap-
 plied in practice to the extent possible, with allowances made for boat travel from
 distant islands. The National Assembly approved legislation that provided for deten-
 tion without charge for up to 7 days if authorized by court order. Detainees have
 access to legal counsel, and free counsel is provided to the indigent. The law pro-
 vides for judicial review of the legality of detention, and bail is available for most
 offenses. Some defense attorneys assert that extended periods of detention under
 harsh conditions are used to extort confessions from suspects.
 Several persons have brought civil cases against the police for unlawful arrest or
 entry, with limited success.
 There were no cases of forced exile. Following the 1977 coup, a number of persons
 went into voluntary exile, and others were released from prison with the condition
 that they immediately leave the country. A number of these former exiles who re-
 turned were able to reacquire their property, but the majority have not. There were
 some instances in which the Government rejected valid compensation claims for con-
 fiscated properties of returning exiles, apparently for political reasons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, it is inefficient, lacks resources, as is subject to executive inter-
 ference.
 The judicial system includes magistrates' courts, the Supreme Court, the Con-
 stitutional Court, and the Court of Appeal.
 Criminal cases are heard by a magistrates' court or the Supreme Court, depend-
 ing on the gravity of the offense. A jury is used in cases involving murder or trea-
 son. Trials are public, and the accused is considered innocent until proven guilty.
 Defendants have the right to counsel, to be present at their trial, to confront wit-
 nesses, and to appeal. However, there are few well-trained lawyers. The Constitu-
 tional Court convenes weekly or as necessary to consider constitutional issues only.
 The Court of Appeal convenes twice per year to consider appeals from the Supreme
 Court and Constitutional Court only.
 Defendants generally have the right to a fair trial. All judges are appointed for
 5 years, and can be reappointed by the Constitutional Appointment Committee. All
 were hired from other British Commonwealth countries, and none is Seychellois.
 Some observers criticized expatriate judges for a perceived lack of sensitivity on is-
 sues such as human rights. Legal organs of the Government, such as the Attorney
 
 
 295
 General's office and the Ombudsman, are reluctant to pursue charges of wrongdoing
 or abuse of power against senior officials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy and freedom from arbitrary searches.
 The law requires a warrant for police searches, and the authorities generally re-
 spected this requirement in practice. The law requires that all electronic surveil-
 lance be Istified on the grounds of preventing a serious crime and be approved by
 a judge. The Government maintains telephone surveillance of some political figures.
 Some members of opposition parties claimed that they lost their government jobs
 because of their political beliefs and are at a disadvantage when applying for gov-
 ernment licenses and loans.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, but it also provides for restrictions on speech "for protecting the
 reputation, rights, and freedoms of private lives of persons" and "in the interest of
 defense, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health." Both freedom
 of speech and the press are thus constrained by the ease with which civil lawsuits
 can be filed to penalize journalists for alleged libel. In most instances, citizens speak
 freely, including in Parliament.
 The Government has a near monopoly in the media, owning the only television
 and radio stations, the most important means for reaching the public, and The Na-
 tion, the only daily newspaper. The official media adhere closely to the Govern-
 ment's position on policy issues and give the opposition and news adverse to the
 Government only limited attention. While both opposition parties publish an assort-
 ment of newsletters and magazines, only one significant opposition newspaper, the
 weekly Regar, is in circulation. Government officials have sued Regar for libel seven
 times in the last 4 years, including once in 1997. A second weekly, The Independent,
 ceased publication in 1995 after losing a libel suit brought by a government official.
 Academic freedom is limited since, for example, one cannot reach senior positions
 in the academic bureaucracy without demonstrating at least nominal loyalty to the
 SPPF. There are no universities; secondary school teachers are largely apolitical.
 The Government controls access to the Polytechnic, the most advanced learning in-
 stitution, and public school graduates wishing admission are given preference based
 on their participation in the National Youth Service (NYS), a year-long program
 that emphasizes educational instruction, although in the past it has stressed para-
 military training and SPPF ideology.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally re-
 spected these rights in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and there was no
 known abridgment of domestic or international travel. Although it was not used to
 refuse a passport application, the 1991 Passport Act allows the Government to deny
 passports to any citizen if the Minister of Defense finds that such denial is 'In the
 national interest.' There were no known requests for asylum and no refugees in the
 Seychelles.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercised the right to change their government in the July 1993
 national assembly and presidential elections, which were judged by international
 and national observers to have been free and fair. However, President Rene and the
 SPPF dominated the electoral process and continued to rule-as they have since
 1977. The elections served to provide a voice to other parties.
 The President's SPPF party has utilized its political resources and those of the
 Government to develop a nationwide organization that extends to the village level.
 The opposition parties have been unable to match the SPPF's organization and pa-
 tronage, in part because of financial limitations.
 The main opposition party, the Democratic Party, is led by Sir James Mancham,
 the country's first elected president, who was forced into a 15-year exile in 1977.
 Mancham was reelected president of the Democratic Party by acclamation at a con-
 troversial party convention in March. Critics of Mancham alleged that his ties to
 the ruling SPPF were too close and that he discouraged his own party members
 from criticizing the Government.
 
 
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or minority groups
 in politics. Women hold 2 of the 11 ministerial positions and 8 of the 33 seats in
 the National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices. However, both the churches and some nongovernmental organizations
 have been strong voices for human rights and democratization, and the Government
 has not interfered with their activities. There were no known requests by inter-
 national human rights groups to visit the Seychelles.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution affirms the right to be free from all types of discrimination, but
 it does not specifically prohibit discrimination based on these factors. In practice,
 there is no overt discrimination in housing, employment, education, or other social
 services based on race, sex, ethnic, national, or religious identification.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, remains a problem.
 Police seldom intervene in domestic disputes, unless the dispute involves a weapon
 or major assault. The few cases that reach a prosecutor are often dismissed, or, if
 a case reaches court, the perpetrator is usually given only a light sentence. There
 is growing societal concern about domestic violence and increased recognition of the
 need to address it.
 This society is largely matriarchal, and women have the same legal, political, eco-
 nomic, and social rights as men. There is no officially sanctioned discrimination in
 education or employment, and women are well represented in politics and business.
 Children.-Children have legal protection from labor and physical abuse and are
 required to attend school. Free public education is available. In June 1995, the Gov-
 ernment created an institutional framework for aiding children.
 Sexual abuse of young girls, usually in low-income families, is a serious problem.
 While complete statistics are not available, Ministry of Health data and press re-
 ports indicate that there are a significant number of rapes committed against girls
 under the age of 15. Very few child abuse cases are actually prosecuted in court.
 The strongest public advocate for young victims is a semiautonomous agency, the
 National Council for Children, not the Government. There is criticism that the po-
 lice fail to investigate charges of child abuse with vigor.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against people
 with disabilities in housing, jobs, or education. However, there is no legislation pro-
 viding for access to public buildings, transportation, or government services. The
 Government has promised the International Labor Organization (ILO) that it would
 implement a law providing for more jobs for disabled workers.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The education gap between Creoles and
 Seychellois of white or Asian origin is narrowing. The Government is attempting to
 reduce this gap through universal access to public education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Under the 1993 Industrial Relations Act (IRA),
 workers have the right to form and join unions of their choosing. Police, military,
 prison, and fire-fighting personnel may not unionize. Under the act, the former gov-
 ernment-controlled union, the National Workers Union, lost its monopol position.
 There are currently four registered unions: Two dominated by the SPPF and two
 independents. An attempt to organize an independent union incorporating employ-
 ees from both governmental ministries and government-owned entities was thwart-
 ed by government legal action.
 Unions can freely affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides workers
 with the right to engage in collective bargining. However, in practice free collective
 bargaining does not normally take place. The Government has the right to review
 and approve all collective bargaining agreements in the public and private sectors.
 There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. Inthe public sector, which employs
 about 60 percent of the labor force, the Government sets mandatory wage scales for
 employees. Wages in the private sector are generally set by the employer in individ-
 ual agreements with the employee, but in the few larger businesses, wage scales are
 subject to the Government's right of review and approval. Private employers histori-
 cally have paid higher wages than the Government in order to attract qualified
 workers. However, economic problems during the year led to downward pressures
 on wages.
 
 
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union members.
 Independent unions allege that their members in the public sector have encountered
 discrimination on the job because of their affiliation with non-SPPF unions.
 The Employment Acts of 1987 and 1995 constitute the basic labor law. They au-
 thorize the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs to establish and enforce em-
 ployment terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have frequently obtained re-
 course against their employers through the Ministry.
 The Government plans to inaugurate an export processing zone in early 1998.
 There are no export processing zones, but the Government is actively attempting
 to create one.
 c, Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment does not prohibit forced and bonded labor by children, but such practices
 are not known to occur.
 The minimum age for employment is 15 years, and children are encouraged to at-
 tend school until the 10th grade or the age of 17, whichever occurs first. The Gov-
 ernment strongly encourages children to fulfill 1 year of National Youth Service
 (NYS) before entering the work force at the age of 16 or the Polytechnic School for
 Vocational Training, and it discourages public or private sector employment of work-
 ers under the age of 16. The Government sponsors apprenticeships and short-term
 (up to 6 months) work programs for those who leave school and do not participate
 in the NYS. Children in these programs receive a training stipend which is below
 the minimum wage. The Government enforces child labor laws through inspections
 by the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.---Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage
 scale, which is administratively regulated by the Government; it covers the public
 and state-owned sectors and differentiates among various job classifications. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs enforces minimum wage regulations. The
 official minimum wage is $380 (1,900 Seychelles -rupees) per month. Trade unions
 contend that government entities pay some workers at less than the legal minimum.
 Even with the free public services that are available, primarily health and edu-
 cation, independent labor unions dispute that a single salary at the low end of the
 pay scale provides a worker and family with even a Spartan standard of living.
 Many families deal with the high cost of living by earning two or more incomes,
 although the number of households with two persons employed has reportedly
 dropped to 30 percent. In recent years, there has been a growing trend in govern-
 ment policy to admit foreign workers, primarily from India and elsewhere in Asia,
 to work in the construction and commercial fishing sectors. Although it is difficult
 to determine the living and working conditions of these workers, there is strong evi-
 dence that the labor laws are routinely flouted by their employers with the Govern-
 ment's knowledge. These workers are paid lower wages and forced to work longer
 hours than Seychellois, sometimes with the express consent of the Government.
 The legal maximum workweek varies from 45 to 52 houis, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector, while government employees work shorter hours. Each full-time work-
 er is entitled to a half-hour break per day and a minimum of 21 days of paid annual
 leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime up to 60 additional hours per month.
 The Government generally enforces these ceilings. Foreign workers do not enjoy the
 same legal protections.
 The Government issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs has for-
 mal responsibility for enforcing these regulations; however, the Ministry of Health
 seeks a role in this area. An ILO team which visited in early 1995 found serious
 deficiencies in the management and effectiveness of government monitoring and en-
 forcement efforts. Occupational injuries are most common in the construction, ma-
 rine, and port industries. A worker who removes himself from a potentially dan-
 gerous situation on the job is considered to have resigned. Safety and health inspec-
 tors rarely visit job sites. In 1994 there were 4 deaths and 162 on-the-job injuries
 officially reported. In 1995 there were two deaths and 57 on-the-job injuries. The
 Ministry had not released later statistics by years end.
