 SEYCHELLES
 Formerly a British colony, Seychelles, with a popula-
 tion of 61,000, became an independent republic in June
 1976. The tradition of respect for individual rights
 and civil liberties inherited from the British colonial
 government was maintained during its first year of
 independence. A June 1977 coup replaced President
 Mancham with his coalition partner Prime Minister Rene,
 who dismissed Parliament and now runs the Government
 by decree.
 Under Rene, the Government has stressed social and
 economic reforms beneficial to Seychelles' poor majori-
 ty. Primarily because of fears of counter-coup plot-
 ting, the Government has also devoted greater attention
 and resourdes than did its predecessor to internal and
 external security. Some Seychelles citizens suspected
 of such plotting have been subject to surveillance,
 search, interrogation and detention.
 There are currently no individuals incarcerated or
 otherwise detained for political reasons in Seychelles,
 and constitutional guarantees of the integrity of the
 person have been largely respected despite the abroga-
 tion of major sections of the Constitution.
 Under the chairmanship of Justice Telford George, Dean
 of the Legal Department of the University of the West
 Indies, a committee of four prominent Seychellois,
 including representatives of the private sector, was
 constituted to draft a new constitution. The new
 constitution probably will be promulgated in February
 1979, and elections are likely to be held by June
 1979. Most observers predict that the new constitu-
 tion will provide for a one party state and will
 incorporate the human rights guarantees and inde-
 pendent judiciary which existed under the previous
 constitution.
 
 (154)
 
 
 155
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The Seychelles constitution implicitly prohibits
 torture. There have been no instances or allegations
 of torture in the Seychelles.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman,or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Seychelles Constitution specifically prohibits
 corporal punishment and provides for enforcement by
 the courts of fundamental rights and freedoms. There
 have been no instances of allegations of cruel, in-
 human or degrading treatment of prisoners.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 There are no political detainees in Seychelles at
 present. In April 1978 the Government detained 21
 individuals who it believed were associated with
 alleged coup plotting. The Constitution provides
 authority to do so in time of war, a state of emergency,
 or when democratic institutions are threatened by
 subversion. The Constitution also provides that any
 person alleging that he or she is denied or threatened
 with denial of any of its protective provisions has
 the right to apply to the Supreme Court for redress.
 Shortly after the arrests, the Government issued
 temporary public security regulations which consider-
 ably expanded its authority to detain suspects without
 filing charges and to control the movement of desig-
 nated individuals. The detainees were all released by
 early August, and while several, encouraged by the
 regime, left the country, the others resumed their
 places in Seychelles society. The temporary regula-
 tions were rescinded in August.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 With the exception of the incident noted in Section c
 above, there have been no known instances of denial of
 fair, public trials.
 
 
 156
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Shortly after its installation in power, the new
 regime accorded broad new powers to the Seychelles
 police, including rights of search, seizure and arrest
 without warrant. However, these powers have been used
 sparingly and the sanctity of the home has been
 generally respected.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 With the construction of an international airport in
 1971, tourism rapidly replaced plantation agriculture
 as the dominant industry of the Seychelles. The
 Government is making major efforts to improve agri-
 culture and to develop a commercial fishing industry
 in order to reduce unemployment, agricultural imports,
 and dependence on the tourist industry. Income distri-
 bution is unequal; two-thirds of the labor force have
 incomes below the national average. One-third of the
 potential labor force is either unemployed or under-
 employed. Corruption is not a significant problem.
 Tax revenues are derived primarily from import and
 value-added taxes.
 The Rene regime's policies and budget priorities are
 directed toward improving the quality of life of the
 poor. The Government's first priority is an accel-
 erated low-cost housing scheme. To date, some 1,000
 low-income families (seven percent of the population)
 have benefitted from this program. The Rene regime
 also introduced educational measures designed to
 provide eight years of free, standard schooling to all
 children. The Government plans to abolish private
 medical practice in January 1979 and provide equal medi-
 cal treatment to all citizens regardless of means.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing-
 
 
 157
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 News is not censored. The only local publication
 concerned with political commentary addresses most
 issues in a candid fashion. Freedom of religion is not
 curtailed. While a decree shortly after the June 1977
 coup imposed fines and up to three years of imprison-
 ment for acts, statements or writing deemed prejudi-
 cial to public safety, the decree has not been en-
 forced and has not inhibited criticism by the general
 public.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restrictions on internal or foreign
 travel or on emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In February 1978 the regime thwarted efforts by the
 deposed political party to revitalize itself as a
 party of opposition. This was accomplished by harass-
 ment and implied threats.   Regarding the new Constitu-
 tion, President Rene has opined that Seychelles will
 become a one-party state. He has promised, however,
 that the Constitution will incorporate the wishes of
 the people and will be subject to approval or rejection
 by referendum.
 The constitution of the ruling political party prohi-
 bits discrimination on the basis of sex, and women
 play an active role in party, governmental and trade
 union affairs. The labor movement in the Seychelles
 is in a period of transition; it is likely that a
 national trade union federation will be created in the
 near future., While labor unions are not officially
 tied to the Government at present, the ruling Seychelles
 People's Progressive Front draws much of its support
 from the labor movement, and many interlocking rela-
 tionships exist between the party and the labor
 movement.
 
 
 158
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government invited Amnesty International to visit
 Seychelles in response to an inquiry from the organi-
 zation concerning the detention in April of 21 persons
 charged with plotting a coup. The detainees, however,
 were released from prison before arrangements for a
 visit were made. The Government permitted independent
 local journalists and an Australian television news
 team to visit the detainees while they were being
 held. To the knowledge of the Department of State,
 there were no other inquiries by other international
 human rights organizations in 1978.
 
 
