 SEYCHELLES
 The Government of Seychelles, led by President France Albert
 Rene, took power in June 1977 in a military coup d'etat. The
 1979 Constitution abolished all political opposition to the
 socialist ruling party, the Seychelles Peoples' Progressive
 Front. This Constitution does not guarantee fundamental human
 rights but states them in a preamble as the intention of the
 people of Seychelles.
 The Government has faced security threats in the past from its
 opponents living in Australia, the United Kingdom, and South
 Africa. Government forces repulsed a group of mercenaries who
 attacked Seychelles in November 1981. An internal mutiny by
 some members of the armed forces in 1982 was also put down
 with the assistance of Tanzanian troops then in Seychelles.
 In 1984 all Tanzanian troops were removed by mutual agreement,
 but there are an estimated 100 North Korean military advisors
 stationed in Seychelles.
 The Seychelles economy has, until recently, been almost
 totally reliant on tourism for foreign exchange. An estimated
 65,000 foreigners visited in 1984. Seychelles has actively
 sought to diversify its economy by granting fishing licenses
 to French, Spanish, Korean, and Japanese interests. The
 Government has sought donor assistance to move ahead with a
 major expansion of the fishing port in Victoria.
 The President was elected without opposition to a new term of
 office in 1984, and he further consolidated power within the
 single ruling party. Responding to charges both at home and
 abroad that he was bent on creating a Communist state, the
 President reiterated his desire that Seychelles maintain a
 non-aligned foreign policy, and he reaffirmed his commitment
 to freedom of religion. This year, some 38 persons were
 charged with unlawful assembly when they sought to demonstrate
 against the Soviet presence in the country. Their cases have
 not been resolved although all have been freed on bail. More
 disturbing was the disappearance of a known dissident in
 September 1984. Although his whereabouts remain unknown, many
 believe that his disappearance may have been arranged by
 persons in the security forces.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported instances of killing for political
 motives or other instances of arbitrary deprivation of life in
 1984.
 b. Disappearance
 The unexplained disappearance of two Seychellois in 1984 has
 raised serious concern among many elements of the population.
 In the first instance there is no evidence that the man was
 involved in political activities. The second, however, was
 believed by the Government to have been a member of the
 outlawed opposition movement. His disappearance in September
 is still under investigation. Many of the Government's
 opponents, as well as key church leaders, have pressed for
 more information on this case.
 
 
 275
 SEYCHELLES
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture and there have not
 been any reports that torture has been utilized. There have
 been some isolated reports of rough treatment by police in the
 course of criminal arrests. Demonstrators arrested by the
 Government in October 1984 report they were well treated
 without physical or verbal abuse. Prisoners are adequately
 fed and supervised by professional prison wardens. They are
 normally incarcerated on isolated islands, although family
 visits are routinely arranged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In October 1984 four persons were arrested without charge in
 conjunction with anti-Government demonstrations. Unlike those
 charged with unlawful assembly, these persons appear to be
 held under a security act which allows detention without the
 right of habeas corpus. According to family members, they are
 well treated but have not beep advised of any charges against
 them. Three of the four were released in November 1984. This
 detention act, enacted in December 1981 following an attack by
 mercenaries, has been used sparingly. Police have, however,
 arrested persons for 24 hours for *questioning' regarding
 anti-Government activities. Frequently, opponents of the
 Government have been urged to emigrate, an option many have
 chosen over the years.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Seychelles jurisprudence is patterned in large measure on
 English common law, although there is heavy influence of
 Napoleonic law, as well. Judges are provided under
 arrangements with British Commonwealth countries and have
 exhibited considerable independence from both the executive
 and legislative branches of the Government. The Chief
 Justice, however, stressed in two addresses during 1984 that
 it is the judiciary's responsibility to impose sentences as
 required by law and that the judiciary should reflect the will
 of the people as expressed in laws passed by the legislature.
 Those charged with demonstrating were charged under a former
 British colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly (i.e.,
 without a government permit). In 1984 the President remanded
 a rape case involving members of the armed forces to civilian
 courts for adjudication. Seychelles law requires that members
 of the armed forces be tried by court martial unless the
 President decrees otherwise. This decision was widely. hailed
 as a step forward, since court martial penalties were
 sometimes seen as too lenient. Defendants in non-political
 cases have access to counsel and have enjoyed speedy and fair
 trials.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Seychelles authorities have broad powers of search and
 seizure without warrant. A new law passed in 1984, the
 Seychelles Marketing Board Act, allows police to enter any
 premises, private or public, and to seize any documents which
 they believe may violate the Act. Unlike 1983 when there were
 many reported violations of private homes, there were few
 reports of such actions in 1984. Legislation exists which
 
 
 276
 SEYCHELLES
 allows the Government to open mail, domestic as well as
 international, and it is widely believed the Government does
 so. Some foreign visitors have complained of surveillance by
 security forces. Since June 1983 the Government has embarked
 on a campaign to nationalize private property. Although it
 has stated that compensation will be paid, negotiations with
 the previous owners are continuing. The Government claimed at
 the time the legislation was passed that it intended to use
 its powers to claim unused agricultural land. Yet there have
 been four seizures of hotels, as well as private residences.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including-
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the Constitution of
 1979, freedom of speech is curtailed in practice. Legislation
 provides for up to three years detention for anyone "who with
 intent to bring the President into hatred, ridicule or
 contempt, publishes any defamatory or insulting matter whether
 in writing, print or word of mouth or in any other manner.'
 Apparently no charges have been brought under this
 legislation. This same legislation allows a two-year sentence
 for anyone who "prints, makes, imports, sells, supplies,
 offers for sale or supply, distributes, reproduces, or has in
 his possession or control" any publication banned by the
 Government for security reasons, but again there has been no
 prosecution under it. The Government has sought to curtail
 the importation of pamphlets printed by its opposition abroad.
 The Government controls the major newspaper in the country, as
 well as all radio and television broadcastihg. The Catholic
 Church publishes an increasingly lively paper, 'Echo Des
 Isles,* which is not subject to government control or
 censorship. Since the President promised not to interfere
 with religious expression in September 1984, that paper has
 published hard-hitting articles which obliquely criticize the
 Government. The two largest religious denominations in the
 country, the Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches, are each
 provided two free hours of uncensored broadcasting each
 month. Again, in late 1984 both churches have used these
 broadcasts to comment on social and political issues. Foreign
 broadcasts are widely listened to and are uncensored. Except
 for opposition material, foreign publications, including those
 critical of the Government, have been imported and sold
 without hindrance.
 Persons who seek to mobilize public opinion against the
 Government, however, run a serious risk of being arrested for
 "questioning" or can face social and economic harassment.
 Some who have worked for the Government have been fired
 without recourse to appeal or review. Others have been
 encouraged to leave the country either by direct threat or
 through anonymous threats which they believe originate from
 Government officials. Foreign nationals critical of the
 Government have been requested to depart.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A law dating from 1959 inhibits the right of peaceful assembly
 without government permit. Some 38 persons were arrested in
 1984 and charged with unlawful assembly when police broke up a
 peaceful demonstration.
 
 
 277
 SEYCHELLES
 There is one legal union (the National Workers Union) which is
 under direct control of the ruling party. It does not
 function as a free trade union, although it has some limited
 powers to negotiate wage increases and better working
 conditions for its members. Legislation was passed in 1983
 which restricts an employer from dismissing workers. There
 has been no official strike in Seychelles since 1977, although
 1984 saw a 'work stoppage" by stevedores who protested a
 change in their contract. The issues were handled peacefully
 and without publicity in meetings between the union, workers,
 and government. All associations, clubs, and other groups
 require government permission to organize. The National
 Workers Union is a member of the Ghana-based, continent-wide,
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity (OATUU).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There has been no official religious persecution in Seychelles
 and the President in 1984 publicly reiterated his support for
 religious freedom. The Roman Catholic and Anglican churches
 have flourished, and Muslims and Hindus are unrestricted in
 their religious practices. Seychelles has granted a license
 for many years to a Protestant radio station which broadcasts
 throughout Asia and Africa. There is, however, a clear
 separation between church and state. Religious instruction in
 schools has been limited, and the church has complained that
 artificial impediments have made it difficult, if not
 impossible, for children (ages 14-17) in the National Youth
 Service to attend church on a weekly basis. Church services
 are widely attended and are uncensored.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Passports may
 now be acquired by virtually any citizen, although Seychellois
 traveling abroad for study at Government expense are required
 to sign a bond which enables the Government to regain the cost
 of their education should they fail to return. Such persons
 who are 'bonded' must have Government permission to travel
 abroad following their return. In 1984 the Government granted
 a passport to a suspected dissident for emigration to the
 United States. There are no known cases in which passports
 are currently being withheld. There are no restrictions on
 voluntary repatriation for those who accept the present
 political system.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since 1979 there has been only one legal political party, the
 Seychelles Peoples' Progressive Front. All political (and much
 social) activity is channeled through this institution.
 President Rene, as President of the country and Secretary
 General of the party, wields great power and authority.
 Opponents of the party can neither organize nor express public
 opposition. The party has a number of regional offices called
 'branches' which are responsible for organizing and supervising
 discussion about current government policies. These *branches"
 are encouraged to report public opinion in their regions, and
 to report views to the Executive Committee. In fact, such
 discussions do not often result in policy changes, which are
 directed from above.
 
 
 278
 SEYCHELLES
 Presidential elections were held in 1984. President Rene, in
 an effort to overcome a move by his opponents to boycott the
 uncontested election, threatened that persons who failed to
 register ran the risk of losing certain benefits and
 privileges they enjoyed as citizens of Seychelles. The
 President received over 90 percent of those casting valid
 ballots.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Since 1983 there have been no requests or inquiries regarding
 human rights in the Seychelles. Amnesty International states
 it did not have sufficient information to allow an entry on
 the Seychelles in its 1984 Report. Freedom House rates the
 Seychelles "not free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Seychelles enjoys a relatively high standard of living for an
 underdeveloped country. Per capita GNP in 1982 was $1,485.
 Free health services of a high standard are available to all
 persons. Infant mortality is 19.4 per thousand, one of the
 lowest in Africa. Life expectancy 169.9 years] approaches
 that found in many West European countries. Free universal
 education is available for all children, and in the case of
 academically qualified students, a minimum of 13 years
 education is provided by the state. Recent changes in the
 National Youth Service, a two-year program which is virtually
 compulsory for all children ages 14-16, have emphasized the
 importance of academic training. Children are now granted one
 weekend leave per month, a move designed to dampen parental
 concern that the influence of the family is being diminished
 in the program.
 The status of women in this essentially matriarchal society is
 high. Women have the same legal, political, economic, and
 social rights as men. Although there are no women currently
 serving in the Council of Ministers, many senior officials up
 to and including the rank of Principal Secretary are women.
 Nutrition requirements of most Seychellois are easily met
 through an abundance of food available throughout the
 country. Seychelles has the highest per capita consumption of
 fish in the world, a diet amply supplemented by a variety of
 fresh fruits and vegetables. Unemployment remains a serious
 problem, although the Government has emphasized development
 plans which are as labor intensive as possible. A "full
 employment scheme" also provides manual labor for anyone who
 desires to work at a rate set by the Government. The
 Government remains the largest employer in the country. Some
 persons who are believed by the Government to oppose its
 policies have found it difficult to gain employment.
 
 
 279
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SEYCHELLES
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         2.4      2.4     2.5
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        2.4      2.4      2.5
 A.AID  .............. ... 2.0        2.0     2.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        2.0      2.0      2.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         2.0      2.0     2.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.3      0.3     0.3
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.3      0.3     0.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.3      0.3     0.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.3      0.3     0.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.1      0.1     0.2
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............  0.1          0.1      0.2
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.       0.1      0.2
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 .LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         2.4      2.4     2.5
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        2.4      2.4      2.5
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........     9.0      0.0      8.1     31.3
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOS               8.6      0.0      8.0     28.2
 UNDP               0.4      0.0      0.0      2.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.1      0.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 19
 
 
 280
