 SEYCHELLES
 On June 5, 1979, Seychelles became a socialist, one-party
 state. The single party is the Seychelles People's
 Progressive Front (SPPF). France Albert Rene was
 elected President and a People's Assembly (legislature)
 was elected. Under this leadership the government has
 sought major social and economic reforms.
 The 1979 constitution does not contain a Bill of Rights as
 such. According to the preamble to the constitution, the
 protection of traditional civil liberties is a stated
 intention of the people of Seychelles. However, legal
 safeguards against arbitrary action by the executive are
 minimal. These liberties, while generally respect-
 ed, exist at the sufferance of the government.
 The government of President Rene has concentrated signifi-
 cant resources on matters of internal and external security.
 Individuals suspected of opposition activities have been
 subject to surveillance, search, interrogation, and arrest.
 Following a riot in downtown Victoria in October 1979,
 approximately 100 individuals were arrested in a crackdown
 on political opposition. All of those political prisoners
 were released by mid-1980. The prisoners' property and
 business interests were untouched, but thirteen prisoners
 were released on the condition that they leave the country
 for at least a year. A curfew from 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 -a.m.,
 introduced in November 1979, remained in effect until August
 1980.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The preamble to the new constitution states that it is
 the intention of the people of Seychelles to secure the
 right not to be subjected to torture. No allegations of
 torture of Seychellois in Seychelles have been received in
 1980.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The preamble states it is the people's intention to secure
 the right not to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading
 treatment. Political prisoners released during 1979 and
 1980 have reported being interrogated, but have not reported
 cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. There have been no
 instances of summary or other execution. Prisoners live on
 an island just outside Victoria harbor and are free to fish,
 grow their own fruits and vegetables, and serve out their
 sentences under generally benign conditions. A uniformed,
 disciplined and respected prison service, on the British
 model, administers the prison.
 a. Disappearances
 There have been no known incidents of disappearance in
 Seychelles.
 
 
 220
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Fear of internal dissension and-possible counter-coup
 attempts prompted the introduction of regulations in late
 1979 considerably expanding the government's authority to
 detain suspects without filing charges and to control the
 movement of designated individuals.
 The constitution imposes no restraints on the President
 in carrying out his responsibilities. The judiciary lacks
 the power to protect the individuals against abuses by the
 state.
 There are no effective legal safeguards against instances of
 arbitrary arrest or imprisonment which might arise in the
 future.
 Political prisoners taken in late 1979 were held, without
 being formally charged, for several months and eventually
 were released. They were denied representation and were not
 tried. The government never presented evidence of any kind
 to indicate the detainees had violated the law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Political prisoners arrested in late 1979 were never
 brought to trial, and spent from 3 to 7 months in jail.
 The last thirteen detainees released in July 1980 were
 ordered to leave the country for one to two years. Two of
 them, however, were permitted to remain in Seychelles
 because they lacked the funds to leave.
 Non-political prisoners are granted fair public trials
 in Seychelles. Host judges are third country nationals,
 usually British, on short-term contract. The appellate
 judges come once a year from Britain.
 According to the Attorney General, the accused has
 a right to counsel. Legal aid is also available for
 serious cases heard before the Supreme Court, but not
 normally in magistrates court where lesser offenses are
 tried.
 Emergency powers permit detention without trial if the
 President signs a detention order. In that case there is
 no legal counsel because there is no trial.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Shortly after his installation in power, President Rene
 accorded the police broad powers of search, seizure,
 and arrest without warrant. These powers have been used
 sparingly. However, no effective legal safeguards exist
 against arbitrary invasion of the home. Released political
 detainees have cemplained of intimidating surveillance of
 their homes, but electronic eavesdropping, demolition or
 sealing of homes is not practiced.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 The government's efforts to improve the quality of life in
 Seychelles have concentrated on nutrition, housing, public
 health, full employment and equal opportunity in education
 
 
 221
 for all its citizens.
 Host processed food is imported and therefore costly. The
 government encourages a cooperative movement and maintains
 controlled prices on basic items suoh-as rice, milk and
 chicken. A government parastatal organization was recently
 formed to purchase all agricultural produce and market it at
 fixed prices.
 The government has sought to provide and improve housing for
 all citizens, particularly in the poorest areas outside of
 the capital city of Victoria. Host Seychellois own their
 own homes on a small plot of land. They are able to obtain
 government assistance for financing, repairs, and improving
 utilities.
 The government abolished private medical practice in 1979
 and several doctors and dentists left Seychelles. To fill
 the gap, several doctors and dentists from other countries
 have arrived to work on short-term contracts.
 Under a new health plan, each of the districts is to provide
 a medical/dental clinic for treatment for citizens regard-
 less of their means. Plans to expand the Victoria hospital
 facilities are well under way. There are few major health
 problems in Seychelles, with the exception of an occasional
 epidemic of dengue fever.
 Income distribution is unequal; two-thirds of the labor
 force have incomes below the national average: one-third
 of the potential labor force is either unemployed or under-
 employed. Third-country nationals fill many of the best-
 paid government positions.
 A national employment scheme, introduced to eliminate
 unemployment, provides daily employment on public works
 projects. President Rene introduced monthly social
 security payments for citizens over 64 years old.
 Women find employment throughout the economy: they can
 be found at high levels of government, in the hotels
 and tourism offices, as well as sweeping streets under the
 national employment scheme.
 The labor movement in Seychelles, closely tied to the ruling
 Seychelles Peoples Progressive Front, exerts considerable
 influence over employment conditions. The National Workers
 Union, in conjunction with the government and employers,
 fixes basic wage rates. The Department of Labor, which
 maintains a register of positions, determines which candi-
 dates will be sent to employers for job interviews. Only
 when the list of unemployed candidates is exhausted can
 already-employed candidates interview for a job. An
 employer can also advertise for candidates to register with
 the Department of Labor to fill a position.
 Third country nationals need work permits which are issued
 when qualified Seychellois are unavailable. When a quali-
 fied Seychellois becomes available, the expatriate's work
 permit is usually allowed to lapse.
 
 
 222
 To counterbalance the uneven distribution of income,
 a social security scheme serves to distribute contributions
 made by employers and employees to the poor, aged, disabled
 and unemployed. However, payments are based on need, not
 prior contributions. As a result, a prosperous retiree who
 has paid into the social security scheme will receive
 nothing.
 Declaring an end to past policy of elitism in the Seychelles
 educational system, President Rene established equal educa-
 tional opportunities for all by establishing school districts,
 each district having one school, and providing a nine-year,
 compulsory, standardized public school program of basic
 education for all Seychellois children.
 Despite opposition in late 1979 to the national youth
 service scheme, the Port Launay youth camp, scheduled
 to open in January 1981, is to offer a mixed academic,
 craft and technical curriculum to boarding students aged
 14-16. Attendance is voluntary. After it opens, students
 will have three alternatives after completing ninth grade:
 academic study at Seychelles College for students aged
 14-18; technical training for future employment in the
 trades; or, the Port Launay youth camp.
 College-level study means study abroad, generally in a
 non-aligned country, sometimes at government expense. The
 government will, however, sponsor post-graduate students
 for education in Western countries.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The preamble of the new constitution states that it is the
 intention of the people to secure the enjoyment by every
 person in Seychelles of certain fundamental rights and
 freedoms, including freedom of thought, conpcience and
 religion; freedom of opinion and expression; and freedom to
 assemble and associate peacefully in accordance with the
 law.
 In late 1979, however, the law was changed, providing
 up to three years imprisonment for many person who publishes,
 whether orally or in writing or otherwise, any statement,
 rumor or report which is likely to cause fear and alarm
 to the public or disturb the public peace* or many person
 who, with intent to bring the President into hatred,
 ridicule, or contempt who publishes any defamatory or
 insulting matter whether in writing, print, word of mouth
 or in any other manner."
 The President can also ban publications for public security
 purposes. Any person who "prints, makes, imports, publishes,
 sells, supplies, offers for sale or-supply, distributes,
 reproduces or has ifi his possession or under his c6ntrol
 any prohibited publication" can face two years imprisonment.
 The major newspaper and only radio station are both govern-
 ment owned and controlled. The Catholic church publishes
 another small paper. Movies are subjected to censorship
 
 
 223
 for suitability for young audiences and, in some instances,
 segments that show government in a bad light are cut.
 The majority of films shown in Seychelles' only movie
 theatre are'American. International magazines--Time,
 Newsweek, Jeune Afrique--appear regularly on the newstands.
 BBC and VOA can be tuned in on shortwave radios.
 For Seychelles citizens, anti-government statements could
 result in imprisonment as a political prisoner. Expatriates
 have been expelled on 24-hours notice without explanation.
 Freedom of speech is, thus, impeded by the threat of confine-
 ment for Seychellois, or expulsion for citizens of other
 countries.
 No organized opposition to the government is allowed.
 The SPPF cgntrols the National Workers Union, the only
 labor union.
 The government respects freedom of religion. Ninety-five
 percent of the population is Catholic. Others, Anglican
 and Muslim, practice their religions. Both the Catholic
 and Anglican churches are headed by bishops.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 A 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. curfew on Mahe Island during
 the first half of 1980 restricted internal movement.
 The government lifted the curfew when it became apparent
 that it was unnecessary and was harmful to tourism. A
 harbor curfew still restricts marine traffic in Victoria
 harbor between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 Neither foreign travel nor emigration are restricted,
 although repatriation may in some cases depend on the
 cause for expatriation.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The new constitution establishes Seychelles as a one-
 party state, designates the ruling SPPF party as the only
 lawful party, and restricts political activity to the
 party and the government. Activities of those opposed to
 single-party government, socialism, or the present
 government and its policies remain severely restricted.
 Opponents of the Rene government cannot organize in any
 way, whereas government supporters receive a great deal
 of encouragement to participate in politics. The SPPF
 constitution prohibits discrimination based on sex.
 Women participate actively and occupy prominent positions
 in government and political organizations. Women occupy
 thirteen of the twenty-five seats in the elected People's
 Assembly.
 Problems of nationality, citizenship or statelessness
 do not exist.
 
 
 224
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Seychelles does not participate in any international or
 regional human rights bodies and has no internal organiza-
 tion which contests human rights violations.
 The Amnesty International Report of 1980 states that in
 November 1979 the government detained 78 persons for an
 alleged coup plot. In March 1980 Amnesty International,
 at the invitation of the government, sent a mission to
 Seychelles to inquire into these detentions. By the time
 of the mission 60 detainees had been released. A report
 based on the mission's findings stated the majority of
 detainees were prisoners of conscience, imprisoned because
 of their political opinions or associations. It called for
 the trial or release of the detainees, and improvements in
 prison conditions.
 
 
 225
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SEYCHELLES
 1978      1979     1980
 IeECON. ASSIST.TOTAL,.             0.2       0.8      1.0
 LOANSo*........            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTSTeoeo      S**,         0.2      0.8       1.0
 AeAID oeesoo.oooe..o.*            0.0       0.6      0.6
 LOANS ..... .. o..00                 0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.e.ooeoo**             e0.0     0.6       0.6
 (SECoSUPPeASSISTo)oeo           00       0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.oEoo              0.1       0.1      0.2
 LOANSoeooooooooooo             0.0     0.0       0.0
 GRANTSo......o..*            0.1      0.1       0.2
 TITLE I-TOTAL     TALoooooo       0.0       0.0      000
 REPAY. IN SLOANS.e.o             0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.o...            0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL...oo***             0.1       0.1      0.2
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.            0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOLoRELIEF AGENCY,.oo             0.1      0.1       0.2
 CoOTHER ECON. ASSIST-*.            0.1       0.1      0.2
 LOANSesoooooesosooe            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS     NTSeoeoeeO**       0.1       0.1       0.2
 CONTR. TO IFI*..           0.0       0.0       0.0
 PEACE CORPSS..             0.1       0.1       0.2
 OTHER.**ooeoo**o.           0.0       0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...            0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANSoeeo*oeoos            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS..     .oooe..e       0.0      0.0       0.0
 AeMAP GRANTSoooooo            0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS....            0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.INTL NIL.EO.TRNGo...            0.0       0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...            0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.....o.o            00      0.0       0.0
 !II.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...            0.2      0.8       10
 LOAN~o*ooeo0oooooo,00                 0.0       0.0
 GRANTSeo..oo...  ee*o          0.2      0.8       1.0
 -------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS.....o....           0.        0.0      0o0
 EX-IM BANK LOANSoe.....            0.0      0.0       0.0
 .ALL.QTHER*.*..*********            0.0       0.0      0.0
 --------w-----               ------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1970      1979      1980     1946-80
 -----        -----------------------------------------------
 TOTAL*.o....       12.0      0.6       0.3      14.2
 IBRD                 0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0
 IFC                  0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0
 IDA                  0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0
 IDB                  0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0
 ADS                  0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0
 AFD3                11.6      0.0       0.0      11.6
 UNOP .               0.4       0.4      0.3       2.2
 OTHER-UN             0.0       0.2      0.0       0.4
 EEC                  0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
 226
