 SEYCHELLES
 The Government of Seychelles is led by President France Albert
 Rene, who took power in June 1977 in a military coup d'etat
 and forced into exile a number of former leaders, including
 ex-prime minister James Mancham. In 1979 a new Constitution
 was promulgated which formally abolished all political
 opposition to the Socialist ruling party, the Seychelles
 Peoples' Progressive Front (SPPF). This Constitution provides
 for a strong presidential executive, who appoints ministers,
 and a People's Assembly of 23 selected members and several
 appointed members. The 1985 changes in the constitution of
 the SPPF brought greater consolidation of power in the hands
 of President Rene.
 Since the 1977 coup, the Government has faced numerous
 security threats from opponents living in Australia, the
 United Kingdom, and South Africa, and it had to call on the
 assistance of Tanzanian troops to put down an internal mutiny
 by some members of the armed forces in 1982. While all
 Tanzanian troops were withdrawn by mutual agreement in 1984,
 some North Korean military advisors remain in Seychelles to
 train the small (about 1,000 persons) Seychelles Defense
 Forces. The Seychelles also has a uniformed police force of
 500, and a People's Militia of about 2,000.
 The Seychelles economy relies predominantly on tourism for
 foreign exchange. The tourism industry, which fell
 dramatically in the early 1980's has now revived, and some
 75,000 foreigners visited the country during 1985. The
 Seychelles Government has actively sought to diversify the
 economy by granting fishing licenses to French, Spanish,
 Korean, and Japanese trawlers and by expanding the fishing
 port in Victoria through donor assistance. Fishing, if fully
 developed, could replace tourism as the largest earner of
 foreign exchange by the end of the decade.
 There was no marked change in the Seychelles' human rights
 situation during 1985. The Constitution does not guarantee
 fundamental human rights but rather states them in a preamble
 as the intention of the people of Seychelles. At the party
 conference in 1985, the President reaffirmed his determination
 to put down opposition elements, and the Government continued
 to use exile as a means of surpressing dissent. On the
 positive side, the President reaffirmed his commitment to
 freedom of religion and promised that the Government would
 neither interfere in church affairs nor restrict the right of
 religious groups to speak out including through their
 influential media outlets.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported instances of any domestic killing for
 political motives or other instances of arbitrary deprivation
 of life in 1985. It has been alleged however, that Gerard
 Hoarau, leader of the London-based Seychelles National
 Movement, might have been assassinated by government agents in
 London in December.
 
 
 271
 SEYCHELLES
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of other disappearances during 1985.
 Two persons who disappeared in 1984 have not been found.
 Amnesty International noted in its 1985 Report that it has
 received allegations that these persons were abducted and
 killed by government security agents. President Rene has
 denied these allegations. Amnesty International has also
 written to the President regarding five other cases since 1977
 in which people either disappeared or died in apparent
 accidents.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture and there have
 been no recent reports that torture has bee practiced. There
 have been some isolated reports of rough treatment by police.
 Prison conditions are satisfactory. Prisoners are well fed
 and supervised by professional wardens. Prisoners are
 normally incarcerated on isolated islands, but family visits
 are routinely arranged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 At the end of 1985, nine persons were reported under
 detention, held under the provisions of the Public Security
 (Detention) Act, which allows indefinite detention upon order
 of the President. This Detention Act, enacted in December
 1981 following an attack by mercenaries, was used, for
 example, to arrest 41 persons in 1984 for unlawful assembly.
 In October 1984, 38 of the detainees were fined and released,
 but the remaining 3 are still held in detention. Moreover,
 police have not hesitated to take persons into custody and
 keep them overnight for "questioning" in regard to suspected
 antigovernment activities. In particular, persons who seek to
 mobilize public opinion against the Government run a serious
 risk of being arrested for "questioning." Some who have
 worked for the Government have been fired without recourse to
 appeal or review. Others have faced social and economic
 harassment and received direct or anonymous threats which they
 believe originate from government officials as signals to
 leave the country. Frequently, opponents of the Government
 have been urged to emigrate, an option that many have chosen
 over the years.
 There is a prohibition against the use of forced or compulsory
 labor, and such practices have not been employed in
 Seychelles. There is, however, National Youth Service (NYS)
 for all persons 14 to 16, which has elements of military
 training and discipline, as well as academic study.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Defendants in nonpolitical cases (both civil and criminal)
 have access to counsel and have enjoyed speedy and fair
 trials. Right to trial is patterned in large measure on
 English common law, although there is also a heavy influence
 of Napoleonic customary law. Judges are provided under
 arrangements with the British Commonwealth and, except for
 security cases, they have exhibited considerable independence
 from both the executive and legislative branches of the
 Government. The Chief Justice, who is appointed by the
 President, stressed in two addresses during 1984 that it is
 
 
 272
 SEYCHELLES
 the judiciary's responsibility to impose sentences as required
 by law and that it should reflect the will of the people as
 expressed in laws passed by the legislature. Seychelles' law
 requires that member of the armed forces be tried by
 courts-martial unless the President decrees otherwise.
 Amnesty International is investigating the case of Royce Dias
 in order to ascertain whether he is a prisoner of conscience,
 notwithstanding his conviction for a criminal offense. Dias'
 7 year sentence for possession of drugs was recently reduced
 by the Appeals Court to five years.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure
 without need of a warrant. The Seychelles Marketing Board
 Act, passed in 1984, allows police to enter any premises,
 private or public, and seize any documents which they believe
 may violate this Act. Legislation exists which allows the
 Government to open mail, domestic as well as international,
 and it is widely believed that the Government does so. The
 party conference in 1985 adopted a resolution which supported
 President Rene's efforts to quell opposition elements "by
 whatever ways and means he deems suitable." Since June 1983
 the Government has embarked on a campaign to nationalize
 private land, ostensibly to claim unused agricultural land.
 There have been four seizures of hotels, as well as private
 residences and at least one foreign-owned corporation.
 Although the Government has stated that compensation will be
 paid, negotiations with previous owners are continuing.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the Constitution of
 1979, freedom of speech in public is exercised sparingly.
 The Government controls the major newspaper in the country, as
 well as all radio and TV broadcasting. Legislation provides
 for up to 3 years' detention for anyone "who with intent to
 bring the President into hatred, ridicule or contempt,
 publishes any defamatory or insulting matter whether in
 writing, print or word of mouth or in any other manner." This
 same Act authorized a 2-year sentence for anyone who "prints,
 supplies, distributes, reproduces, or has in his possession or
 control" any publication banned by the Government for security
 reasons. No charges are known to have been brought under this
 Act. The Government has sought to prevent the importation of
 pamphlets printed by its opposition abroad.
 Despite the restrictions, there has been an improvement in the
 situation since the President's 1984 speech in which he
 promised not to interfere with the church's right to speak out
 against the Government. The Catholic church publishes a
 lively paper, Echo des Isles, which is not subject to
 Government control or censorship. This paper continues to
 publish some articles which obliquely criticize the
 Government. The two largest religious denominations in the
 country, the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches, are each
 provided 2 free hours per-month of uncensored broadcasting.
 Both churches have taken advantage of the monthly broadcast to
 comment on social and.political issues. Seychelles has
 
 
 273
 SEYCHELLES
 granted a license for many years to a Protestant radio station
 which broadcasts religious programs throughout Asia and
 Africa. Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to, and
 foreign publications, including those critical of the
 Government, have been imported and sold without hindrance.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A law dating from 1959 inhibits the right of peaceful assembly
 without government permit. The Government has been quick in
 moving against unauthorized demonstrations and has made arrest
 under an ex-British colonial law which prohibits unlawful
 assembly (i.e. without a government permit). All
 associations, clubs, and other organizations require
 government permission to organize.
 There is one legal union (the National Workers Union) which is
 under direct control of the ruling party. It does not
 function as a free trade union, although it plays an advisory
 role for workers and seeks better working conditions for its
 members. Changes adopted at the party conference in 1985
 further restricted the election of labor union officials who,
 in the future will be appointed by the Government. A 1983 law
 restricts an employer from dismissing workers. There has been
 no official strike in Seychelles since 1977.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There has been no religious persecution in Seychelles, and
 church services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic and
 Anglican churches have flourished, and Muslims and Hindus are
 unrestricted in their religious practices. There is a clear
 separation between church and state. Religious instruction in
 schools has been limited. The Government has addressed the
 churches' complaint that artificial impediments have made it
 difficult, if not impossible, for children (ages 14-17) in the
 National Youth Service (NYS) to attend church on a weekly
 basis, by allowing services to be held at NYS Camps. As
 recently as 1984, the President publicly reiterated his
 support for religion and said there would be no government
 interference in the right of people to worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Passports may
 be acquired by virtually any citizen, although Seychellois
 traveling abroad for study at Government expense are required
 to sign a bond which enables the Government to recoup the cost
 of their education should they fail to return. Such persons
 who are "bonded" must have government permission to travel
 abroad following their return. In 1984, the Government
 granted a passport to a suspected dissident who wished to
 emigrate to the United States. There are no restrictions on
 voluntary repatriation for those who are willing to accept the
 present one-party political system.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There is no possibility of citizens changing their government
 through democratic means. Since 1979 there has been only one
 legal political party, the Seychelles People's Progressive
 Front (SPPF). All political and much social activity is
 
 
 274
 SEYCHELLES
 channeled through this institution. President Rene, both as
 President of the country and as Secretary General of the
 party, wields great power and influence. Opponents of the
 party can neither organize nor express public opposition. The
 party has a number of regional offices called "branches" wbich
 are responsible for organizing and supervising discussion
 about current government policies and for reporting on public
 opinion in their regions.
 The Government remains the largest employer in the country.
 Some persons who are believed by the Government to oppose
 official policies have found it difficult to gain employment.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude-Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Amnesty International is investigating alleged human rights
 violations in the Seychelles. Requests for information are
 sent to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who acts as an
 interlocutor between human rights groups, such as Amnesty
 International, and the Seychelles Government. It is reported
 that all such inquiries have been answered and that inquiries
 have led to the release of some detainees. In addition to its
 concerns mentioned in lb, Amnesty International in its 1995
 Report, was concerned because suspected opponents of the
 Government, including prisoners of conscience, were held under
 legislation providing indefinite detention without trial.
 Freedom House rated Seychelless "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Seychelles' population of 65,245 enjoys a relatively high
 standard of living for an underdeveloped country, with a per
 capita gross domestic product of $2,300 (1983). The
 population growth rate is currently estimated at only 0.8
 percent annually. The Seychelles economy remains largely
 dependent on tourism, which has increased markedly in 1984 and
 1985. Nutrition requirements of most Seychellois are easily
 met as an abundance of food is available throughout the
 country. Seychelles has the highest per capita consumption of
 fish in the world. Local diets are amply supplemented by a
 variety of fresh fruits and vegetables. Unemployment remains
 a serious problem, although the Government has emphasized
 development plans which are extremely labor intensive. A
 "full employment scheme" also provides manual employment for
 anyone who desires to work for fair compensation.
 Free health services of a high standard are available to all
 persons. Infant mortality is 13.8 per 1,000 live births, one
 of the lowest rates in Africa, and life expectancy at birth,
 estimated at 66 years for men and 73 years for women,
 approaches that found in many Western European countries.
 Free education is available for all children and, in the case
 of academically qualified students, a minimum of 13 years'
 education is provided by the State. Recent changes in the
 National Youth Service (NYS), a 2 year program which is
 virtually compulsory for all children ages 14 to 16, have
 reflected an emphasis on the importance of academic training.
 Children in NYS are now granted one weekend leave per month,
 in part to dampen parental concern that the influence of the
 family was being diminished in the program.
 
 
 275
 SEYCHELLES
 Labor laws have not yet been promulgated, but written
 guidelines published in 1980 establish the minimum working age
 at 14. The guidelines cover leave, dismissal, overtime,
 minimum wages, reports of service injury or death, and salary
 deductions. According to officials of the National Workers
 Union, occupational safety and health conditions are a part of
 the union's inspection program.
 Women enjoy high status in this essentially matriarchal
 society. Women have the same legal, political, economic, and
 social rights as men. Although there are no women currently
 serving in the Council of Ministers, two women are serving as
 central committee members of the party. Many senior
 government officials, .up to and including the rank of
 principal secretary, are women.
 
 
 276
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SEYCHELLES
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL,..         2.4      2.5      2.5
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    2.4      2.5      2.5
 A.AIO .....................     2.0      2.0      2.2
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      2.0      2.0      2.2
 (SEC.SUPPASSST.).          2.0      2.0      2.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.3      0.3      0.3
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.3      0.3      0.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE.II-TOTAL .........        0.3      0.3      0.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.3      0.3      0.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.1      0.2      0.0
 LOANS ............ ...      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................ . .0.1      0.2      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.1      0.2      0.0
 .NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL IL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL,..         2.4      2.5      2.5
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     2.4      2.5      2.5
 ---       ----------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 -TOTAL ........     0.0      8.3     12.2     43.7
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      6.2      6.2
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOa                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      8.0      6.0     34.2
 UNOP               0.0      0.2      0.0      2.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.1      0.0      0.5
 EEC.               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
