 SEYCHELLES
 The Government of Seychelles, led by President France Albert
 Rene, took power in a military coup in June 1977. In 1979, a
 new Constitution was promulgated which formally abolished
 all political opposition to the Socialist ruling party, the
 Seychelles Peoples' Progressive Front, whose own principles
 are incorporated in the nation's fundamental law. The Constitu-
 tion does not guarantee fundamental civil liberties, but rather
 states them in a preamble as an intention of the Seychelles
 people.
 Challenges to the Government's legitimacy have been mounted in
 the past from Seychellois exiles in the United Kingdom, Aus-
 tralia, and elsewhere. The Government sees this as a serious
 threat, ard it has consequently invited some 120 Tanzanian
 troops and 55 North Korean soldiers to remain on the islands to
 provide security support and to train the local armed forces.
 The Government security services remain alert to any challenge
 to the present system. They have sometimes violated accepted
 norms of human rights practices in the process.
 The Seychelles economy benefited from a tourist boom in the late
 1970's. Since 1981, however, tourism and consequently government
 revenues have fallen. Free health care and free education are
 provided each citizen. Although Seychelles remains a mixed
 economy, with retail trade, small industry, and agriculture in
 private hands, the Government in recent years has made large in-
 vestments in state-owned enterprises. A centrally planned econ-
 omy remains a stated goal of both the Government and the party.
 In 1983, President Rene released six foreign mercenaries who
 had been captured in an abortive coup in November 1981 and
 sentenced to death the following year. At the same time he
 released the last Seychellois prisoner who had been arrested
 in connection with the November attack and who had been the
 subject of inquiry from Amnesty International. In 1983, the
 Government also finally brought to courts martial an undis-
 closed number of soldiers arrested in an army mutiny in 1982.
 The leaders were sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. At the
 same time serious questions arose about the murder of two
 political dissidents in-July 1983, in a series of unresolved
 murders and disappearances which have marred the Seychelles
 since 1979. Government involvement in the murders is suspected
 by knowledgeable observers. The party introduced greater
 centralized control in 1982 by abolishing the system in which
 district party officials were elected from their own constitu-
 encies. Such figures are now appointed by the party central
 executive committee. National elections for the country's
 legislature took place in July 1983. Most constituencies were
 offered a single candidate. In those areas where multiple
 candidates stood, all were members of the party.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 The admitted murder by army officials of two political opponents
 of the Rene government raised serious questions about the
 Government's commitment to basic human rights. Although one
 
 (301)
 
 
 302
 victim of the attack survived and named army personnel as the
 attackers, no inquest or other judicial review took place.
 The Government claimed that the attack was made by persons
 unknown. In late 1982, the Government announced that two
 other dissidents had died when bombs they were manufacturing
 exploded accidentally. Evidence in that case, too, is far
 from conclusive, and was not subject to independent judicial
 review.
 b. Disappearance
 It was widely believed that as many as 200 soldiers were
 arrested following the August 1982 mutiny. The Government
 has never announced the numbers of those detained, raising
 questions whether those convicted or acquitted at courts mar-
 tial in 1983 represent the total number detained.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture.   There have been
 reports, however, that those arrested in conjunction with
 the 1982 army mutiny were subjected to extended questioning
 which included some physical abuse. Certainly, their imprison-
 ment in the army prison included being held in small cells
 without clothing or adequate food and water in the initial
 period following their arrest. Police have also routinely
 struck prisoners arrested for minor criminal infractions.
 Prison conditions in the Seychelles by and large reflect the
 relatively high standard of living. Prisoners are well fed
 and supervised by professional prison wardens. They are
 normally incarcerated on small islands which, however, in-
 creases their sense of isolation. Family visits are routinely
 allowed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Since December 1981, Seychelles legislation has given the
 President the right to detain persons exclusive of judicial
 review, including habeas corpus. This act has been used
 sparingly, and there are currently no persons in detention under
 the act. Police do, however, arrest persons believed to be
 hostile to the Government for "questioning" and/or interrogation.
 These persons, many of whom believe the actions are a warning
 to stay out of politics, are usually released within 24-48
 hours. Usually the Government urges its opponents to emigrate
 voluntarily from the islands rather than face possible arrest.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Seychelles jurisprudence is largely patterned after British
 common law, although there are strong elements of the French
 Napoleonic Code. Most judges are obtained from Commonwealth
 countries under contract and, therefore, exhibit considerable
 independence from the Government. Civilians involved in crim-
 inal cases are given fair and speedy trials. Defendants nor-
 mally enjoy access to legal counsel and a British-style appeals
 process. Military offenders are tried before courts martial.
 There are currently no prisoners who could be classified as
 "political," the last such one having been released in mid-1983.
 There have been no trials of political prisoners in the
 
 
 303
 Seychelles. Those who have been arrested have been held without
 trial and usually have chosen to leave the country after having
 been called in for questioning or, in some cases, for extended
 periods up to six months or longer for investigation. Pressures
 to leave involve not only the threat or fear of detention but
 also social and economic ostracism. While the Seychelles court
 system is fair in its application of both civil and criminal
 laws, political cases are handled outside the judicial system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search, seizure, and
 arrest without warrant. In 1983, the police entered a number of
 homes at night without warrant, ostensibly, to search for illicit
 materials, including drugs and contraband political literature.
 It is widely believed that the Government has the capability
 to tap telephones of potential opponents and does so as a
 matter of routine. Legislation has been passed which author-
 izes the Government to open mail, both international and
 domestic, and again, it is believed that the Government does
 so. Foreign visitors have complained of surveillance by
 security forces; there have been several instances in which
 hotel rooms and baggage were surreptitiously searched.
 Local party branches under the guise of "soliciting public
 opinion" are urged to report on dissident views in local
 communities. Since June 1983, the Government has authorized
 nationalization of land without immediate compensation.
 Although the Government is obtaining land for agricultural
 development under this act, many charge that seizure or the
 threat of seizure is being used as a political instrument
 against opponents of the Government. The Government has
 also evicted landowners to expropriate their land for use by
 military forces.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the Constitution of
 1979, freedom of speech is curtailed in practice. Legislation
 provides for up to three years detention for anyone kho "with
 intent to bring the President into hatred, ridicule, or con-
 tempt, publishes any defamatory or insulting matter, whether in
 writing, print, or word of mouth, or in any other manner." A
 two year sentence may be imposed on anyone who "prints, makes,.
 imports, sells, supplies, offers for sale or supply, distrib-
 utes, reproduces, or has in his possession or under his
 control" any publication banned by the President for security
 reasons. TheGovernment security forces have been active in
 1983 trying to prevent the importation and distribution of
 pamphlets and audio cassettes smuggled into the country from
 political exiles abroad.
 The daily newspaper and radio-television are government con-
 trolled and have never published any articles critical of
 government policy. The only non-government paper is a monthly
 newspaper published by the Roman Catholic Church. The two
 largest religious groups on the island, Roman Catholic and
 Anglican, are given one hour of weekly broadcast time for
 
 
 304
 Sunday services. The broadcast is uncensored, although
 rarely does it impinge on political issues. Foreign broad-
 casts are uncensored and widely listened to on the island.
 Foreign publications, including Western news magazines, are
 sold and distributed. Foreign newspapers with articles
 critical of the Seychelles however, "fail to arrive" or are
 "lost in the mail."
 Persons who attempt to exercise the right to criticize the
 Government outside the authorized channels at party meetings
 are often subject to police harassment, official reprimand
 if they work for the Government, or worse. Many have been
 warned to "leave the country or face the consequences" in
 anonymous telephone calls or letters which the recipients
 have believed were sanctioned by the Government. Expatri-
 ates critical of government policies have been expelled,
 sometimes on 24-hours notice.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation. In practice, however, this right is severely
 restricted. Gatherings of more than three persons require a
 police permit. The police carefully control any assembly to
 insure it has no antigovernment or political character. In
 1982 and 1983 the issuance of permits for public gatherings
 was limited in order to reduce the danger of antigovernment
 demonstrations and to reduce the threat of attack on public
 officials.
 There is but one legal national union (the National Workers
 Union) which is under direct party control. It doer not
 function as a free trade union but does negotiate wages with
 employers. Legislation was passed in 1983 which severely
 restricts the right of an employer to fire workers. The right
 to strike is carefully circumscribed through party channels,
 and apparently there has been no strike in recent years. The
 union works closely with the government labor office, through
 which all vacancies are filled. All expatriate employees are
 required to purchase work permits ($1,500 per year).
 All other associations require government permits, whether
 they be service clubs, private organizations, or church
 groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 In a country which is over 90 percent Roman Catholic, the
 Government and party have reached an uneasy compromise with
 the church. The three recognized Christian groups--Roman
 Catholic, Anglican, and Seventh-day Adventist--worship
 without restriction. Muslims and Hindus are unrestricted in
 their religious practices. Jehovah's Witnesses and Rasta-
 farians, however, are considered a threat to law and order,
 and their activities are closely monitored. Seychelles has
 granted permission for many years for a mission radio
 station which broadcasts through Africa and Asia to operate.
 Both Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches broadcast Sunday
 services over the government-controlled radio. Religious
 instruction is not allowed in the state-run schools, and the
 church believes that artificial impediments have been
 
 
 305
 created to make it difficult, if not impossible for children
 (ages 14-17) in the National Youth Service to attend worship
 services or in other ways to practice their religion.
 Church services are widely attended and are uncensored.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. There are in-
 creasing restrictions on foreign travel, however, and the immi-
 gration office maintains a list of persons who are not allowed
 to leave the country. Passports, which in the past have been
 granted with virtually no restriction, have recently become
 more carefully controlled. While the Government has threatened
 to withdraw passports from several persons believed to be
 opponents, it has forced several other opponents to leave the
 country on short notice. There are no restrictions on voluntary
 repatriation for those who accept the current political system.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Since 1979, the only legal political party is the Seychelles
 Peoples' Progressive Front through which all political activity
 is channeled. Although power nominally rests in the Executive
 Committee, in reality President Rene, as Chairman of the
 party, wields exclusive authority. Opponents of the party
 can neither organize nor express public opposition. Since
 October 1982, chairmen of local "branch* party offices are
 no longer elected by their members, but appointed by the
 Executive Committee. The party branches are responsible for
 organizing political discussions on current policies, to
 solicit public opinion of their members, and report to the
 Executive Committee. In fact, such discussion does not often
 result in policy changes, which are directed from above.
 Elections to the national legislature were held in 1983. In the
 majority of constituencies only one candidate was offered to the
 electorate to accept or reject. In those instances where two
 or more candidates stood for election, all were members of the
 single party. Elections for the Presidency are slated for
 1984. It is widely assumed that President Rene will face no
 opposition. Any alternate candidate would have to be approved
 by the single party Executive Committee, which Rene heads.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are currently no political prisoners held in Seychelles,
 the last having been released during 1983, following an
 inquiry from Amnesty International. It is not known whether
 the inquiry prompted that release. Apparently, there have been
 no other inquiries regarding the Government's practice of
 asking opponents to leave the country. Freedom House rates
 Seychelles "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Seychelles enjoys a high standard of living for an essentially
 underdeveloped country. Free health services of high standard
 
 
 306
 are available to all persons. The infant mortality rate is
 17.5 per 1,000. Free universal education is available for
 11 years and, in some instances, as many as 13 years. Ninety-
 five percent of all eligible children attend and complete
 primary school. There has been considerable controversy,
 however, over the National Youth Service, a two year work and
 academic program which is virtually compulsory for all children
 who complete the nine years of primary school. Emphasis in its
 first years of operation was on 'practical" work experience,
 often to the detriment of traditional academic programs. The
 Government in 1983 announced that the program will now create a
 second "track" designed to provide adequate education for
 children who will go on to higher school or polytechnic. The'
 policy of not allowing the children to spend a night at
 home in their two years' service has been modified to allow
 them to spend one weekend at home each month.
 The status of women economically and socially is lower than
 their male counterparts, and there is discrimination in the
 labor market. Women legally have the same rights and privileges
 under the Constitution as do men. While women currently do not
 hold elected office in the legislature, they are represented in
 the Government. The Seychelles Ambassador to the United States,
 who is also accredited to the United Nations, is a woman.
 Nutrition requirements of most Seychellois are met through an
 abundance of fresh fruits, fish, and vegetables offered at
 reasonable prices. Food is available to anyone tending a
 'house garden." Unemployment continues to be a serious problem,
 however, with as much as one-quarter of the work force now out
 of work. The Government has enforced rigidly a system of price
 control, which has kept inflation at less than one percent in
 three years. The Government has a full employment scheme
 whereby anyone so wishing is paid roughly $3 per day for a
 five-hour workday cleaning streets, etc. This is sufficient
 to allow anyone to feed himself. The Government remains the
 single largest employer in the country. Persons believed to
 be opposed to the Government, however, find it impossible to
 get employment in the civil service and difficult in the
 private sector.
 Per capita gross national product is estimated at approximately
 $1,350 a year, a decline from $1,775 in 1980. The Seychelles
 economy rests on the twin pillars of tourism and foreign
 assistance, both of which have been shaky in recent years.
 Tourism has fallen from a high of nearly 80,000 in the late
 1970's to fewer than 45,000 in recent years. While the number
 of tourists is increasing once again, the revenue earned from
 the industry continues to decline.
 
 
 307
 U.S.OvERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SEYCHELLES
 1981    1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       1.2     2.4     2.4
 LOANS ................. .0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ......... ......  1.2     2.4      2.4
 A.AID   ...................  . .5     2.0      2.0
 LOANS ..............  ...  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ..  O.5   2.0      2.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...       0.0     2.0      2.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......    0.5     0.3     0.3
 LOANS  ...... .....   ...  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............,     0.5     0.3      0.3
 TIPLE  .-TOTAL ..........     0,0     0.0     0.0
 REPAY.  IN  S-LOANS .....    0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR. CURR .....    0.0     0.0     0.0
 TITLE  I1-TOTAL ..........    0.5     0.3     0.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.       0.0     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....      0.5     0.3      0.3
 C.OTHER  ECON. ASSIST...      0.2     0.1     0.1
 LOANS ....... ..........  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  ....... ....    . .0.2    0.1      0.1
 PEACE  CORPS ......     0.2      0.1     0.1
 NARCOTICS ........      0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER .............    0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST. -TOTAL...      0.0     0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............O... 0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      0.0     0.0.     0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........     0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....      0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....       0.0     0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...       0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........     0.0     0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...     1.2     2.4     2.4
 LOANS ..................  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  ..... ..........1.2      2.4      2.4
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........    0.0     0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......      0.0     0.0     0.0
 ALL  OTHER .............. .... .  0.0  0.0  .0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981    1982     1983    1946-83
 -- -- -- -- .. ..   -- -- - -- -- - -- -- - -- -- - -- ........... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 TOTAL........     0.1     9.0     0.0     2312
 IBRD              0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0
 IFC               0.0     0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDA               0.0     0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDB               0.0     0-0     0.0      0.0
 ADB               0.0     0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDB             "0.0     8.6     0.0     20.2
 UNDP              0.1     0.4     0.0      2.6
 OTHER-UN          0.0     0.0      0.0     0.4
 EEC               0.0     0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
