 SEYCHELLES
 Since 1979, Seychelles has been a socialist, one-party state
 headed byPresident France Albert Rene. The single party is
 the Seychelles People's Progressive Front. Under President
 Rene's leadership, the Government continues to strive for malor
 social and economic chanqes, while insurinq its self-preservation
 by limiting and controlling the political process. Seychelles'
 Constitution does not contain a bill of rights; the protection
 of traditional civil rights is set forth in its preamble as a
 stated intention of the people. However, since legal safeguards
 against actions by the executive branch are minimal, civil
 liberties, while generally respected, exist at the sufferance
 of the Government.
 During'1982 the Government of President Rene has been buffeted by
 the aftermath of the November 1981 external mercenary attack, an
 internally inspired army mutiny, and deepening economic malaise.
 It has reacted with increasinqly authoritarian measures. Known
 or suspected enemies of the regime have been arrested, sometimes
 mistreated, and expelled. The Government's use of foreign
 (Tanzanian) troops to crush the mutiny and its reportedly brutal
 handling of captured mutineers has resulted in widespread public
 dissatisfaction.
 The Government has'at the same time maintained a high level'of
 social' servtces to its citizens. The standard of livinq has also
 remained relatively high, However, the economy is declining as
 revenues from tourism,have dropped sharply. Disturbances since
 November, 1981 have exacerbated this downward economic trend.
 Despiie pcitical'turmoil, routine police matters continue to
 be conducted by a trofessional, unarmed police force modeled on
 the British system." An independent judiciary, composed of
 contract expatriate judges, as in the past, applying a mixture
 of British common law and the Napoleonic code, continued to
 administer justice in routine cases. Both the police and
 judiciary generally exercise prudent behavior and judgment and
 do pot abuse their positions.
 1. Respect for the Inteqrity of the Person, Including
 Preedom from:
 a., Killing
 There has been no conclusive evidence that the Government has
 engaged in killing any individual for political motives. However,
 the circumstances surrounding an October bomb explosion which
 killed two persons remain unclear, as does the fate of some army
 mutineers mentioned below.
 b. Disappearance
 Following the August 1982 army mutiny the Government arrested
 approximately 200 servicemen. However, it has not yet informed
 the public of their fate. Most families have been told only
 that relatives involved in the mutiny have been sent to some
 outer island. This perceived obfuscation has been widely resent-
 ed, mainly because Seychelles is so small (46,.000 population)
 that many citizens know or are related to one or more of the
 mutineers. The Government's unwillingness to be more specific
 about those detained has also increased speculation about the
 actual death toll during the mutiny. The official figure of nine
 killed is not widely believed. Many families whose relatives
 allegedly are in detention believe they are actually dead.
 
 
 260
 c. Torture
 The Seychelles Constitution prohibits torture. While there
 have been various allegations to suggest torture has occurred,
 there is no clear evidence to date that it has qone beyond the
 relatively less severe maltreatment discussed below.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution clearly prohibits such treatment, there
 are reports that many persons arrested following the November
 1981 mercenary attack and August 1982 army mutiny were mistreated.
 This included beatings, incarceration without clothing, restric-
 tion for extended periods in a small space, limited food and
 water, and public humiliation. Rough treatment by the authori-
 ties is also meted out to Rastafarians, a black youth protest
 movement unrelated to the religious sect which believes in the
 divinity of the late Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie. *Rastas"
 stand out because of their unkempt personal appearance, long hair,
 drug usage, and unemployment. When arrested--usually for vagran-
 cy, public disorder, or drug trafficking--police frequently cut
 their hair and beat them.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 About 80 persons known to be hostile to the regime were detained
 following the November 1981 mercenary attack. In December 1981,
 a Preservation of Public Security Act, which gave the President
 unlimited detention powers, was enacted. It in effect legalized
 these arrests. No arrestees were ever charged or appeared in
 court, and all but one had been released prior to October 1982.
 While there are no legal procedures to guard against arbitrary
 arrest or imprisonment, individuals are usually not detained
 for prolonged periods without being charged or brought to trial.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Seychelles jurisprudence is modeled on the British system, with
 criminal statutes based on common law. Most judges are on con-
 tract from other commonwealth nations and exercise a large degree
 of independence from the executive branch. Non-political and
 non-military offenders are assured fair and speedy public trials.
 There are opportunities for appeal and access to counsel.
 Military offenders are generally tried by court martial under a
 rigid code which regulates court procedures. However, soldiers
 committing crimes against civilians often escape unpunished be-
 cause of government reluctance to prosecute. Political prison-
 ers, i.e. those considered by the Government to be involved in
 activities designed to subvert the state or the regime of Presi-
 dent Rene, are not brought to trial. They are either released
 following investigation or expelled from the country.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Although the authorities have broad powers of search, and arrest
 without warrant, those powers are used sparingly except in cases
 of national emergency. Even in normal times, however, domestic
 political enemies are subject to surveillance, telephone taps,
 and even intimidation. Foreign visitors occasionally find their
 rooms have been searched. During the November 1981 and August
 1982 emergencies, military authorities entered many homes in
 search of hostile forces or suspected enemies. Several such
 entries were forced and accompanied by abuse of the occupants.
 The Seychelles Government recognizes civilian hostility to
 military searches and uses the more disciplined, unarmed police
 when possible.
 
 
 261
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is protected by the Constitution but restricted
 in practice. A 1979 law provides for up to three years imprison-
 ment for *any person who, with intent to bring the President
 into hatred, ridicule, or contempt, publishes any defamatory or
 insulting matter whether in writing, print, or word of mouth or
 in any other manner." The President can also ban any publica-
 tion for security reasons, as well as jail anyone for up to two
 years who "prints, makes, imports, publishes, sells, supplies,
 offers for sale or supply, distributes, reproduces, or has
 in possession or under his control any prohibited publication."
 The only daily newspaper and the one radio station are govern-
 ment controlled and operated. The Catholic Church publishes
 a monthly paper. The international editions of various periodi-
 cals are regularly available at newsstands. Foreign broadcasts
 are uncensored and can be easily received. An international
 missionary society operates a regional broadcastinq station
 from Seychelles, but avoids reporting on local events.
 Anti-government attitudes by Seychellois or expatriates can have
 unpleasant consequences. Most of the 80 Seychellois detained
 after-the November mercenary attack had criticized the Govern-
 ment. Vocal opponents are told to emigrate. Expatriates have
 been expelled (often on 24 hours notice) or refused work permit
 renewals.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although the Constitution guarantees "freedom to assemble and
 associate peacefully," this right is strictly controlled.
 Since any.-public gathering by more than three persons techni-
 cally requires a police permit, the authorities have extensive
 powers to ban any potential non-government-sponsored assembly.
 The labor movement in Seychelles is closely associated with
 the only'party, the Seychelles Peoples Proqressive Front.
 The only legal union--the National Workers Union--is under
 direct party control. The union claims a membership of 25,600,
 but government statistics report a national work force of only
 17,150. The major role of the union is to negotiate wages with
 employers and the Government. In the currently declining economy,
 it is largely trying to protect jobs. The right to strike is
 severely circumscribed by the Government's indirect control of
 the union. All vacancies are filled through the government labor
 office, which chooses the candidates to be sent for interviews
 with an employer. All third country nationals, employed or
 self-employed in Seychelles, require expensive (S6,350) annual
 work permits.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 While several key leaders in the Government are avowed atheists,
 the regime recognizes the importance of religion in a society
 where 96 percent of the population is Roman Catholic. Freedom of
 religion is recognized in principle but somewhat circumscribed in
 practice. Four denominations--Catholic, Anglican, Seventh Day
 Adventist, and Bahai--are officially recoqnized as "Christian."
 They may worship unhindered, as can Muslims and Hindus. The
 Jehovah's Witnesses are officially proscribed because they are
 viewed as a threat to traditional Christian denominations, and
 the self-styled "Rastafarians" as noted above are harassed.
 
 
 262
 Foreign missionaries are kept out of the country through work-
 permit restrictions. The Government attempts to limit religious
 influence on youth by making it difficult for students at the
 National Youth Service to attend church services. Clergymen
 are not allowed in the National Youth Service camps.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emiqration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal movements aside from
 a sea curfew. This prohibits marine landings and departures
 from 6 p.m. to 5 a.m.
 Restrictions on foreign travel and emigration are used by the
 Government to control dissidents. The Immigration Department
 maintains a list of persons not permitted to leave Seychelles.
 It also may oblige vocal government opponents and expatriates to
 leave on short notice. The right of voluntary repatriation is
 respected for those who are not deemed to be opponents of the
 regime.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Since 1979 Seychelles has been a single party state. The ruling
 Seychelles Peoples Progressive Front is the only permitted party.
 The party subscribes to a socialist political/economic philoso-
 phy which it has progressively implemented. Opponents of the
 Government cannot organize freely and find it unsafe to express
 their beliefs publicly. The original democratic structure of the
 party has been gradually eroded. In-October 1982, the party
 constitution was changed to enable the executive committee to
 appoint district leaders. The executive committee was self-
 appointed during the formation of the party in the mid-1970s and
 has controlled its membership carefully since then. Previously,
 district leaders were elected by branch party members. Party
 members can and do voice their constituents' concerns within the
 party, but this has become far more circumspect since mid-1982.
 Women in Seychelles have had equal opportunity to participate
 in politics, culture, education, employment, sports, and other
 facets of society since 1977. They have made considerable
 progress during this period in all the aforementioned areas.
 The Seychelles Women's Association--a distinct component under
 the party umbrella--was formed by the Government to promote
 women's causes. Women currently fill 40 percent of the 230
 positions on party branch committees and occupy 13 of 23 elected
 seats in the National Peoples Assembly.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Outside organizations are not known to have made any inquiries
 in the past year to investigate human rights in Seychelles.
 An inquiry in December 1981 by Amnesty International about the
 detention and treatment of at least 15 Seychellois arrested that
 month became moot in 1982 with their subsequent release.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Seychelles enjoys a high standard of living comparable to a
 lower middle income country. The Government spends significant
 resources on social services and provides excellent health care,
 education, nutrition, and housing for all Seychellois. However,
 the Seychelles economy depends largely on two factors--tourism
 and foreign assistance. Both have declined in 1982, the former
 
 
 26
 more significantly than the latter.
 Tourism, which accounts for almost 50 percent of the GNP, de-
 clined by mid-year to 43 percent of its 1979 peak level. Foreign
 assistance from Iraq, Libya, and Algeria, previously substantial
 donors, also decreased, while assistance from the UK and France
 remained static. Per capita GNP was $1,773 in 1980 but had
 declined to an estimated $1,400 in 1982. Fconomic problems have
 been compounded by the Government's on-going transformation of a
 largely private economy into one dominated by inefficient govern-
 mental enterprises.
 While Seychelles revalued the rupee by 15 percent in March 1981,
 neighboring countries, who compete for the same tourist business,
 devalued their currencies.
 Although these events adversely affected Seychelles' tourism,
 they did contribute importantly to a low rate of inflation (about
 4 percent in 1982).
 Medical care, prescription drugs, and out-of-country specialized
 treatment are free through the government-operated medical pro-
 gram. Upper income groups perceive an overall decline in medical
 standards since the abolition of all private practice in 1979.
 However, all Seychellois now have access to adequate facilities.
 The lack of Seychellois doctors continues to be a problem. The
 hospitals are staffed by doctors from 17 different countries,
 resulting in an amalgam of medical practices. Family planning
 and population control continue to be sensitive subjects among
 the largely Catholic population. The Government has adopted
 a discreet, gradual approach to family planning through commun-
 ity counseling centers. The Government is concerned over long
 term population problems. About 40 percent of the population is
 under age 14, and there is a 2.1 percent growth rate (19A0).
 Nutritional standards are excellent. Fish and fresh fruit are
 available at relatively low cost, and the Government serves a
 balanced hot lunch to all school children. The US contributes
 rice, oil and milk powder to this program. Starvation is unknown
 in Seychelles.
 Education is free and universal, with 95 percent of the eligible
 population enrolled in primary school. The school program re-
 quires attendance in grades one through nine. This is followed
 by required participation in a two year away-from-home National
 Youth Service. The Youth Service attempts both to mold Seychel-
 lois youth to fit the Government's socialist society and to pre-
 pare them for further academic or technical training. Youth
 Service graduates can either go on to a two year polytechnic
 (for pre-university academic courses or technical training) or
 enter the labor force. University studies are only possible
 overseas. Government scholarships are now given only for "non-
 aligned" countries (Algeria, Yugoslavia, Cuba, etc.). It is
 generally agreed that academic standards are low at the Youth
 Service. Many families have sent their children to overseas
 schools (usually in Britain).
 Social welfare programs are based on the principle of need.
 Those with means are expected to pay for services provided.
 Social security funds are distributed to the poor, aged, dis-
 abled, and unemployed on the basis of need, not necessarily
 on prior contributions.
 A national employment scheme is aimed at improving the nine
 percent unemployment rate by providing daily employment on
 ad hoc projects. The underemployment rate is reportedly high--
 
 15-480 0 - 83 - 18
 
 
 264
 about 25 percent of the labor force. The Government tries to
 provide adequate housing for all citizens by partial grants
 at subsidized interest rates, scheduled more to income level
 than repayment requirements. Special emphasis is directed at
 populating outlying islands through bonuses and housing grants
 for Seychellois willing to move.
 While social programs continue to be a high priority for the
 Government, its ability to maintain them is threatened by the
 worsening economic circumstances.
 
 
 265
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS ANO LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF 3OLLARS)
 COUNTRY: 4EYCMiLL'S
 1930      1981      19SZ
 ------------------------ -   - - ----' l -- l l---  I -l-l-- --- - l----
 I.iCON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...            1.0       1.Z       2.4
 LOANS..............           .03      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS... ............        1.0      1.2       2.4
 AAID ................. 0.0              0.5       2.0
 LOANS .................      0.0       0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ..............          0.6      0.5       2.0
 (SEC.SPP.ASSIST.)...            0.0      0.0       2.0
 d.FOOO FOR PEACE .......           0.2       0.5      0.3
 LOANS.............        ... 0.0      3.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............           0.2      a.5       0.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........           0.0       0.0      0.0
 EPAY. TIN �-L0ANS                 0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. .N Pro. OURR ..             0.0       3.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TUTA .........            O.z       0.5      0.3'
 E.RELIEP.FC.DEV  * WFP,           Q.0       0.0      0.0
 VOCR6La AaENCY ....            0.2       0.!      0.3
 C.OTHER E4.9N. AS3STT...*         0.2       Oa*       C.1
 LOANS. ............ .,0.0            0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ................ o.    z      0.2       0.1
 PEACEC3RFS .... .;          0.       c.2       0.1
 NARCOTICS  ......          0.        0.0       0.0
 OTnER...   .........   0..0      0.0       0.0
 1I.MIL. ASSIST.TOTAL ...           J.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS..... .........      .  0.0       0.0       0.0
 GRANTS...............          0.0      0.0       0.0
 ....ANTS            ...            0       0.0       0.0
 3.   Oictr SALE-FmS ....         0.0      0.0"      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E3.TR1J ....           0.0       G.0      0.0
 U,.TRN- X  SS ST3O ...           0.0       0.0      0.0
 t.gTMER GAANTS.......             O.0       0.0      0.0
 LIIT3TAL :LCN. i    1L,.-          1.0       1.2      2.4
 LOANS .......... ....... 0.             .0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          1.0        1.2       2.4
 --  - - - - - -  - - -- - -  - - - - - ------11 1   .. .l ll l-il-l  I-l l li l l l ---ll-- ---
 THEq US L')ANS ..........           0.0     ,.0         0.0
 5X-IM 6ANK LOANS,.,..,.            0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL .07HR.............         .. 0.0       0.u      0.0
 ASSISTANCe FRO! !NTERNATI0NAL A ENCT$S.
 19V)      1931      1982     1946-2
 TJTAL..........     0.3        0.1       8.6     22.9
 IBRO                 O.C      C.        0.0       3.0
 IFC                            0.      0 .0      0.0
 1OA,                 0.0      0.0       O.       0.0
 I0b                  0.1       0.0      .0.3      0.0
 AO3                  0.0      0.0       0.0       .0
 AFO5                 3.1       Q.0       i.t     V.2
 uN3P                  ,  "     0.1      0.0       ?,3
 UTmER-UN             P,        i        0.0      0.4
 0.c 3.l                       0 .       0.0       0.0
 
 
 266
