 SEYCHELLES
 The Seychelles is a one-party state led by President France
 Albert Rene, who took power in June 1977 in a military coup
 d'etat and forced into exile a number of former leaders,
 including the then president, James Mancham. A new
 Constitution, adopted in 1979, abolished all political
 opposition to the ruling Socialist party, the Seychelles
 People's Progressive Front (SPPF). This Constitution provides
 for a strong presidential executive, who appoints ministers,
 and a People's Assembly of 23 elected members and several
 appointed members. The 1987 elections to the Assembly were
 competitive (more than one candidate vied for some seats), but
 all candidates were members of the SPPF.
 Seychelles has a defense force of about 800 army personnel, a
 300-man presidential protection unit, a 100-man navy, a 15-man
 air force, a uniformed police force of 500, and a people's
 militia of about 1,000.
 The Government, through the Seychelles marketing'board, its
 many other state enterprises, and banking regulations,
 controls the importation, licensing, and distribution of
 virtually all goods and services and exercises significant
 control over all phases of the economy. Tourism is the most
 important sector, accounting for 11 percent of the gross
 domestic product. Employment, foreign exchange earnings,
 construction, banking and commerce are all dominated by
 tourism and related industries. Seychelles has made progress
 toward diversifying its economy by granting fishing licenses
 to 40 foreign trawlers, and it services this trawler fleet at
 expanded port facilities in Victoria, which were financed by
 foreign donor assistance. In addition, a tuna canning factory
 has begun operation and is adding to foreign exchange earnings.
 Human rights continue to be significantly restricted. The
 Constitution does not guarantee fundamental human rights, but
 rather describes them in a preamble as the goal of the people
 of Seychelles. The Public Security Act, which allows for
 indefinite detention in security cases, serves to intimidate
 real and potential opposition. The Government also uses exile
 as a means of suppressing dissent and in 1988 continued a
 program of acquiring real property belonging to Seychellois
 residing overseas who are known to oppose the Government.
 There were no reported instances of torture in 1988 and no
 political arrests or detentions. One case that had raised
 human rights concerns was resolved in 1988 when Royce Dias, an
 opponent of the Government, was released from prison.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Political killing
 There were no confirmed instances of killing for political
 motives in 1988.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance in 1988.
 
 
 294
 SEYCHELLES
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture, and there were no
 new reports of torture in 1988. The Government made no
 apparent effort to investigate credible allegations of torture
 that occurred in 1986. Generally, prisoners are well fed and
 supervised by professional prison wardens. Prisoners are
 normally incarcerated on isolated islands, although family
 visits are routinely arranged. There is a review tribunal
 which is supposed to monitor prisoner treatment, but the
 tribunal has not met since the late 1970's.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were no confirmed reports in 1988 of persons being
 arrested and detained under the Public Security Act, which
 allows for indefinite detention in security cases. The Act
 has been used in the past under questionable circumstances, as
 in 1986 when Phillippe Boulle, the leading human rights
 activist in the country, and others were detained for 5 months
 without formal charge. In addition to those held under the
 Act, police sometimes detain persons for up to 24 hours for
 questioning regarding alleged antigovernment activities. In
 particular, persons who seek to mobilize public opinion
 against the Government run a serious risk of being detained
 for questioning. At the end of 1988, there were no known
 political detainees, the last detainee under the Act having
 been released in September 1987.
 The Government has in the past taken various other actions
 against potential opponents. Some government workers have
 been fired without recourse to appeal or review. Other
 persons have suffered social and economic harassment and have
 received direct or anonymous threats which they interpreted as
 signals to leave the country. Frequently, the Government has
 directly urged opponents to emigrate, an option that many have
 chosen over the years.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Defendants in nonpolitical (both civil and criminal) cases
 have access to counsel and enjoy speedy and fair trials. The
 right to trial is patterned on English common law, although
 there is also a heavy influence of Napoleonic code law.
 Judges are provided under arrangements with the British
 Commonwealth and, except for past security cases, they have
 exhibited considerable independence from both the executive
 and legislative branches. The Chief Justice, who is appointed
 by the President, has stressed on several occasions that it is
 the judiciary's responsibility to impose sentences as required
 by law and that it should reflect the will of the legislature.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. He has not
 only appointment authority but also broad detention authority
 where public security is involved. Seychelles' law requires
 that a member of the armed forces be tried by court-martial
 unless the President decrees otherwise. In theory, the
 Constitution precludes the President from dismissing judges.
 However, the President dismissed the previous Chief Justice,
 an action which has so far not been subjected to legal review.
 
 
 295
 SEYCHELLES
 Amnesty International (AI) expressed concern about Royce Dias,
 a known opponent of the Government, alleging that the criminal
 charges against him had been fabricated for political
 reasons. Dias' 7-year sentence for possession of drugs was
 later reduced by the appeals court to 5 years. In January he
 was released early from prison as part of a general amnesty
 which included other prisoners. Dias subsequently departed
 from Seychelles and is now living in the United Kingdom.
 AI's 1988 report stated the organization had received-reports
 that John Both, a supporter of former President Mancham, and
 then serving a prison sentence for drug possession, may have
 been imprisoned for his political views. Both's attorney
 alleged that the drugs were planted but failed to provide
 independent corroborating testimony. Both was released from
 prison in mid-1988 after serving 2 years of his 3-year
 sentence, with 1 year off for good behavior.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure
 without a warrant. The Seychelles Marketing Board Act, passed
 in 1984, allows police to enter any premises, private or
 public, and to seize any documents which they believe may be
 in violation of the Act. Legislation exists which allows the
 Government to open mail, domestic as well as international,
 and it is widely believed that it does. Many persons complain
 that applications for immigrati6n to other countries mailed
 from overseas are confiscated.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the Constitution,
 freedom of speech is exercised sparingly. The Government
 controls the major newspaper in the country, as well as all
 radio and television broadcasting. Legislation provides up to
 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who with intent to bring the
 President into hatred, ridicule, or contempt, publishes any
 defamatory or insulting matter whether in writing, print, or
 by word of mouth, or in any other manner." This same
 legislation authorizes a 2-year sentence for anyone who
 "prints, supplies, distributes, reproduces, or has in his
 possession or control" any publication banned by the
 Government for security reasons. The Government has sought to
 prevent the importation of pamphlets printed by its opposition
 abroad. There were no known arrests for distribution or
 importation of "seditious literature" in 1988.
 The President has kept his promise not to interfere with the
 right of religious groups to speak out freely. The Catholic
 Church publishes a lively paper, Echo Des Isles, which is not
 subject to government censorship. The paper carries some
 articles which obliquely criticize the Government. The two
 largest religious denominations in the country, the Roman
 Catholic and the Anglican churches, are each provided 2 hours
 of free, uncensored broadcasting time a month. Both churches
 have taken advantage of the monthly broadcasts to comment on
 social and political issues.
 Broadcasts and telecommunications originating in Seychelles
 are subject to the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Act of
 1988, which consolidated a number of regulations which had
 
 
 296
 SEYCHELLES
 been on the books for years. The Act authorizes the
 Government to restrict the transmission of messages, prohibit
 the broadcast of any material which in the Government's
 opinion is objectionable, and enter any premises and examine
 any apparatus in connection with the Act. In 1988 the
 Government issued a new, 25-year broadcasting license to the
 Far East Broadcasting Association (FEBA), a radio missionary
 organization which has broadcast the Christian gospel to Asia
 and Africa from Seychelles for the past 18 years. The BBC
 opened a new relay facility on the main island of Mahe in
 October 1988. Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to and
 are uncensored. Foreign publications are imported and sold
 without hindrance.
 Education at all levels is totally controlled by the
 Government. The Ministry of Education, Information and Youth
 operates the schools, determines the curriculum, and hires the
 teachers. Political indoctrination is prevalent in the lower
 grades, especially at National Youth Service villages, less so
 at the highest level--the polytechnic (U.S. high school
 equivalent). There are no private schools except for those
 operated exclusively by and for expatriates.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has in the past been quick to move against
 unauthorized demonstrations and has made arrests under an old
 British colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without
 a government permit, but no such incident occurred in 1988.
 All associations, clubs, and other organizations require
 government permission to organize, which is usually granted
 for nonpolitical groups only.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no religious persecution in the Seychelles, and
 church services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic,
 Anglican, and other Christian demoninations thrive, and
 Muslims and Hindus are unrestricted in their religious
 practices.
 There is a clear separation between church and state.
 Religious instruction in schools has been limited. The
 Government has addressed religious institutions' complaints
 that artificial impediments have made it difficult, if not
 impossible, for children (ages 14-17) in the National Youth
 Service (NYS) to attend church by allowing services-to be held
 at the NYS camps.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Seychellois
 traveling abroad for study at government expense are required
 to sign a bond which enables the Government to recoup the cost
 of their education if they fail to return. Persons who are
 "bonded" must obtain government permission to travel abroad
 following their return. There are no known cases in which
 passports are currently being withheld. There are no
 restrictions on voluntary repatriation for Seychellois willing
 to accept the present one-party political system.
 
 
 297
 SEYCHELLES
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change their Government
 Since 1979 there has been only one legal political party, the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF). All political
 (and much social) activity is channeled through this
 institution. Citizens cannot change the one-party system, and
 therefore cannot change the party in power. President France
 Albert Rene, both as President of the country as well as the
 Secretary General of the party, wields considerable power and
 influence. During the last SPPF Congress held in December,
 1987, the President was again unopposed and was elected
 unanimously to a fourth 3-year term as Secretary General of
 the party. Opponents of the party can neither organize nor
 express public opposition. The party has 23 regional offices,
 called "branches," which are responsible for organizing and
 supervising discussion about current government policies.
 These branches are encouraged to report public opinion in
 their regions, but this does not often result in policy
 changes.
 One woman serves as a cabinet minister, and she and two other
 women are serving as Central Committee members of the party.
 Many other senior officials, up to and including the rank of
 state secretary, are women.
 The Government has, and uses, various means to stifle-
 political opposition. In 1983 it embarked on a campaign to
 nationalize private land, ostensibly to claim unused
 agricultural acreage. On March 13, 1987, the Government,
 under the Land Acquisition Act of 1977, implemented a vigorous
 program of acquiring parcels of Seychelles real estate owned
 by Seychellois abroad known to oppose the Government.
 Compensation, supposedly at market value, is usually in the
 form of bonds and is paid to the owners over a period of 20
 years. Acquisitions increased in 1988, not only of properties
 belonging to nonresident Seychellois, but also of properties
 belonging to foreign nationals and of resident Seychellois not
 known to oppose the Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has not been particularly responsive to
 inquiries from international and nongovernmental
 organizations. A report of the U.N. Commission on Human
 Rights noted three outstanding disappearance cases dating back
 to 1977 and 1984 to which there has been no response from the
 Government since 1986. However, requests for information are
 processed and sent to the Chief Jpstice of the Supreme Court,
 who acts as an interlocutor between human rights groups, such
 as Al and the Government. In the past, inquiries have led to
 the release of some detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education,
 or other social services based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high
 status in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the
 same legal, political, economic, and social rights as men, and
 generally there is no disparity in wage rates.
 
 
 298
 SEYCHELLES
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers to associate is restricted in that there
 is only one authorized union, the National Workers' Union
 (NWU). It is under the direct control of the Government and
 the party and is not, therefore, an independent trade union.
 Despite being a transmission device for the Government, the
 NWU plays an effective role on behalf of workers and forces
 employers to address workers' complaints. All prospective
 workers for positions in government and in the private sector
 can be hired only through the Central Employment Registrar.
 In a sense, they become members of the union automatically
 upon employment because a portion of their mandatory social
 security contributions goes directly to the NWU. Under the
 terms of the Employment Act of 1985, union officials are
 appointed by the Government rather than elected by the
 membership. Shop stewards, however, are elected by the
 membership of the various NWU chapters at the workplace.
 There is no Seychelles law which specifically prohibits
 strikes, but any organized work stoppage could easily be
 stymied by the Government's invocation of one of several
 public ordinances against unauthorized demonstrations. The
 last strike in Seychelles occurred in 1977.
 The NWU lost its seat on the governing body of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) when it failed to
 attend a 1981 meeting in Geneva. Although the Government
 continues to pay dues to the ILO, it has not sent a delegation
 to annual ILO conventions in recent years. The NWU is
 permitted to affiliate with a regional trade union
 organization and is a member of the Organization of African
 Trade Union Unity. It also maintains contact with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) but
 was forced to disaffiliate from the ICFTU in 1981 by the party.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There is no collective bargaining in the true sense of the
 term. Authority over wages, hours, benefits, and conditions
 of employment is vested in the Ministry of Employment and
 Social Services, which enforces the provisions of the
 Employment Act of 1985 and establishes pay schedules
 applicable to all sectors. The NWU, through the Ministry, has
 signed collective agreements which establish maximum working
 hours for various occupations. Private employers and the
 larger state enterprises are subject to the "collective
 bargaining agreements" which have been established for the
 various "sectors" of employment. The parameters of these
 agreements are determined in negotiations between the
 Federation of Employers' Associations of Seychelles and the
 NWU. These agreements vary from sector to sector, but all
 provide minimum standards that are set by the Ministry. The
 Ministry must also approve any agreement before it goes into
 effect. Any grievances which might arise later are subject to
 discussion in worker-management committees at the workplace,
 with the Ministry having the final say, should arbitration
 fail.
 There are no export processing zones. Labor legislation is
 applied uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 299
 SEYCHELLES
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced or compulsory labor in'Seychelles.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum working age, monitored and enforced by the
 Government, is 15, with supervised training programs available
 to some youngsters at age 14. In establishments within the
 tourist sector, the minimum working age is 18.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The basic minimum wage, established by law, is equivalent to
 $109 a month, which falls below the subsistence level. The de
 facto minimum wage is $200 a month, which is barely adequate
 in Seychelles' relatively high-priced economy. Workers
 employed on the outer islands are entitled to a range of
 additional mandatory allowances and benefits. The maximum
 workweek, established by law, is 48 hours with shorter hours
 for some occupational groups. NWU officials have
 responsibility for monitoring and enforcing occupational
 safety and health conditions in the workplace. Regulations
 are not extensive in this area, and enforcement even less so.
 The NWU is working with the Government to develop preventive
 safety measures, but this effort has not moved beyond the
 discussion stage.
 
 
 300
 SIERRA LEONE
 Sierra Leone has a one-party system of government with the
 President exercising predominant executive authority. The
 1978 Constitution, approved in a national referendum,
 established the All People's Congress (APC) as the country's
 sole legal political party. Major-General Dr. Joseph Saidu
 Momoh assumed power on November 28, 1985, following a national
 referendum confirming his designation by the APC for the
 Presidency.
 The security structure includes the Defense Force (1,500-2,000
 men), the regular police (3,000-5,000), and a paramilitary
 branch of the police, the Special Security Division
 (1,000-1,500). The Defense Force is responsible for
 preventing external aggression and wide-scale civil
 disturbances. The police are responsible for law and order
 and internal security. The Special Security Division's role
 is not well defined, but, under the previous regime, was used
 to enforce the political decisions of the President. In
 September President Momoh proposed creating another special
 division with the express purpose of stopping illegal
 trafficking in precious resources, e.g., gold and diamonds.
 About 70 percent of Sierra Leone's 3.9 million population is
 engaged in agriculture, mainly subsistence farming. For many
 years the economy has been in a steady decline, in part due to
 falling world diamond prices and to reduced rice production.
 Mineral exports, notably titanium ore, gold, and diamonds, are
 the principal sources of foreign exchange. The Constitution
 recognizes the right of the individual to own private
 property, but government ownership is retained in certain key
 sectors, particularly in the transportation and marketing of
 mineral exports. In November 1987, the Government imposed a
 state of economic emergency to counter the deteriorating
 economic situation and combat hoarding and smuggling. The
 program granted the State authority, inter alia, to detain
 persons without trial, to control the movements of people, and
 to limit press reporting.
 The human rights situation in 1988 continued to be restricted
 by the economic emergency legislation. In 1987-88, the
 Government used its new powers forcefully, notably in the
 initial months, and there were abuses of human rights, e.g.,
 in the detention of a number of persons without charge or
 trial, in arbitrary strip searches at roadblocks, and in
 restricting the assembly of several groups wishing to
 demonstrate peacefully. The constitutionality of the
 emergency laws was upheld by the High Court, and they remained
 in effect at the end of 1988. The treason cases of former
 Vice President Francis M. Minah and 17 others continued in
 1988 in the Court of Appeals. In September this Court upheld
 the convictions and death sentences of Minah and 11 others,
 sustained the prison sentences of 2 others, and reversed the
 convictions of 4 persons. Those sentenced to death for
 plotting to assassinate the President have appealed to the
 Supreme Court and still have the option of appealing to the
 Clemency Board chaired by the President. Most observers,
 including Amnesty International representatives who attended
 part of the trial, indicate that the trial proceedings were
 conducted generally in accord with international standards.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
