 SEYCHELLES
 In 1992 Seychelles continued to be ruled by President France Albert Rene, who
 took power in June 1977 in a military coup d'etat. In July and November the first
 multiparty elections were held since the 1977 coup. In the July elections, Rene's
 party, the Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), benefited significantly from
 various forms of governmental assistance and pressure, including reports of strong
 economic leverage over voters. The July vote--which the SPPF won by 58.4 percent
 to the Democratic Party's 33.7 percent--determined the delegate composition of the
 electoral commission charged wlith drafing a new constitution.
 n the November 15 referendum on the proposed constitution, the vote was 53.7
 percent in favor, well short of the 60 percent required for acceptance. The voting
 procedures were free and fair, but the draft constitution had been finalized in the
 electoral commission after the oppsition walked out, claiming the Government was
 pushing through an undemocratic document which reinforced the wide powers of the
 current President. At year's end, the commission was scheduled to reconvene in Jan-
 uary 1993 to beg  discussions with the   t i oin a new draft document. In the
 meantime, the Constitution based on a one-party government remained in force.
 The Government retains full control of the Seychelles security apparatus, which
 includes about 800 army personnel and apeoples militia of about 2,000. The secu-
 rity forces close ties to the ruling party, the SPPF, serve to intimidate the orosi-
 
 
 224
 tion and weaken the democratic process. This was particularly true before and after
 the July elections, when the security forces harassed opposition camp aigners tore
 down oppo sition posters, and assaulted members of oppostion prties. Bot militay
 and police personnel were responsible for instances of brtality during and after the
 July elections, incuding an assault on a Roman Catholic seminarian. There were
 no data available from the US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency on
 Seychelles' total annual military expenditures. However, military and police expend-
 itures which are relatively high for Seychelles' small population, are included in the
 same budget item and are expected to remain at current levels.
 Although private enterprise and private property are permitted, the public and
 quasi-public sectors drive the economy. The Government, through the Seychelles
 Marketing Board, other state organizations, and banking regulations, controls the
 importation, licensing, and distributio of virtually all goods and services and exer-
 cises significant control over all phases of the economy. Tourism is the most impor-
 tant sector, directly accounting for over 10 percent of the gross domestic product.
 Human rights remained circumscrifed in 1992, although the Government made
 progress toward political reforms in holding multiparty elections. The continued
 domination by the SPPF Government of all sectors of the country's political and eco-
 nomic life and, in particular, the Government's use of excessive force and harass-
 ment tactics against opposition political forces in the electoral process detracted
 from reform measures, including constitutional reform. Reform steps in 1992 in-
 cluded permitting increased freedom of speech and press, rescinding the Public Se-
 curity Act, which allowed the President to order indefinite detention in security
 cases, and permitting the return of many of the most prominent dissidents and ex-
 iles, including former president James Mancham.
 In 1992 the Government started a process of "delinking" the armed forces from
 their intimate association with the SPPF, as recommended by the Commonwealth
 group which observed the July elections. In December the Deputy Secretary-General
 of the SPPF, James Michel, was removed as chief of staff of the defense forces.
 There was as yet no indication, however, that the SPPF had actually relinquished
 control over the armed forces.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiling.-There were no such killings in 1992.
 However, the security forces used excessive force on several occasions during the
 electoral process. In particular, a violent clash between government and opposition
 forces on the island of Praslin led to the death of one opposition supporter in a
 melee following the Jul elections. No one was punished in this incident.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture. Nonetheless, in 1992 security forces used
 brutal and abusive practices  at members of opposition political parties as well
 as agasin   dependent Seychellois observers who were attempting to record their
 actions. For example, on the day following the elections, soldiers beat opposition
 journalist Roger Mancienne with gun butts; he was attempting to photo _aph them
 beating up Democratic Party supporters in front of the Democratic Party office.
 Similarly, on the same day security forces severely beat Roman Catholic seminarian
 Eric Leon when he tried to photograph them tearing down opposition posters on the
 island of Praslin. The security forces involved were not punished.
 Living conditions at Police Bay prison are Spartan and have not improved since
 church leaders were allowed to visit the prison in 1990. Access to the facility is se-
 verely limited, and inmates cannot receive printed or broadcast news from the out-
 side world.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Penal Code provides that persons ar-
 rested must be brought before a magistrate within 48 hours. In nonpolitical cases
 this provision is a ppled in practice, and the detainee can effectively seek judicia
 review of the legality of detention (habeas corpus). Bail is available in most cases,
 as is free legal counsel for indigents.
 Police sometimes hold persons for 24 hours for "questioning" regarding alleged
 antigovernment activities. In late 1989, the Attorney General determined that the
 period of initial detention could be extended to 48 or 72 hours, provided that an ac-
 tive investigation was being conducted 'with reasonable dispatch." Defense attor-
 neys have excellent access to detainees and can readily ascertain whether there is
 an active investigation.
 Following the July elections, numerous Democratic Party and other opposition
 supporters were rounded up and briefly detained by the police. For example, an op-
 
 
 225
 position journalist not affiliated with the Democratic Party was briefly arrested for
 taking pictures of the police as they beat Democratic Party supporters on the day
 after the elections.
 In the past, the Government also used the Public Security Act (PSA), which al-
 lowed indefinite detention in security cases, to intimidate human rights monitors
 and other critics. Arrests and detentions under this Act were considered administra-
 tive rather than criminal in nature, and the procedural protections applicable in
 criminal cases generally did not apply. Responding to domestic and international
 criticism, the Government rescinded the Act in September.
 In 1992 most prominent dissidents, including former president James Mancham,
 returned from exile. The dissidents' prospects upon return have been limited, how-
 ever, by continued control by SPPF sympathizers of employment and housing oppor-
 tunities in the largely state-dominated economic sector. In addition, opposition fig-
 ures' properties confiscated by the Rene regime without just compensation in past
 years have been retained by the Government and at year's end some of these prop-
 erties were being permanently distributed to SPPF supporters. The Government has
 refused to allow politically hostile foreigners to visit Seychelles, most notably the
 former Seychelles honorary consul in Germany.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is patterned on English com-
 mon law (e.g., public trial by jury) but influenced by the Napoleonic Code, particu-
 larly in ciw; matters (e.g., torts and contracts). The judiciary includes the mag-
 istrate's (or small claims) court, the Supreme (or trial) Court, and the Court of Ap-
 peals. Criminal cases are heard by a magistrate or by the Supreme Court, depend-
 ing on the gravity of the offense. A jury is called only in cases of murder or treason.
 Trials arepublic, and the State bears the burden of proving the defendant's guilt.
 The defendant has the right to be present at the trial, to confront witnesses, and
 to appeal. Indigent defendants are provided free legal counsel.
 Judges, primarily from African and Asian countries, are provided under arrange-
 ments with the Commonwealth of Nations. In ordinary cases, they have exhibited
 some independence from the Government, although they are sometimes subject to
 government pressure. Most political and security cases never come to trial and are
 handled outside the court system. There are few procedural safeguards in such
 cases, of which there were none in 1992. Participants in President Rene's 1977 coup
 d'etat and high government officials are generally shielded from prosecution by the
 judicial system.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. He not only has appointment au-
 thority but also broad detention authority when public security is deemed to be in-
 volved, notwithstanding repeal of the PSA. Seychelles law requires that a member
 of the armed forces be tried by court-martial unless the President decrees otherwise.
 In the past, this has allowed criminals with military ties to protect themselves from
 prosecution for offenses committed against civilians. In 1992 there were no known
 political detainees or prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities have broad powers for search and seizure without a warrant and have used
 this authority in the past to suppress dissenting opinion. The Government may le-
 gally open domestic and international mail, but this practice may be declining. Key
 positions in the Government are reserved for SPPF members and sympathizers, es-
 pecially in politically important sectors such as the office that distributes low-cost
 government housing and land.
 The Government requires all students applying to the Polytechnic, Seychelles'
 most prestigious learning institution, to attendte Ntional Youth Service (NYS),
 a year-long, paramilitary, political, and social training program run by SPPF par-
 tisans which promotes the political program of the Rene regime. The Government's
 requirement serves to force partisan political indoctrination upon Seychellois who
 seek to continue their education in their own country.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech is theoretically protected
 under the 1979 Constitution. Since Rene's announcement of democratization in late
 1991, limited freedom of speech has been tolerated. Certain subjects-such as high-
 level corruption-remain taboo. Legislation provides upto 3 years' imprisonment for
 anyone who, with intent to bring the President into hatred, ridicule, or contempt,
 disseminate any defamatory or insulting matter, whether in writing, print, word of
 mouth, or any other manner. This same legislation authorizes a 2-year sentence for
 anyone who prints, supplies, distributes, reproduces, or has in his possession or con-
 trol any publication banned by the Government for security reasons. Despite such
 attempts at censorship, the Seychelles independent press took increasing liberties
 with the President's reputation.
 
 
 226
 
 The Government controls the principal newspaper and all local radio and tele-
 vision broadcasting. The Ministr of Information publishes the only local daily
 newspaper, the Nation, which presents the news with a government bias and does
 not publish independent viewpoints on political matters. Nevertheless, throughout
 the heated referendum campaign, radio and television broadcast long critiques of
 the proposed constitution by opposition figures and re  ous leaders.
 In 1992 Seychelles made progress in respecting freedm of speech and press, with
 many new newspapers and journals published, generally by rival political parties.
 Criticism of the President (including innuendo regarding corruption) was widely
 seen in political posters and carried in the opposition press, including in Regar and
 the Seychelles Weekly (former President Manchain s newspaper). The Catholic
 Church publishes a lively monthly magazine, Echo des Iles, which often runs edi-
 torials and letters criticizing the Government. The Seychelles Island Journal-a
 paper published abroad by exiles until 1992-resumed publication in Seychelles
 without government harassment. In general, international publications are imported
 and sold without hindrance.
 In 1992 state-owned radio and television stations continued their pro-SPPF"cov.
 erage but also regularly broadcast items critical of the Government in news pro-
 grams. The local clergy broadcast independent views during weekly religious pro.
 grams. The country's two largest denominations, the Roman Catholic and the Anli-
 can Churches, took advantage of free air time to comment on social and political
 issues.
 Foreign broadcasts are widely heard and are unhindered. However, the Govern-
 ment has increased its range of available controls over broadcasts and telecommuni-
 cations originating in Seychelles through the Broadcasting Telecommunications Act
 of 1988. This Act authorizes the Government to restrict the transmission of mes-
 sages and to prohibit the broadcast of any material deemed objectionable. The Act
 also allows government officials to enter any premises and examine any apparatus.
 There are no universities in Seychelles, and higher education is generally limited
 to practical training and vocational school. The local faculty is largely apolitical, and
 consequently academic freedom has not been an issue. However, the Director of the
 prestigious Polytechnic was fired, presumably because of her links to an opposition
 party.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-In the past, the Government
 has been quick to move against unauthorized demonstrations and has made arrests
 under an old British colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without a gov-
 ernment permit. In 1992 the Government permitted regular political demonstrations
 and meetings but did not set clear policies regarding assembly, and it occasionally
 intervened without reasonable cause to arrest opposition supporters. For example,
 in July it arrested a number of people peacefully gathering in front of an opposition
 art headquarters for no apparent purpose other than intimidation. Earlier, in
 hPPF supporters broke up an opposition rally with violence. Police refused
 to intervene until their station came under attack. Following the violence, the Gov-
 ernment suspended all party rallies for 2 weeks.
 The Government increasingly tolerated opposition parties and organizations, but
 all associations, clubs, and other organizations still require government permission
 to organize. In accordance with President Rene's December 1991 commitment, the
 Government allowed opposition political parties to form, and there were eight ar-
 ties by year's end. However, the SPPF Government used a variety of tactics, includ-
 ing detention powers to ensure the primacy of the SPPF.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no religious persecution in Seychelles, and
 church services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic, Anglican, and other
 Christian denominations worship freely and Muslims and Hindus are not restricted
 in their religious practices. In eneral, the Government routinely approves local
 church requests to bring in foreign missionaries. Roman Catholics make up about
 90 percent of the population, and Anglicans account for another 5 percent. There
 are also active and growing"Pentacostal, Seventh-Day Adventist, and other evan-
 gelical Protestant churches.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 p atriaton.-There are no restrictions on internal travel. Historically, Seychellois
 ave been free to travel abroad as well, although the 1991 Passport Act, allows the
 Government to deny passport services to any Seychellois citizen if the Minister of
 Defense (currently the President) finds this in "the national interest." The new law
 was proposed after the Supreme Court ruled in 1990 that the Government had no
 basis for refusing to renew the passport of exiled dissident Katherine Pillay. Under
 the Act, there is no recourse to judicial review. There were no known asylum re-
 quests in 1992.
 
 
 227
 Section 3. Respect for Political Pghts: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1992 citizens still did not have this right, and President Rene and the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF) continued to dominate the political
 process. The failure of the SPPF-dominated constitutional commission's draft to win
 the required 60 percent approval of the electorate leaves the timing of the
 Seychelles democratization program uncertain. The defeat of the proposed new con-
 stitution was widely seen as a victory for the opposition. The churches, particularly
 the Catholic Church, played a major role in defeating the proposed document. The
 SPPF must now work with the opposition to prepare a new constitution acceptable
 to 60 percent of the electorate.
 The 1979 Constitution provides that the SPPF may nominate only one candidate
 for' President of the Republic. President Rene was the only candidate in the June
 1989 presidential election, receiving over 96 percent of the vote. The present Peo-
 ple's Assembly is largely subordinate to the President and the party and routinely
 approves all bills proposed by the Government. President Rene's commitment to de-
 mocracy remains ambiguous; in speeches in 1992 he promised a more open political
 process but then condemned his opposition opponents.
 There are no legal restrictions against the participation of women or minority
 groups in politics. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Education are women, and
 there  are  other prominent women     in  high  positions. Still, women  are
 underrepresented in the Government.
 Section 4. Governmentd Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices in Seychelles, and, notwithstanding the reform program, it is uncertain
 whether the Government would permit such independent groups to form. However
 the churches have been strong voices for human rights and democratization, and
 other organizations critical of the Government have suffered no apparent repercus-
 sions. For example, following clear government abuses of human rights that oc-
 cur ed after the July elections, the Seychelles Bar Association boycotted court pro-
 ceedings in protest. The protest lasted several weeks but eventually collapsed in the
 face of governmental indifference. Requests for information from foreign organiza-
 tions are sent to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who acts as an interiocutor
 between human rights groups and the Government. There were no known inter-
 national requests for investigations in 1992.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex Religion, Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education, or other social
 services based on sex or racial, ethnic, national, or religious identification. Women
 enjoy high status in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the same legal,
 political, economic, and social rights as men. A 1991 U.N. study indicates that fe-
 males receive the same years of schooling as males.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, does occur in Seychelles, but,
 according to medical personnel, is not widespread and not tolerated by the Govern-
 ment or the courts. Women have frequently used a procedure providing for a bond
 "to keep the peace" of up to approximately $200 on someone using or threatening
 violence. Married women may easily obtain exclusion orders against abusive hus-
 bands and frequently do. Violence against women, whether domestic or otherwise,
 is considered assault and is subject to criminal prosecution. Police have no hesi-
 tation in intervening in domestic disputes in which violence has occurred or is
 threatened.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assoiation.-Workers do not have the right to form or join unions
 of their own choosing, nor are the unions independent of the Government or the rul-
 ing party, even though the Government is a member of the International Labor Or-
 ganization (ILO) and has ratified ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of Association. The
 ILO s Committee of Experts 1992 report stated that Seychelles has established a
 system of trade union monopoly, which is contrary to Convention 87. All workers
 (except for some temporary workers) must belong to the National Workers Union
 (NWU), and a percentage of their social security contributions finances the NWU.
 The SPPF controls the NWU's funds and appoints its leaders. Workers are per-
 mitted to vote for their shop stewards (also called works committee members), but
 all candidates are screened in advance by the NWU executive secretariat, which has
 the power to dismiss any elected shop steward.
 
 
 228
 Although a draft trade union industrial act would legalize other workers' organi-
 zations, as of late December the law remained unchanged. The NWU aggressively
 sought to coerce Seychelles employers to sign dosed shop agreements prior to the
 change in the law.
 Workers and their leaders have no legal right to strike or initiate any industrial
 action except with the prior permission of the SPPF Central Committee. Workers
 at the public utility commission struck briefly in 1992, and port workers practiced
 "slow downs" to seek higher wages.
 The NWU's only international affiliation is with the Organization of African
 Trade Union Unity, but it maintains close relations with the Communist-dominated
 World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-With only one party-domi-
 nated union confederation permitted, there are serious limitations on workers' right
 to organize. The NWU constitution calls for union members to be protected 'from
 victimization in the carrying out of legitimate trade union activity" and requires its
 executive board to investigate shop steward dismissals to ensure that the dismissals
 are not based on union-related activities. In the event of a disagreement between
 the NWU and a company over a shop steward's dismissal, the party would make
 the final determination.
 Free collective bargaining is not practiced in Seychelles. The Government has the
 right to review and approve all collective bargaining agreements from the public and
 private sectors. There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. The Government
 and state-owned companies, which employ about 70 percent of the labor force, have
 mandatory wage scales for their employees, based on job classification. Most private
 employers run very small establishments, and wages in the private sector are gen-
 erally set by individual agreements between employer and employee; however, in
 the few larger businesses where collective bargaining is used, wage scales are sub-
 ject to the Government's right of review and approval.
 In practice, private employers often follow public sector wage scales when setting
 salary levels, although they frequentl pa  somewhat more than the Government
 in order to attract qualified workers. The Employment Act of 1985, Seychelles' basic
 labor law, vests the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs with authority to
 establish and enforce employment terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have fre-
 quently obtained recourse against their employers through the Ministry. Although
 amendments passed in 1990 resulted in a modest simplification and liberalization
 of the basic labor law, the amendments did not significantly modify the Govern-
 ment's dominant role in setting terms and conditions of employment.
 There are no export processing zones in Seychelles.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and does not exist in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 15, and children are required to attend school until the 10th grade or the age of
 17, whichever occurs first. The Government strongly encourages children to fulfill
 a year of National Youth Service (NYS) before entering the work force at the age
 of 18 or going to the Polytechnic School for Vocational Training, and it discourages
 public or private sector employment of workers under 18 years of age. The Govern-
 ment offers voluntary short-term (up to 6 months) work programs for school leavers
 not participating in the NYS. Children in these programs receive a training stipend
 which is below the minimum wage. The Government effectively enforces its child
 labor laws through regular inspections by the Ministry of Employment and Social
 Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage
 scale, administratively regulated by the Government, which covers the public and
 parastatal (state-owned) sectors and differentiates among various job classifications.
 Given the free public services that are available, primaril in the areas of health
 and education, a single salary at the low end of the pay scale provides a family with
 a decent, if Spartan, standard of living. Many families deal with Seychelles' high
 cost of living by earning two or more incomes. The Ministry of Employment and So-
 cial Affairs enforces minimum wage regulations. Due to a labor shortage, the pre-
 vailing wage rates in the private sector are considerably higher than the legally re-
 quired public sector minimum, and workers have little reason to accept lower than
 minimum wage.
 The legal maximum workweek varies from 35 to 40 hours, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector. Each full-time worker is entitled to a half-hour break per day and a
 minimum of 21 days of paid annual leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime
 up to 60 additional hours per month. The Government enforces these ceilings,
 though it is possible that some occasional abuses do occur.
 
 
 The Government issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs is re-
 sponible for enforcing these regulations. Inspectors enforce safety standards
 through regular workplace visits, and the Government protects the identity of work-
 ers who complain of hazardous conditions. Occupational injuries are most common
 in the construction and marine and port industries.
