 SEYCHELLES
 The Government of Seychelles, led by President France Albert
 Rene, took power in June 1977 in a military coup d'etat and
 forced into exile a number of former leaders, including ex-prime
 minister James Mancham. In 1979 a new Constitution was
 promulgated which formally abolished all political opposition to
 the socialist ruling party, the Seychelles People's Progressive
 Front (SPPF). This Constitution provides for a strong
 presidential executive, who appoints ministers, and a People's
 Assembly of 23 members and several appointed members.
 In the past, there have been external threats. Tanzanian
 troops, now no longer on the islands, helped put down a mutiny
 in the armed forces in 1982. The defense force repulsed a
 November 1981 attack by mercenaries financed by Seychellois in
 exile. The Seychelles has a defense force of about 1,000
 persons, as well as a uniformed police force of 500 and a
 People's Militia of about 2,000.
 The Seychelles economy relies predominantly on tourism for
 foreign exchange. The tourism industry, which fell dramatically
 in the early 1980's, has since revived, and some 70,000
 foreigners visited the Seychelles during 1986. Seychelles has
 actively sought to diversify the economy by granting fishing
 licenses to French, Spanish, Korean, and Japanese trawlers and
 by expanding the fishing port in Victoria through donor
 assistance.
 The human rights situation in Seychelles changed little during
 1986. The Constitution does not guarantee fundamental human
 rights but rather includes them in a preamble as the goal of the
 people of Seychelles. The President has reaffirmed his
 determination to put down opposition elements, and the
 Government continued to use exile as a means of suppressing
 dissent. On the positive side, the President reaffirmed his
 commitment to freedom of religion and promised that the
 Government would neither interfere in church affairs nor
 restrict the right of religious groups to speak out, including
 through their influential media outlets.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of killing for political motives.
 Members of the opposition allege, however, that Gerard Hoareau,
 leader of the London-based Seychelles National Movement, who was
 killed in November 1985, was assassinated by government agents.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture. While instances of
 torture are infrequent, one prisoner, detained for political
 reasons, reportedly was burned with cigarettes and had his beard
 set on fire.
 
 
 256
 SEYCHELLES
 Generally, prisoners are well fed and supervised by professional
 prison wardens. Prisoners are normally incarcerated on isolated
 islands, although family visits are routinely arranged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 At the end of 1986, there were no known cases of persons still
 under detention under provisions of the Preservation of Public
 Security Act. Under this Act, the President exercises
 quasi-judicial powers. For example, detention orders are served
 on authority of the President who can suspend habeas corpus
 where public security is involved.  This Act, enacted in
 December 1981 following an attack by mercenaries, has been used
 on several occasions in recent years and has tarnished the
 Government's reputation. Six persons were arrested in June 1986
 under this Act, including Phillippe Boulle, the leading human
 rights activist in the country, but the six were subsequently
 released. In addition, police have held persons for 24 hours
 for "questioning" regarding alleged antigovernment activities.
 In particular, persons who seek to mobilize public opinion
 against the Government run a serious risk of being held for
 "questioning," and if government employees can be fired without
 recourse to appeal. Others face social and economic harassment
 and receive direct or anonymous threats which they believe
 originate from government officials as signals to leave the
 country. Frequently, opponents of the Government are urged to
 emigrate, an option that many have chosen over the years.
 There is a prohibition against the use of forced or compulsory
 labor, and such practices have not been employed in Seychelles.
 There is, however, National Youth Service for all persons 14 to
 16, which has elements of military training and discipline, as
 well as academic study.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Defendants in nonpolitical (both civil and criminal) cases have
 access to counsel and have enjoyed speedy and fair trials.
 Trial procedures are patterned in large measure on English
 common law, although there is also a heavy influence of
 Napoleonic customary law. Judges are provided under
 arrangements with the British Commonwealth and, except for
 security cases, have exhibited considerable independence from
 the executive and legislative branches of the Government. The
 Chief Justice, who is appointed by the President, has stressed
 on several occasions that it is the judiciary's responsibility
 to impose sentences as required by law and that it should
 reflect the will of the legislature. Seychelles' law requires
 that a member of the armed forces be tried by court-martial
 unless the President decrees otherwise.
 Amnesty International adopted Royce Dias, a known opponent of
 the Government, as a prisoner of conscience. Dias' 7-year
 sentence for possession of drugs was recently reduced by the
 appeals court to 5 years. The pardoning of a relative of a
 senior government official for a similar criminal offense
 rekindled suspicion that the criminal charges against Dias were
 fabricated for political reasons.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure without
 a warrant. The Seychelles Marketing Board Act, passed in 1984,
 
 
 257
 SEYCHELLES
 allows police to enter any premises, private or public, and to
 seize any documents which they believe may be in violation of
 the Act. Legislation exists which allows the Government to open
 mail, domestic as well as international, and it is widely
 believed that the Government does so. Since June 1983, the
 Government has embarked on a campaign to nationalize private
 land, ostensibly to claim unused agricultural land. Although
 the Government has stated that compensation will be paid,
 relatively few persons have yet received compensation.
 Negotiations with previous owners are continuing.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the 1979 Constitution,
 freedom of speech is exercised sparingly. The Government
 controls the major newspaper in the country, as well as all
 radio and television broadcasting. Legislation provides for up
 to 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who with intent to bring
 the President into hatred, ridicule or contempt, publishes any
 defamatory or insulting matter whether in writing, print or word
 of mouth, or in any other manner." This same legislation
 authorizes a 2-year sentence for anyone who "prints, supplies,
 distributes, reproduces, or has in his possession or control"
 any publication banned by the Government for security reasons.
 In November 1986, two Seychellois were sentenced for possessing
 and reproducing seditious literature. One received a 9 month
 sentence while the other received a 6 month suspended sentence
 (due to her youth). The Government has sought to prevent the
 importation of pamphlets printed abroad by its opposition.
 The President has promised not to interfere with the church's
 right to speak out freely. The Catholic Church publishes a
 lively paper, Echo des Isles, which is not subject to government
 control or censorship. This paper continues to publish some
 articles which obliquely criticize the Government. The two
 largest religious denominations in the country, the Roman
 Catholic and Anglican churches, are each provided 2 free
 uncensored hours of broadcasting a month. Both churches have
 taken advantage of the monthly broadcast to comment on social
 and political issues. Seychelles has for the past 17 years
 granted a license for a Protestant radio station (FEBA) to
 broadcast religious programs throughout Asia and Africa. FEBA
 is planning to expand its facilities in Seychelles. The British
 Broadcasting Corporation has commenced building a relay facility
 on the main island of Mahe. Foreign broadcasts are widely
 listened to and are uncensored. Foreign publications have been
 imported and sold without hindrance.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has been quick to move against unauthorized
 demonstrations and has made arrests under a British colonial law
 which prohibits unlawful assembly without a government permit.
 All associations, clubs, and other organizations require
 government permission to organize, which is usually granted for
 nonpolitical groups.
 There is one legal union, The National Workers' Union, which is
 under direct control of the ruling party. It does not function
 as a free trade union, although it plays an advisory role for
 workers and seeks better working conditions for its members.
 Changes at the 1985 Party conference further restricted the
 
 
 258
 SEYCHELLES
 election of labor union officials who, in the future, will be
 appointed by the Government. A new labor law was published in
 1986 which sets out guidelines for employee/employer relations.
 There has been no official strike in Seychelles since 1977.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There has been no official religious persecution in Seychelles,
 and church services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic and
 Anglican churches have flourished, and Muslims and Hindus are
 unrestricted in their religious practices. There is a clear
 separation between church and state. Religious instruction in
 schools has been limited. In response to the church's complaint
 that it has been difficult, if not impossible, for children
 (ages 14 to 17) in the National Youth Service (NYS) to attend
 church on a weekly basis, the Government now allows services to
 be held at the NYS camps. As recently as 1984, the President
 publicly reiterated his support for religion and said there
 would be no government interference in the right of people to
 worship as they choose.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Passports may be
 acquired by virtually any citizen, although Seychellois
 traveling abroad for study at government expense are required to
 sign a bond which enables the Government to recoup the cost of
 their education should they fail to return. Such persons who
 are "bonded" must have government permission to travel abroad
 following their return. There are no known cases in which
 passports are currently being withheld. There are no
 restrictions on voluntary repatriation for those who are willing
 to accept the present one-party political system.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since 1979 there has been only one legal political party, the
 SPPF. All political (and much social) activity is channeled
 through this institution. President Rene, both as President of
 the country as well as the Secretary General of the party,
 wields much power and influence. Opponents of the party can
 neither organize nor express public opposition. The party has
 23 regional offices called "branches" which are responsible for
 organizing and supervising discussion about current government
 policies. These branches are encouraged to report public
 opinion in their regions. Such discussions do not normally
 affect policy, which appears to be directed from above.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Requests for information are sent to the Chief Justice of the
 Supreme Court, who acts as an interlocutor between human rights
 groups, such as Amnesty International, and the Seychelles
 Government. Reportedly all such inquiries have been answered,
 and in some cases these inquiries have led to the release of
 detainees.
 
 
 259
 SEYCHELLES
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education, or
 other social services based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high status
 in this essentially matriarchal society. Women have the same
 legal, political, economic, and social rights as men. One woman
 was recently elevated to the rank of minister. Two women are
 serving as central committee members of the party.  Many senior
 officials, up to and including the rank of secretary of state,
 are women.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The people of Seychelles enjoy a relatively high standard of
 living for a developing country. Labor laws were consolidated
 in the Employment Act of 1985, which provides for a minimum
 working age of 14 and a minimum wage of $165 per month.
 According to officials of the National Workers Union,
 occupational safety and health conditions are monitored by the
 Union's inspection program.
 
 
 260
 U.S.OV.ERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: SEYCHELLES
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON.  ASSIST-TOTAL...       2.5      2.7      2.3
 LOANS ..............   0..0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   2.5      2.7      2.3
 A.AID ....... ............    2.0      2.2      2.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   2.0      2.2      2.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST ) ,,       2.0      2.0      1.9
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......     0.3      0.3      0.0
 LOANS .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   0.3      0.3      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IEPAY.  I4  S-LOANS .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 DAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL .........      0.3      0.3      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....      0.3      0.3      0.0
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST...      0.2      0.2      0.3
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.2      0.2      0.3
 PEACE  CORPS ......      0.2      0.2      0.3
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.CREDIT  FINANCING ....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.EO.TRNG ....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ).TRAN-EXCESS  STOCK,,,       0.0      0.0      0.0
 -.OTHER  ;RANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL...     2.5      2.7      2.3
 LOANS ..............       0.0       2.0     0.0
 GRANTS .................  . 2.5     2.7      2.3
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986    1946-86
 TOTAL ........     3.3    12.4      2.5     53.4
 IBRD               0.0     6.2      0.0      6.2
 IF'                3.0     0.0      9.5      9.5
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AO3                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               8.0     6.0      0.0     34.2
 UNIP               0.2     0.2      0.0      3.0
 OT9ER-UN           0.1     0.0      0.0      0.5
 EEr                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 261
