 SEYCHELLES
 President France Albert Rene and his Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF) have governed since a 1977 military coup. In the 1990's the SPPF guided
 the return to a multiparty political system, which culminated in July 1993 in the
 country's first free and fair presidential and parliamentary elections since 1977.
 President Rene was continued in power, and the SPPF won 27 of the 33 National
 Assembly seats, 21 by direct election and 6 by proportional representation. Despite
 the elections, the President and the SPPF continued to dominate the country
 through a pervasive system of political patronage and control over government jobs,
 contracts, and resources.
 
 
 239
 The Constitution was amended in 1995 to allow for the appointment of a vice
 president. The President has complete control over the security apparatus, which in-
 cludes a national guard force, the army, and the police. There is also an armed
 paramilitary Police Mobile Unit. There were several credible reports that the secu-
 rity forces abused persons in custody.
 In recent years, the Government continued in an unsystematic way its program
 to privatize the economy, imposed cuts in domestic spending, reintroduced import
 licensing to improve the country's foreign exchange position, and passed laws with
 tax cuts and abatements to encourage and attract foreign investment. In addition,
 the Government tried to reduce the high dependence on tourism-approximately 70
 percent of hard currency earnings-by promoting the development of fishing and
 light manufacturing. Despite these efforts, the public and quasi-public sectors con-
 tinued to drive the economy. The Government, through the Seychelles Marketing
 Board, other state organizations, and the use of banking regulations, continued to
 dominate most aspects of the economy.
 The human rights situation continued to im prove, and the Government generally
 respected the rights of its citizens. However, despite parliamentary formalities, the
 President continued to wield power virtually unchecked. Security forces used exces-
 sive force in a few instances, although police brutality was not widespread. The au-
 thorities investigated complaints of police abuse. Violence against women and child
 abuse remained problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture, but there have been instances of exces-
 sive use of force by police. The authorities have investigated and punished offenders
 in the past.
 Contions at Long Island prison are Spartan. Family members are allowed
 monthly visits, and prisoners have access to reading but not writing materials.
 There is no regular system of independent monitoring of prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides that persons
 arrested must be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours. This provision is ap-
 plied in practice to the extent possible (with allowances for boat travel from distant
 islands). In October the National Assembly amended this to allow, with a court
 order, 4 days' detention without a formal charge. With a judge's approval this period
 can be extended to 7 days. Detainees have access to legal counsel, and free counsel
 is provided for the indigent. The law provides for judicial review of the legality of
 detention, and bail is available for most offenses.
 Several persons have brought civil cases against the police for unlawful arrest or
 entry, with limited success.
 There were no cases of forced exile. Following the 1977 coup, a number of persons
 went into voluntary exile, and others were released frm prison with the proviso
 that they immediately leave the country. A number of these former exiles who re-
 turned were able to reacquire their property, but the large majority have not. There
 were some instances in which the Government rejected valid comjpensation claims
 for confiscated properties of returning exiles, apparently for political reasons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but there are questions about its independence. The judicial system includes
 magistrates' courts, the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Court, and the Court of
 Appeal. Criminal cases are heard by a magistrates' court or the Supreme Court, de-
 pending on the gravity of the offense. A jury is used in cases involving murder or
 treason. Trials are public, and the accused is considered innocent until proven
 guilty. Defendants have the right to counsel, to be present at their trial, to confront
 witnesses, and to appeal. However, there are few well-trained lawyers. The Con-
 stitutional Court convenes weekly or as necessary to consider constitutional issues
 only. The Court of Appeal convenes twice a year to consider appeals from the Su-
 preme Court and Constitutional Court only.
 Defendants generally have the right to a fair trial. All judges are appointed for
 5 years, and can be re-appointed by the Constitutional Appointment Committee. All
 were hired from other British Commonwealth countries, and none is Seychellois.
 Some observers criticized expatriate judges for a perceived lack of sensitivity on is-
 sues such as domestic violence. Legal organs of the Government, such as the Attor-
 
 
 240
 
 ney General's office and the Ombudsman, are reluctant to pursue charges of wrong-
 doing or abuse of power against senior officials.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy and freedom from arbitrary searches.
 The law requires a warrant for police searches, and the authorities generally re-
 spected this requirement in practice. The law requires that all wiretaps be justified
 on the grounds of preventing a serious crime and be approved by a judge. The Gov-
 ernment maintains telephone taps on some political figures.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, but it also provides for restrictions on speech "for protecting the rep-
 utation, rights, and freedoms of private lives of persons" and "in the interest of de-
 fense, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health." Both freedom
 of speech and the press are thus constrained by the ease with which civil lawsuits
 can be filed to penalize journalists for alleged libel. In most instances, citizens speak
 freely, including in Pariiament.
 The Government has a near-monopoly on the media, owning the only television
 and radio stations, the most important means for reaching the public, and The Na-
 tion, the only daily newspaper. The official media adhere closely to the Govern-
 ment's position on policy issues and give the opposition and news adverse to the
 Government only limited coverage.
 While both of the opposition parties publish an assortment of newsletters and
 magazines, only one significant opposition newspaper, the weekly Regar, is cur-
 rently in circulation. Government figures have sued Regar for libel six times in the
 past 3 years, including once in 1996.
 A second weekly, The Independent, ceased publication in 1995 because of dwin-
 dling circulation and the financial effect of losing a libel suit brought by a govern-
 ment official. Independent publications are also potentially vulnerable to govern-
 ment pressure now that the only printing press has been sold to an SPPF National
 Assemblyman. In general, government harassment of opposition publications is di-
 minishing.
 Academic freedom is limited since, for example, one cannot reach senior positions
 in the academic bureaucracy without demonstrating at least nominal loyalty to the
 SPPF. There are no universities; secondry schoolteachers are largely apolitical.
 The Government controls access to the Polytechnic, the most prestigious learning
 institution, and public school graduates wishing admission are given preference
 based on their participation in the National Youth Service (NYS), a year-long pro-
 gram that now emphasizes educational instruction, although in the past it has
 stressed paramilitary training and SPPF ideology.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these freedoms, and in practice the Government generally permitted peaceful as-
 sembly and association without interruption or interference. In addition to the
 SPPF, there are two other political parties. In 1996 the Government once denied
 permission to the United Opposition Party to hold a public demonstration the day
 of the President's State of the Nation address. Opposition parties cited several cases
 in which supporters lost government jobs solely because of their political beliefs. Po-
 litical criteria also weigh in government decisions regarding licenses and loans.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and there was no
 known abridgement of domestic or international travel. Although it was not used,
 the 1991 Passport Act allows the Government to deny passports to any citizen if
 the Minister of Defense finds that such denial is "in the national interest." There
 were no known requests for asylum and no refugees in the Seychelles.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercised the right to change their government in the July 1993
 National Assembly and presidential elections, which were judged by international
 and national observers to have been free and fair. However, President Rene and the
 SPPF dominated the electoral process and continued to rule-as they have since
 1977. The elections served to provide a voice to other parties.
 The President's SPPF party has utilized its political resources and those of the
 Government to develop a nationwide organization that extends to the village level.
 
 
 241
 The opposition parties have been unable to match the SPPF's organization and pa-
 tronage, in part because of financial limitations.
 The main opposition party, the Democratic Party, is led by Sir James Mancham,
 the country's first elected president, who was forced into a 15-year exile in 1977.
 Mancham was reelected president of the Democratic Party by acclamation at a con-
 troversial party convention in March. Critics of Mancham alleged that his ties to
 the ruling SPPF were too close and that he discouraged his own party members
 from criticizing the Government.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or members of mi-
 nority groups in politics. Women hold 3 ministerial positions in the 11-person Cabi-
 net and 8 seats in the 33-member National Assembly. The white minority of
 Seychelles continues to dominate governmental institutions, but some Creoles (Afri-
 can Seychellois) have risen to senior positions of responsibility, particularly in the
 military forces. Of the six members of the Defense Forces Council, four are Creole.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices. However, both the churches and some nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) have been strong voices for human rights and democratization, and the
 Government has not interfered with their activities. There were no known requests
 by international human rights groups to visit the Seychelles.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution affirms the right to be free from all types of discrimination, but
 it does not specifically prohibit discrimination based on these factors. In practice
 there is no overt discrimination in housing, employment, education, or other social
 services based on race, sex, ethnic, national, or religious identification.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, remains a problem.
 Police seldom intervene in domestic disputes, unless the dispute involves a weapon
 or major assault. The few cases that reach a prosecutor are often dismissed, or if
 a case reaches court, the perpetrator is usually given only a light sentence. There
 is growing societal concern about domestic violence and increased recognition of the
 need to address it.
 This society is largely matriarchal, and women have the same legal, political, eco-
 nomic, and social rights as men. There is no officially sanctioned discrimination in
 education or employment, and women are well represented in politics and business.
 Children.-Children have legal protection from labor and physical abuse and are
 required to attend school. Free public education is available. In June 1995, the Gov-
 ernment created an institutional framework for aiding children.
 Sexual abuse of young girls, usually in low-income families, is a serious problem.
 While complete statistics are not available, Ministry of Health data and press re-
 ports indicate that there are a significant number of rapes committed against girls
 under the age of 15. Very few child-abuse cases are actually prosecuted in court.
 The strongest public advocate for young victims is a semiautonomous agency, the
 National Council for Children, not the Government. There is criticism that the po-
 lice fail to investigate charges of child abuse with vigor.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against people
 with disabilities in housing, jobs, or education. However, there is no legislation pro-
 viding for access to public buildings, transportation, or government services. The
 Government has promised the International-Labor Organization (ILO) that it would
 implement a law providing for more jobs for disabled workers.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There is a longstanding education gap be-
 tween Creoles and Seychellois of white or Asian origin, which has been a factor in
 the continuing political and economic domination of the country by whites and
 Asians. Despite a significant Creole majority, the President, the Industry Minister,
 the Foreign Minister, most principal secretaries, and almost the entire merchant
 and financial class are white or Asian. The Government is attempting to reduce this
 gap through universal access to public education, but the formalization and teaching
 of Creole has increased the difficulty that Creole students experience in learning
 English and French at a competitive level. Further, the political domination by
 whites seems unyielding since the elected leadership of the majority party and of
 one of the two main opposition parties is white.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Under the 1993 Industrial Relations Act (IRA),
 workers have the right to form and join unions of their own choosing. Police, mili-
 tary, prison, and fire-fighting personnel may not unionize. Under the act, the former
 
 
 242
 government-controlled union, the National Workers Union, lost its monopoly posi-
 tion.
 There are currently four registered unions: two dominated by the SPPF and two
 independents. An attempt to organize an independent union incorporating employ-
 ees from both governmental ministries and government-owned entities was thwart-
 ed by government legal action.
 Unions can freely affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides workers
 with the right to engage in collective bargaining. However, in practice free collective
 bargaining does not normally take place. The Government has the right to review
 and approve all collective bargaining agreements in the public and private sectors.
 There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. In the public sector, which employs
 about 60 percent of the labor force, the Government sets mandatory wage scales for
 employees. Wages in the private sector are generally set by the employer in individ-
 ual agreements with the employee, but in the few larger businesses, wage scales are
 subject to the Government's right of review and approval. Private employers histori-
 cally have paid higher wages than the Government in order to attract qualified
 workers. However, economic problems this year have led to downward pressures on
 wages.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union members.
 Independent unions allege that their members in the public sector have encountered
 discrimination on the job because of their affiliation with non-SPPF unions.
 The Employment Acts of 1987 and 1995 constitute the basic labor law. They au-
 thorize the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs to establsh and enforce em-
 ployment terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have frequently obtained re-
 course against their employers through the Ministry.
 There are no export processing zones, but the Government is actively attempting
 to create one.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and it does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 15 years, and children are encouraged to attend school until the tenth grade or
 the age of 17, whichever occurs first. The Government strongly encourages children
 to fulfll 1 year of NYS before entering the work force at the age of 16 or the Poly-
 technic School for Vocational Training, and it discourages public or private sector
 employment of workers under the age of 16. The Government sponsors apprentice-
 ships and short-term (up to 6 months) work programs for those who leave school
 and do not participate in the NYS. Children in these programs receive a training
 stipend which is below the minimum wage. The Government enforces child labor
 laws through inspctions by the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Seychelles has a omplicated minimum wage
 scale, which is administratively regulated by the Government; it covers the public
 and stat-owned sectors and differentiates among various job classifications. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs enforces minimum wage regulations. The
 official minimum wage is about $320 (1,600 Seychelles rupees) per month. Trade
 unions contend that government entities pay some workers at less than the legal
 minimum. Even with the free public services that are available, primarily health
 and education, independent labor unions dispute that a single salary at the low end
 of the pay scale provides a worker and family with even a Spartan standard of liv-
 ing.
 any famiies deal with the high cost of living by earning two or more incomes,
 although the number of households with two persons employed has reportedly
 dropped to 30 percent. In recent years there has been a growing trend in govern-
 ment policy to import foreign workers, primarily from India and elsewhere in Asia,
 to work in the construction and commercial fishing sectors. Although it is difficult
 to determine the living and working conditions of these workers, there is strong evi-
 denoe that the labor laws are routinely flouted by their employers, with the Govern-
 ment's knowledge. These workers- are paid lower wages and forced to work longer
 hours than Seychellois, sometimes with the express consent of the Government.
 The legal maximum workweek varies from 45 to 52 hours, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector, while government employees work shorter hours. Each full-time work-
 er is entitled to a half-hour break per day and a minimum of 21 days of paid annual
 leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime up to 60 additional hours per month.
 The Government generally enforces these ceilings. Foreign workers do not enjoy the
 same legal protections.
 The Government issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs has for-
 mal responsibility for enforcing these regulations; however, the Ministry of Health
 
 
 243
 seeks a role in this area. An ILO team which visited in early 1995 found serious
 deficiencies in the management and effectiveness of government monitoring and en-
 forcement efforts. Occupational injuries are most common in the construction, ma-
 rine, and port industries. A worker who removes himself from a potentially dan-
 gerous situation on the job is considered to have resigned. Safety and health inspec-
 tors rarely visit job sites. In 1994 there were four deaths and 162 on-the-job injuries
 officially reported. In 1995 there were two deaths and 57 on-the-job injuries. The
 Ministry did not release statistics for this year.
