 SEYCHELLES
 Until recently, Seychelles was a one-party state ruled by
 President France Albert Rene, who took power in June 1977 in a
 military coup d'etat. The present Constitution, adopted in
 1979, abolished all political opposition to the ruling
 Socialist party, the Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF), and established a strong presidency, which appoints
 ministers, and a People's Assembly of 22 elected party members
 and several appointed members. However, in December President
 Rene announced a transition to multiparty democracy to begin in
 January 1992. Multiparty elections for delegates to a
 constitutional commission are slated for July 1992 and a draft
 of a new constitution is to be submitted to a national
 referendum by the end of 1992.
 The Government has full control of Seychelles' security
 apparatus, which includes about 800 army personnel and a
 people's militia of about 2,000. Collectively, these units
 amount to roughly 5 percent of the total population. The
 Seychelles' police force has engaged in surveillance against
 private citizens suspected of antigovernment sentiments, and
 both military and police personnel have been responsible for
 occasional instances of police brutality.
 Although private enterprise and private property are permitted,
 the public and quasi-public sectors drive the economy. The
 Government, through the Seychelles Marketing Board, other state
 organizations, and banking regulations, controls the
 importation, licensing, and distribution of virtually all goods
 and services and exercises significant control over all phases
 of the economy. Tourism is the most important sector, directly
 accounting for over 10 percent of the gross domestic product.
 Human rights remained circumscribed in 1991. For most of the
 year, direct political opposition to Government. policies was
 not tolerated. The present Constitution does not provide for
 fundamental human rights but rather includes them in a preamble
 as a goal of the people of Seychelles. The Public Security
 Act, which allows the President to order indefinite detention
 in security cases, has served to intimidate real and potential
 opposition elements. In 1991 the Government arrested and
 detained several persons for circulating antigovernment
 materials. At the end of the year, however, several dissidents
 were permitted to return, and the Government had begun to allow
 more open political debate.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no confirmed instances of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture. Nonetheless, in
 1991, security forces occasionally used excessive force and
 abusive practices when apprehending or detaining suspects.
 
 
 328
 SEYCHELLES
 In addition, security forces periodically harassed or roughed
 up persons believed to be supporting a new underground
 political party.
 In April local dissident Jean Francois Ferrari was twice
 assaulted by state security forces during two separate
 arrests. The Government did not discipline the security force
 members involved. On July 4, Ferrari was attacked by two
 private individuals, apparently working on behalf of elements
 in the state security forces. The two persons were
 subsequently charged with assault but had not been prosecuted
 at year's end. Ferrari was arrested again in November and
 subsequently released.
 Frank Francois Kilindo, a dockworker arrested in May for
 circulating antigovernment literature, was held at the maximum
 security facility at Police Bay for 3 weeks where he was
 interrogated at length and forced to sign a confession about
 his involvement in a new underground political party. In
 mid-June, the Government allowed the Anglican Archbishop to
 visit Kilindo briefly, and he was released shortly thereafter.
 Living conditions at Police Bay prison are Spartan and have not
 improved since church leaders were allowed to visit the prison
 in November 1990. Prisoners must perform hard labor, and
 recalcitrant inmates may be subjected to physical abuse or
 solitary confinement. Access to the facility is severely
 limited, and inmates cannot receive printed or broadcast news
 from the outside world. Only prisoners on good behavior are
 allowed visits by family members, and even these visits are
 rarely allowed. In general, no other visitors are permitted at
 the facility, although the Government did allow a visiting
 expert on prison reform to view it in September.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Penal Code provides that persons arrested must be brought
 before a magistrate within 48 hours. In nonpolitical cases,
 this provision is applied in practice, and the detainee can
 effectively seek judicial review of the legality of detention
 (habeas corpus). Bail is available in most cases, as is free
 legal counsel for indigents.
 Police sometimes hold persons for 24 hours for "questioning"
 regarding alleged antigovernment activities. In particular,
 persons who seek to mobilize public opinion against the
 Government run a serious risk of being held for such
 interrogation. In late 1989, the Attorney General determined
 that the period of initial detention could be extended to 48 or
 even 72 hours, provided that an active investigation was being
 conducted "with reasonable dispatch." Defense attorneys have
 excellent access to detainees and to the police and can readily
 ascertain whether there is an active investigation.
 The Public Security Act allows for indefinite detention in
 security cases and has been used in the past to intimidate
 human rights activists and other critics of the Government.
 Arrests and detentions under this Act are considered
 administrative rather than criminal in nature, and the
 procedural protections applicable in criminal cases generally
 do not apply.
 There were a small number of politically motivated detentions
 in 1991, both under the Penal Code'and the Public Security Act,
 
 
 329
 SEYCHELLES
 including Frank Francois Kilindo and Jean Francois Ferrari (see
 Section l.c.). Kilindo was detained for 3 weeks under the
 Public Security Act, and Jean Fran~ois Ferrari was detained
 briefly twice, on one occasion for throwing his passport on the
 floor of the People's Assembly to protest the new, restrictive
 Passport Act passed in March. On three other occasions in 1990
 he was taken in for questioning about antigovernment literature -
 found during searches of his home.
 A number of prominent persons have been in exile, including
 former President Mancham, but President Rene announced in
 December that all exiles were free to return home. Opposition
 activist Dr. Maxime Ferrari returned in October, and following
 Rene's. announcement Mancham stated his intention to return.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is patterned on English common law (e.g.,
 public trial by jury), but it is also influenced by the
 Napoleonic code, particularly in civil matters (e.g., torts and
 contracts). The judiciary includes the magistrate's (or small
 claims) court, the Supreme (or trial) Court, and the Court of
 Appeals. Judges, primarily from African and Asian countries,
 are provided under arrangements with the Commonwealth of
 Nations. In ordinary cases, they have exhibited some
 independence from the Government, although they are sometimes
 subject to government pressure. For instance, in January the
 President refused to renew the contract of a foreign judge
 after he decided a politically sensitive case against the
 Government. Most political and security cases are handled
 outside the court system. There are few procedural safeguards
 in such cases.
 The police are responsible for investigating crimes, but the
 Attorney General's office decides whether to prosecute.
 Criminal cases are heard by a magistrate or by the Supreme
 Court, depending on the gravity of the offense. A jury is
 called only in cases of murder or treason. The State bears the
 burden of proving the defendant's guilt, and the defendant has
 the right to be present at the trial and to confront
 witnesses. Trials are public, and the defendant has the right
 to appeal. In addition, indigent defendants'are provided free
 legal counsel.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. He has not only
 appointment authority but also broad detention authority when
 public security is involved. Seychelles law requires that a
 member of the armed forces be tried by court-martial unless the
 President decrees otherwise. At the end of 1991, there were no
 known political detainees or prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure without
 a warrant, and they have used this authority in the past to
 suppress dissenting opinion. In 1991 the police searched the
 homes of at least two persons suspected of possessing
 "seditious" literature. In October persons believed to be
 acting on behalf of government security forces ransacked the
 home of Raymond de Speville, an outspoken local dissident. The
 Government can legally open domestic and international mail,
 and it is widely believed that it does so regularly. It is
 also widely believed that in the past the Government assigned
 
 
 330
 SEYCHELLES
 citizens to eavesdrop on conversations in the workplace and
 elsewhere to report on possible opposition plots. This
 monitoring activity has apparently decreased in recent years,
 most likely because many opponents were in exile.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the 1979 Constitution,
 freedom of speech is restricted. There is no criticism of the
 President or the Government in Parliament, although specific
 issues are debated and reported in the media.
 The Government controls the principal newspaper and all local
 radio and television broadcasting. Legislacion provides up to
 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who, with intent to bring the
 President into hatred, ridicule, or contempt, publishes any
 defamatory or insulting matter whether in writing, print, or by
 word of mouth, or in any other manner." This same legislation
 authorizes a 2-year sentence for anyone who .prints, supplies,
 distributes, reproduces, or has in his possession or control"
 any publication banned by the Government for security reasons.
 State-owned radio and television stations do not broadcast
 programs critical of the Government. Occasionally, however,
 the local clergy broadcasts independent views during weekly
 religious programs. The country's two largest religious
 denominations, the Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches,
 alternate each week broadcasting a live Sunday church service,
 using free radio time supplied by the government-owned radio
 station. In 1991 both Churches took advantage of this air time
 to comment on social and political issues, with the Catholic
 Bishop and the Anglican Archbishop delivering important sermons
 on democracy and the proposed referendum on multipartyism.
 Anglican priest Wavel Ramkalawan, who was banned from the
 airwaves because he broadcast an antigovernment sermon in
 October 1990, was permitted to resume broadcasts in December.
 Following Rene's announcement of multipartyism, government
 officials indicated that measures would be taken to establish
 more independent media.
 Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to and are uncensored.
 However, the Government has increased its range of available
 controls over broadcasts and telecommunications originating in
 Seychelles through the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Act
 of 1988. This Act authorizes the Government to restrict the
 transmission of messages and to prohibit the broadcast of any
 material deemed objectionable. The Act also allows government
 officials to enter any premises and examine any apparatus.
 The Ministry of Information publishes the only local daily
 newspaper, the Nation. The Nation generally presents the news
 with a progovernment slant and does not publish independent
 viewpoints on political matters. In September the Government
 tentatively approved separate requests by local dissident Jean
 Francois Ferrari and another person to start two new
 newspapers. A "trial issue" of Ferrari's newspaper was
 published in December with a limited circulation. The first
 general circulation issue was scheduled for publication in
 January 1992. The Catholic Church publishes a lively monthly
 magazine, Echo des Iles, which often runs editorials and
 letters criticizing the Government. Because of the magazine's
 antigovernment stance, the President threatened a libel suit
 against the magazine in 1990 and asked the Catholic Bishop in
 
 
 331
 SEYCHELLES
 1991 to fire the editor; the Bishop refused. In general,
 international publications are imported and sold without
 hindrance.
 The Government has sought to prevent the importation of
 pamphlets printed by its opposition abroad, including those
 sent by facsimile transmissions, but these restrictions were
 apparently relaxed following the announcement of
 multipartyism. In 1990 the police ordered the local cable and
 wireless companyto send messages to all fax subscribers
 warning them that transmission or receipt of "seditious,
 subversive, abusive or obscene" material could result in
 criminal prosecution and disconnectionof their fax machine.
 Despite this warning, former President Mancham and other exiled
 opposition leaders continued to send antigovernbent materials
 via fax throughout-1991. Police have occasionally seized
 locally produced political tracts being distributed on the
 street.
 There are-no universities in Seychelles, and higher education
 is generally limited to practical training and'vocational
 school. The local faculty is largely apolitical and,
 consequently academic freedom has not been an issue.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In the past, the Government-has been quick to move against
 unauthorized demonstrations and has made arrestsunder an- old
 British colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without
 a government permit. There were no such arrests in 1991, but
 security forces did intervene in October to end an impromptu
 speech by-oppostion leader-Maxime Ferrari, who was addressing a
 small rally at the airport upon his return to Seychelles. All
 associations, clubs, and other organizations require government
 permission to organize, which is usually granted for
 nonpolitical groups. As noted above, President Rene announced
 in December that opposition political parties (with a minimum
 of 100 members) would be permitted to register in January 1992.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no religious persecution in Seychelles, and church
 services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic, Anglican,
 and other Christian denominations worship freely, and Muslims
 and Hindus are unrestricted in their religious practices. In
 general, the Government routinely approves local church
 requests to bring in foreign missionaries. Roman Catholics
 make up about 90 percent of the population of Seychelles, and
 Anglicans account for another 5 percent.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within.the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Historically,
 Seychellois have been free to travel abroad as well, although
 in 1991 the People's Assembly passed the Passport Act, which
 allows-the Government to deny passport services to any
 Seychellois citizen if the Minister of-Defense (currently the
 President) finds that denial is in "the national interest."
 The new law was proposed after the Supreme Court ruled in 1990
 that the Government had no basis for refusing to renew the
 passport of exiled dissident Kathleen Pillay. Under the new
 Act, there is no recourse to judicial review.
 
 
 332
 SEYCHELLES
 Until President Rene's announcement in December, the Government
 had refused to allow the return of certain exiled opposition
 figures. It used the new Passport Act in July to deny a
 passport application by Andre Uzice, an exiled opponent living
 in England. Uzice was issued a passport and allowed to return
 in December, however. In October the Government forced the
 airlines to deny passage to exiled dissident Kathleen Pillay,
 but Pillay was permitted to return to Seychelles later in the
 year.
 There were no known asylum requests in 1991.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since 1979, when the present Constitution came into effect,
 there has been only one legal political party, the Seychelles
 Peoples Progressive Front (SPPF). However, opposition parties
 are to be permitted beginning in January 1992. While
 previously citizens could not legally and peacefully change the
 one-party system, if the Government carries out the promised
 reforms, citizens will have the right to freely change the
 Government. Under the present system, President France Albert
 Rene wields far-reaching power, both as President of the
 country and Secretary General of the party.
 The present Constitution provides that the SPPF will nominate
 only one candidate for President of the Republic; the nominee,
 who must be a party member, runs unopposed and is elected by a
 yea or nay vote of the electorate every 5 years. President
 Rene was the only candidate in the June 1989 presidential
 election, receiving over 96 percent of the vote. The People's
 Assembly is largely subordinate to the President and the party
 and routinely approves all bills proposed by the Government.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice against the
 participation of women or minority groups in politics.
 On December 4, President Rene announced that Seychelles would
 make a transition to a multiparty system, with registration of
 new parties beginning in January 1992. This measure had been
 ratified by a SPPF party congress on December 3. Multiparty
 elections for delegates to a constitutional commission are
 slated for July 1992. The Commission is to draft a new
 constitution which will be submitted to a national referendum
 before the end of 1992.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no private human rights groups in Seychelles. Given
 the restrictions on freedom of speech and press and government
 harassment of any activity deemed political, any local groups
 attempting to publicly criticize government human rights
 practices would face serious obstacles.
 Requests for information from foreign organizations are sent to
 the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who acts as an
 interlocutor between human rights groups and the Government.
 There were no known requests for investigations in 1991. A
 representative of the International Committee of the Red Cross
 visited Seychelles in 1991 for an administrative meeting with
 the local Red Cross. He also met with a government official
 during his stay.
 
 
 SEYCHELLES
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education,
 or other social services based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high status
 in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the same
 legal, political, economic, and social rights as men.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, does occur
 in Seychelles, but, according to medical personnel, it is nct
 widespread and is not tolerated by the Government or the
 courts. Under the Criminal Procedure Code, a private civil
 complaint may be'brought before a magistrate, frde of charge,
 to impose a bond "to keep the peace" of up to approximately
 $200 on someone using or threatening violence against another.
 This provision in the Code is used by women against their
 harassers, ano it is quite effective. Married women may easily
 obtain exclusion orders against abusive husbands and frequently
 do. Violence against women, whether domestic or otherwise, is
 considered assault and is subject to criminal prosecution.
 Police have no hesitation in intervening in domestic disputes
 in which violence has occurred or is threatened.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join unions of their
 own choosing, nor are the unions independent of the Government
 or the ruling party. All workers (except for some temporary
 workers) belong to the National-Workers Union '(NWU) by virtue
 of the fact that a percentage of their social security
 contributions is given to the NWU. The SPPF controls the NWU's
 funds and appoints its leaders. Workers and their leaders have
 no legal right to strike or initiate any industrial action
 except with the permission of the SPPF Central Committee.
 Thete were no strikes in 1991.
 Workers are permitted to elect their shop stewards (also called
 Works Committee Members), but all candidates are screened by
 the NWU Executive Secretariat, which has the power to dismiss
 an elected shop steward.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) noted again in 1991, as in previous years,
 that the system of trade union monopoly under the direction of
 a political party is contrary to ILO Convention 87 on Freedom
 of Association, which Seychelles, has ratified. The NWU's only
 international affiliation is with the Organization of African
 Trade Union�Unity, but it maintains close relations with the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 With only one, party-dominated union confederation permitted,
 there are serious limitations on the workers' right to
 organize. The NWU constitution calls.for union members to be
 protected "from victimization in the carrying out of legitimate
 trade union activity" and requires its Executive Board to
 investigate shop steward dismissals to ensure that the
 dismissal is not based on union-related activities. In the
 event of a disagreement between the NWU and a company over a
 shop steward's dismissal, the party would make the final
 determination.
 
 
 334
 SEYCHELLES
 Free collective bargaining is not practiced in Seychelles. The
 Government has the right to review and approve all collective
 bargaining agreements from the public and private sectors.
 There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. The
 government and state-owned companies, which employ about 70
 percent of the labor force, have mandatory wage scales for
 their employees, based on job classification. Wages in the far
 smaller private sector are generally set by individual
 agreements between employer and employee, subject to the
 Government's right of review and approval in collective
 bargaining cases.
 In practice, private employers often refer to public sector
 wage scales when setting salary levels, although they
 frequently pay somewhat more than the Government in order to
 attract qualified workers. The Employment Act of 1985,
 Seychelles' basic labor law, vests the Ministry of Employment
 and Social Affairs with aulthority to establish and enforce
 employment terms, conditions, and benefits. Although
 amendments passed in 1990 resulted in a modest simplification
 and liberalization of the basic labor law, the amendments did
 not significantly modify the Government's dominant role in
 setting terms and conditions of employment.
 There are no export processing zones in Seychelles.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law and does not
 exist in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 15, and children are required
 to attend school until the 10th grade or the age of 17,
 whichever occurs first. The Government encourages children to
 attend a year of National Youth Service (NYS) before entering
 the work force at the age of 18 or going to the polytechnic
 school for vocational training, and it discourages public or
 private sector employment of workers under 18 years of age.
 The Government offers voluntary short-term (up to 6 months)
 work employment programs for school leavers not participating
 in the NYS. Children in these programs receive a training
 salary which is below the minimum wage. The Government
 effectively enforces its child labor laws through regular
 inspections by the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs
 (see below).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage scale which depends
 upon job classifications. Given the free public services that
 are available, primarily in the areas of health and education,
 a single salary at the low end of the pay scale does provide a
 family with a decent, if Spartan, standard of living. Many
 families deal with Seychelles' high cost of living by earning
 two or more incomes. The Ministry of Employment and Social
 Affairs has responsibility for enforcing minimum wage
 regulations. Due to a labor shortage, the de facto minimum
 wage is considerably higher than that legally required, and
 there would be little reason for a worker to accept less than
 the minimum wage.
 The maximum workweek varies from 35 to 48 hours, depending on
 the economic sector. Each full-time worker is entitled to a
 
 
 335
 SEYCHELLES
 half-hour break per day and a minimum of 21 days of paid annual
 leave. Workers are permitted to-work overtime up to 60
 additional hours per month. The Government enforces these
 ceilings, though it is possible that some occasional abuses do
 occur.
 The Government issued comprehensive, revised occupational
 health and safety regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of
 Employment and Social Affairs is responsible for enforcing
 these regulations. Inspectors enforce safety standards through
 regular workplace visits, and the Government protects the
 identity of workers who complain of hazardous conditions.
 
 
 336
