 SEYCHELLES
 In June 1993, 73 percent of voters approved a new Constitution providing for a
 multi party system ofgovernment, after an open bipartisan drafting process. Both
 the Seychelles People's Progressive Party (SPPF) of President France Albert Rene
 and the Democratic Party (DP) of former President James Mancham campaigned ac-
 tively for the Constitution's adoption. Presidential and national assembly elections
 which were judged free and fair by national and international observers, were held
 on July 23, the first such multiparty elections since Rene came to power in a June
 1977 military coup.
 Rene's party decisively defeated the opposition parties, with only one opposition
 candidate from the DP gaining a directly elected seat in the National Assembly. Due
 to an additional number of seats distributed on the basis of the percentage of the
 total vote, the firal composition of the National Assembly was 27 SPPF members
 and 8 opposition members.
 The security forces including about 400 Army personnel a National Guard of un-
 disclosed confdentia size, and the armed "Police Mobile Unit" of 95 officers, have
 close ties to the ruling party.
 Although private enterprise and private property are permitted, the public and
 quasi-public sectors drive the economy. The Government, through the Seychelles
 Marketing Board, other state organizations, and the use of banking regulations, con-
 trols the importation, licensing and distribution of virtually all goods and services
 and exercises significant controf over all phases of the economy. Tourism is the most
 important sector, directly accounting for over 10 percent of the gross domestic prod-
 uct.
 In 1993 Seychelles made substantial progress in respecting the rights of its citi-
 zens. The Government became responsive to human rights issues and-placed consid-
 erable political effort into reforming governmental institutions to accord with inter-
 national standards of human rights practice. One remaining problem is an exces-
 sively legislated regard for the "privacy" of public figures, which serves as a veiled
 threat to press freedom.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no such killings in 1993.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture, and in 1993 this prohibition was re-
 spected in practice. There was one instance of police brutality in late 1993 when
 the police beat up a imprisoned juvenile offender. At year's end an investigation was
 in progress. There was also one abuse of deadly force, when police officers, mistak-
 ing a passer-by for an escaped convict shot at his car and severely wounded him.
 The policemen were subsequently jailed.
 Living conditions at Police Bay prison are Spartan. Access to the facility is lim-
 ited. SPPF and opposition members of the committee drafting the Constitution were
 allowed to visit the prison in 1993, and both delegations expressed satisfaction with
 conditions there. Family visitation is allowed on a weekly basis, and prisoners are
 allowed access to reading materials.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Penal Code provides that persons ar-
 rested must be brought before a magistrate within 48 hours. This provision is ap-
 plied in practice to the extent possible (residents of the outer islands are in practice
 detained for longer than 48 hours, as the boat trip to Victoria, where the courthouse
 is located, can take 3 or more days from such islands as Assumption and Aldabra).
 Detainees can effectively seek judicial review of the legality of detention. Bail is
 available in most cases, as is free legal counsel for indigents. Defense attorneys have
 ready access to detainees.
 The new Constitution guarantees that "every person has a right to liberty and se-
 curity of the person," to privacy, to freedom of conscience, and to freedom of expres-
 sion. However, the Constitution allows the curtailment of the right to freedom of
 expression "for protecting the reputation, rights, and freedoms of private lives of
 persons."
 In 1992 most dissidents who desired to return to Seychelles, including former
 President Mancham, returned from exile.
 In late 1992 and again in 1993, President Rene pledged to reexamine land acqui-
 sition cases of individuals whose lands were not used by the Government after being
 expropriated. Cases were taken up by the court in 1993. No final dispositions were
 made by year's end.
 
 
 248
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The judicial system is patterned on English com-
 mon law (e.g., public trial by jury) but influenced by the Napoleonic Code, particu-
 larly in civil matters (e g  torts and contracts). The judiciary includes the Mag-
 istrate's (or small claims) Court, the Supreme (or trial) Court, and the Court of Ap-
 peals. Criminal cases are heard by a magistrate or by the Supreme Court, depend-
 in& on the gravity of the offense. A jury is called only in cases of murder or treason.
 Trials are ublic, and the State bears the burden of proving the defendant's guilt.
 The defendant has the right to be present at the trial, to confront witnesses, and
 to appeal. Indigent defendants are provided free legal counsel.
 The Constitutional Commission lauded the principle of an independent judiciary.
 However, under certain conditions the mechanism set up for judicial appointments
 the Constitutional Appointments Authority (CAA), allows the ruling party to controf
 appointments.
 Participants in President Rene's 1977 coup d'etat and high government officials
 (and those related to them) are generally shielded from prosecution by the judicial
 system. In addition, an investigation by an opposition paper indicated that on at
 least one occasion, President Rene intervened with the chairman of the CAA in
 order to expedite a case of personal interest before the courts.
 Seychelles law requires that a member of the armed forces be tried by court-mar-
 tial unless the President decrees otherwise. In the past, this allowed criminals with
 military ties to protect themselves from prosecution for offenses committed against
 civilians. In 1993 there were no reported cases of abuses by military personnel, al-
 though the failure of the Government aggressively to pursue criminal charges
 against the brother of a high-ranking Coast Guard official raised questions about
 governmental resolve in prosecuting family members of the political and military es-
 tablishment.
 In 1993 there were no political detainees or prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 new Constitution provides for a wide variety of individual, family, and home protec-
 tions, and establishes a series of fundamental rights which are largely inalienable,
 including the "right to liberty and security of the person" and to privacy.
 Under the previous Constitution, which was law until mid-1993, the authorities
 had broad powers for search and seizure without a warrant and used this authority
 to suppress dissenting opinion. In early 1993, the Government harassed a resident
 foreigner married to a Seychellois for allegedly supporting the Democratic Party.
 After the foreigner proved that he was not involved in politics, he was allowed to
 continue to work and reside in Seychelles. The Government could also legally open
 domestic and international mail, but this practice appears to have ended with the
 advent of the new Constitution.
 Responding to public opinion, the Government in 1993 abolished the requirement
 that all students aplying to the Polytechnic Seychelles' most prestigious learning
 institution, attend National Youth Service (NYS). NYS is a year-long paramilitary,
 political, and social training program run by SPPF partisans who attempt to indoc-
 trinate the young to support the Rene regime.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Guarantees of freedom of speech as provided for
 under the new Constitution were respected. However, the Constitution allows the
 curtailment of the right to freedom of expression "for protecting the reputation,
 rights, and freedoms of private lives of persons." Thus, freedom of speech and press
 is constrained by the legal ease with which journalists can be penalized for alleged
 libel through civil law suits. Certain subjects, such as high-level corruption, remain
 largely taboo.
 The Ministry of Information publishes the only local daily newspaper, The Nation,
 which presents the news with a government bias and does not publish independent
 viewpoints on political matters. Despite oblique threats from the Minister of Com-
 munications, criticism of the President (including innuendo regarding corruption)
 was widely seen in political posters and carried in the opposition press, including
 Regar and the Seychelles Weekly (former President Mancham's newspaper). The
 Catholic Church published a monthly magazine, Echo des Iles, which often ran edi-
 torials and letters criticizing the Government. International political journals and
 j eneral interest magazines (except those with nudity) are imported without hin-
 rance.
 Through an independent, bipartisan Board of Directors endorsed by the leader of
 the opposition, the Government controls all local radio and television broadcasting.
 The meetings of the Constitutional Commission prior to the June referendum were
 televised daily for many weeks, and fierce criticism of the Government's position
 was routinely heard.
 
 
 249
 However, towards the end of 1993 some observers noted a subtle chilling of the
 move towards a more objective media, and it appeared that state-owned radio and
 television were discreetly adopting a less critical, more partisan tone in their news
 stories. The Government determined that any attempt to import satellite antennas
 capable of receiving international broadcasts would have to be approved on a case-
 by-case basis and expensively licensed.
 All films shown, rented, or sold in Seychelles must be approved by the National
 Censorship Board. This is increasingly a rubberstamp process, although government
 laws restrict the distribution of pornography.
 There are no universities in Seychelles; higher education is generally limited to
 practical training and vocational school. Faculty members are largely apolitical, as
 most opponents of the Rene regime fled abroad during the worst period of oppres-
 sion. Most of these opponents have not returned, and the current teachers are gen-
 erally either politically silent or supportive of the party in power.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The rights to freedom of peace-
 ful assembly and association were honored in 1993. The Government tolerated oppo-
 sition parties and organizations and permitted political demonstrations and meet-
 ings. Political parties planning to hold rallies are required to submit notice to the
 police beforehand; there were no known denials of rallies in 1993.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no religious persecution in Seychelles, and
 church services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic, Anglican, and other
 Christian denominations worship freely, and Muslims and Hindus are not restricted
 in their religious practices. The Government routinely approves local church re-
 quests to bring in foreign missionaries, provided that they are working solely to
 preach a religious message. The Government does not accept, however, missionaries
 who apply to come as social workers, family counselors, or Sunday school teachers.
 Roman Catholics make up about 90 percent of the population, and Anglicans ac-
 count for another 5 percent. There are also active and growing Pentecostal, Seventh-
 Dad Adventist, and other evangelical Protestant churches.
 . Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The 1991 Passport Act allowed the Government to deny passport serv-
 ices to any Seychellois citizen if the Minister of Defense found this in "the national
 interest." The new Constitution, however, expressly guarantees the right of freedom
 of movement to Seychelles citizens. There were no known asylum requests in 1993.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Although in 1993 President Rene and the Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF) continued to dominate the political process, Seychellois exercised their right
 to change their government in the June 1993 referendum on the Constitution and
 the July 1993 national assembly and presidential elections. These were held by
 international and national observers to have been free and fair. While the Govern-
 ment continued to be heavily dominated by a single party, this domination reflected
 the party's considerable popularity, as well as the Government's pervasive influence
 on employment and housing opportunities. Under laws passed under the authority
 of the new Constitution, the "Leader of the Opposition," James Mancham, was made
 a government employee with official status, a salary, financial allowances, and an
 annual gratuity.
 There are no legal restrictions against the participation of women or minority
 groups in politics. The white minority of Seychelles continues to dominate govern-
 mental institutions, but some Creoles (African Seychellois) have risen to senior posi-
 tions of responsibility, particularly in the military. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs
 and Tourism are women, and there are women in other high positions. The Geneva-
 based Inter- Parliamentary Union cited Seychelles as having the world's highest
 percentage of female representation in its Parliament (at 45.8 percent of the total
 delegates).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Vio!ations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices in Seychelles. However, the churches have been strong voices for human
 rights and democratization. They and other organizations critical of the Government
 have not been harassed by the Government for their activities.
 Requests for information from foreign organizations are sent to the Chief Justice
 of the Supreme Court, who acts as an interlocutor between human rights groups
 and the Government. There were no known international requests for investigations
 in 1993.
 
 
 250
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 There is no overt discrimination in housing, employment, education, or other so-
 cial services based on sex or racial, ethnic, national, or religious identification.
 Women.-Women have the same legal, political, economic, and social rights as
 men. There are female government ministers, businesspeople, doctors, and attor-
 neys.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, occurs, but according to medi-
 cal personnel, is not widespread and not tolerated by the Government or the courts.
 Women frequently use a procedure providing for a bond "to keep the peace" of up
 to $200 on someone using or threatening violence. Married women may easily obtain
 exclusion orders against abusive husbands and frequently do. Violence against
 women, whether domestic or otherwise, is considered assault and is subject to crimi-
 nal prosecution. Police have no hesitation in intervening in domestic disputes in
 which violence has occurred or is threatened.
 Children.-Children in Seychelles are protected from labor abuse by law, and are
 required to attend school. Children are also protected from abusive parents by legis-
 lation.
 National IRacial /Ethnic Minorities.-There is a historical educational gap be-
 tween Creoles (Seychellois of African origin) and Seychellois of white and Asian ori-
 gin, which has been a factor in the continuing political and economic domination of
 ychelles by whites and Asians. Despite a significant Creole majority, the Presi-
 dent, the Health Minister, the Foreign Minister, most principal secretaries, and al-
 most the entire merchant and financial class are white and Asian. The Government
 is attempting to close this gap through universal access to public education. Empiri-
 cal evidence suggests that this gap is gradually closing, and that increasing num-
 bers of young Creoles are receiving higher education.
 People with Disabilities.-People with disabilities are not discriminated against ei-
 ther de facto or de jure in housing, jobs, or education. There is no legislation guar-
 anteeing universal access to public buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-As a result of the new Trade Union Industrial Act
 passed by the National Assembly in November 1993, Seychellois workers now have
 the right to form and join unions of their own choosing. However, the Act limits
 unions' ability to organize on a large scale so that they cannot become competitors
 of the government- run National Workers' Union (NWU), formerly the only legal
 union. The Government is a member of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 and has ratified ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association.
 Under the law in place for most of 1993, all workers (except for some temporary
 workers) had to belong to the National Workers Union (NWU), and a percentage
 of their social security contributions financed the NWU. The SPPF still controls the
 NWU's funds and a ppoints its leaders. The NWU sought to coerce Seychelles em-
 ployers to sign closed shop agreements. Furthermore, strikes were illegal unless ap-
 proved in advance by the SPPF Central Committee. The only strike in 1993 was
 a brief action in November by Indian contract workers protesting that their contract
 violated Seychelles' labor laws. It ended when the Government decreed that their
 employer was exempt from these laws and threatened to deport the workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-With only one party-domi-
 nated union confederation permitted, there were serious limitations on workers'
 rights to organize for most of 1993. Following the passage of the Trade Union Indus-
 trial Act, other unions were permitted, but the NWU retained a dominant position
 due to the character of the legislation (see above). One independent union formed
 in late 1993.
 The NMW Constitution calls for union members to be protected "from victimiza-
 tion in the carrying out of legitimate trade union activity" and requires its executive
 board to investigate shop steward dismissals to ensure that the dismissals are not
 based on union-related activities. In the event of a disagreement between the NWU
 and a company over a shop steward's dismissal, the SPPF would make the final de-
 termination.
 Free collective bargaining is not practiced in Seychelles. The Government has the
 right to review and approve all collective bargaining agreements from the public and
 private sectors. There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. The Government
 and state-owned companies, which employ about 70 percent of the labor force, have
 mandatory wage scales for their employees, based on job classification. Most private
 employers run very small establishments, and wages in the private sector are gen-
 erally set by individual agreements between employer and employee; however, in
 
 
 251
 the few larger businesses where collective bargaining is used, wage scales are sub-
 ject to the Government's right of review and approval.
 In practice, private employers often follow public sector wage scales when setting
 salary levels, although they frequently pay more than the Government in order to
 attract qualified workers. The Employment Act of 1985, Seychelles' basic labor law
 vests the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs with authority to establish and
 enforce employment terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have frequently ob-
 tained recourse against their employers through the Ministry. Although amend-
 ments passed in 1990 resulted in a modest simplification and liberalization of the
 basic labor law, they did not significantly modify the Governments' dominant role
 in setting terms and conditions of employment.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited by law and does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 15, and children are required to attend school until the 10th grade or the age of
 17, whichever occurs first. The Government strongly encourages children to fulfill
 a year of National Youth Service (NYS) before entering the work force at the age
 of 18 or the Polytechnic School for Vocational Training, and it discourages public
 or private sector employment of workers under 18 years of age. The Government
 offers voluntary short-term (up to 6 months) work programs for school leavers not
 participating in NYS. Children in these programs receive a training stipend which
 is below the minimum wage. The Government effectively enforces its child labor
 laws through regular inspections by the Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.--Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage
 scale, administratively regulated by the Government, which covers the public and
 parastatal (state-owned) sectors and differentiates among various job classifications.
 Given the free public services that are available, primarily in the areas of health
 and education, a single salary at the low end of the pay scale provides a family with
 a decent, if Spartan, standard of living.
 Many families deal with Seychelles' high cost of living by earning two or more
 incomes. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs enforces minimum wage
 regulations. The official minimum wage is about $120 (600 Seychelles Rupees) a
 month. However, due to a labor shortage, the prevailing wage rates in the private
 sector are considerably higher than the legal mi nimum, and workers have little rea-
 son to accept a lower than minimum wage.
 In recent years there has been a growing trend for the Government to import for-
 eign workers, primarily from India and Asia, to work in the construction and indus-
 trial fishing sector. Although it is difficult to determine the living and working con-
 ditions of these workers, there is strong empirical evidence that Seychelles labor
 laws are routinely flouted by their employers, with government knowledge (see Sec-
 tion 6. a.). These workers are paid lower wages and forced to work longer hours
 than Seychellois.
 The legal maximum workweek varies from 25 to 40 hours, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector. Each full-time worker is entitled to a half-hour break per day and a
 minimum of 21 days of paid annual leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime
 up to 60 additional hours per month. The Government enforces these ceilings,
 though it is possible that occasional abuses occur. As noted above, foreign workers
 do not enjoy the same legal protections.
 The Government issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing these regulations. Inspectors enforce safety standards
 through regular workplace visits, and the Government protects the identity of work-
 ers who complain of hazardous conditions. Occupational injuries are most common
 in the construction and marine and port industries.
