 SEYCHELLES
 President France Albert Rene and his Seychelles People's Progressive Front
 (SPPF) have governed since a 1977 military coup. In the 1990's the SPPF guided
 the return to a multiparty political system, which culminated in July 1993 in the
 countIrys first free and fair presidential and parliamentary elections since 1977.
 President Rene was continued in power, and the SPPF won 27 of the 33 National
 Assembly seats, 21 by direct election and 6 by proportional representation. Despite
 the elections, the President and the SPPF continued to dominate the country
 through a pervasive system of political patronage and control over government jobs,
 contracts, and resources.
 The President has complete control over the security apparatus, which includes
 a national guard force, the army, and the police. There is also an armed para-
 military Police Mobile Unit (PMU). Members of the security forces committed a few
 human rights abuses.
 In recent years, the Government continued unsystematically its program to pri-
 vatize the economy, imposed cuts in domestic spending, reintroduced import licens-
 ing to improve its foreign exchange position, and passed laws with tax cuts and
 abatements to encourage and attract foreign investment. In addition, the Govern-
 ment looked to reduce the high dependence on tourism-approximately 70 percent
 of hard currency earnings--by promoting the development of fishing and light man-
 ufacturing. Despite these efforts, the public and quasi-public sectors continued to
 drive the economy, and the Government, through the Seychelles Marketing Board,
 other state organizations, and the use of banking regulations, continued to dominate
 most aspects of the economy.
 
 
 225
 The human rights situation continued to improve, and the Government generally
 respected the rights of its citizens. However, despite parliamentary formalities, the
 President continued to wield power virtually unchecked. Security forces used exces-
 sive force in a few instances, although police brutality is not widespread. The au-
 thorities investigated complaints of police abuse and punished officers found guilty.
 Violence against women and child abuse remained cause for concern.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings. In March a prisoner was shot to death at Police Bay Pison. The
 army guard who was responsible for the shooting received a 6-year sentence from
 a military court (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture, but there have been instances of exces-
 sive use of force by police. The authorities have investigated and punished offenders
 in the past. In August a woman allegedly was repeatedly beaten on the feet and
 legs at police headquarters. A doctor confirmed that her injuries were consistent
 with this allegation. In another case, an inquiry is underway into a charge that a
 detainee was beaten at a district police station in November.
 Conditions at the two prisons are Spartan. Family members are allowed monthly
 visits, and prisoners have access to reading but not writing materials. However,
 there is no regular system of independent monitoring of prisons. At the Police Bay
 Prison (which closed in late 1995), attorneys were not allowed access to the grounds,
 and requests to visit by foreign diplomats were not honored. In March a prisoner
 was shot to death by a guard at the Police Bay Prison. Civilian judicial authorities
 held one hearing on the shooting, and another hearing is scheduled (see Section
 L.a.). In an instance of alleged medical neglect, a prisoner died at the Long Island
 Prison in 1994 shortly after having arrived at the prison reportedly in extremely
 poor medical condition.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides that persons
 arrested must be brought before a magistrate within 24 hours. This provision is ap-
 plied in practice to the extent possible (with allowances for boat travel from distant
 islands). In October the National Assembly amended this to allow, with a court
 order, 4-days detention without a formal charge. With a judge's approval this period
 can be extended to 7 days. Detainees have access to legal counse, and free counsel
 is provided for the indigent. The law provides for judicial review of the legality of
 detention, and bail is available for most offenses.
 Several persons have brought civil cases against the police for unlawful arrest or
 entry, with limited success.
 There were no cases of forced exile in 1995. Following the 1977 coup, a number
 of persons went into voluntary exile, and others were re eased from prison with the
 proviso that they immediately leave the country. A number of these former exiles
 who returned were able to reacquire their property, but the large majority have not.
 There were some instances in which the Government rejecte valid compensation
 claims for confiscated properties of returning exiles, apparently for political reasons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but there are questions about its independence.
 The judicial system includes magistrates' courts, the Supreme Court, the Con-
 stitutional Court, and the Court of Appeal. Criminal cases are heard by a mag-
 istrates' court or the Supreme Court, depending on the gravity of the offense. A jury
 is used in cases involving murder or treason. Trials are public, and the accused is
 considered innocent until proven guilty. Defendants have the right to counsel, to be
 present at their trial, to confront witnesses, and to appeal. The Government pro-
 vides free counsel to the indigent, although there are only a few well-trained law-
 yers. The Constitutional Court convenes twice a year to consider constitutional is-
 sues only. The Court of Appeal convenes twice a year to consider appeals from the
 Suprme Court and Constitutional Court only.
 Defendants generally have the right to a fair trial. All judges are appointed for
 5 years, and can be re-appointed by the Constituional Appointment Committee. All
 were hired from other Commonwealth countries, and none is Seychellois. Some ob-
 servers criticized expatriate judges for a perceived lack of sensitivity on issues such
 as domestic violence.
 Legal organs of the Government, such as the Attorney General's office and the
 Ombudsman, are reluctant to pursue charges of wrongdoing or abuse of power
 against senior officials.
 
 
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy and freedom from arbitrary searches.
 The law requires a warrant for police searches, and the authorities generally re-
 spected this requirement in practice. The law requires that all wiretaps be justified
 on the grounds of preventing a serious crime and be approved by a judge. There
 are credible reports the government maintains phone taps on some political person-
 alities.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, but it also provides for restrictions on speech "for protecting the rep-
 utation, rights, and freedoms of private lives of persons" and "in the interest of de-
 fense, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health." Both freedom
 of speech and the press are thus constrained by the ease with which civil law suits
 can be filed to penalize journalists for alleged libel. In most instances, citizens speak
 freely, including in Parliament, although the President is rarely criticized.
 The Government has a near monopoly on the media, owning the only television
 and radio stations, the most important means for reaching the public, and the only
 daily newspaper (the Nation). The official media adhere closely to the Government's
 position on policy issues and give the opposition and news adverse to the Govern-
 ment only limited coverage.
 While both of the opposition parties publish an assortment of newsletters and
 magazines, only one full-fledged independent newspaper, the weekly Regar, is cur-
 rently in circulation. Government figures have sue Regar for libel five times in the
 past 2 years. Regar temporarily suspended p ubication for 1 month at the beginning
 of the year when it lost a libel suit brought by a government official, so that its
 staff could devote their efforts to raising funds for legal expenses. In November an
 Appeals Court judge sustantially reduced its fine. A second weekly, The Independ-
 ent, was forced to cease publication because of dwindling circulation and the finan-
 cial effect of losing a libel suit brought by a government official. Independent publi-
 cations are also potentially vulnerable to government pressure now that the only
 printing press has been sold to an SPPF National Assemblyman.
 Academic freedom is limited since, for example, one cannot reach senior positions
 in the academic bureaucracy without demonstrating at least nominal loyalty to the
 SPPF. There are no universities; secondary school teachers are largely apolitical.
 The Government controls access to the Polytechnic, the most prestigious learning
 institution, and public school graduates wishing admission are given preference for
 participating in the National Youth Service (NYS), a year-long program which now
 emphasizes educational instruction, although in the past it has stressed para-
 military training and SPPF ideology.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assocdation.-The Constitution provides for
 these freedoms, and in practice the Government generally permitted peaceful as-
 sembly and association without interruption or interference. The police handled stu-
 dent demonstrations in 1994 with professional restraint.
 In addition to the SPPF, there are two other political parties. In 1995 the Govern-
 ment twice denied permission to the United Opposition Party to hold public assem-
 blies.
 In March government security forces barred Christopher Gill, the only directly
 elected member of the Nationa Assembly from the opposition Democratic Party,
 from entering the hall where the party's convention was taking place (see Section
 3).
 Opposition parties cited several cases in which supporters lost government jobs
 solely bccause of their political beliefs. Political criteria also appear to weigh in gov-
 ernment decisions regarding licenses and loans.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom ofMovement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, and there was no
 known abridgement of domestic or international travel. Although it was not used
 in 1995, the 1991 Passport Act allows the Government to deny passports to any citi-
 zen if the Minister of Defense finds such denial "in the national interest." There
 were no known requests for asylum in 1995 and no refugees in the Seychelles.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercised the right to change their government in the July 1993
 National Assembly and presidential elections, which were judged by international
 
 
 227
 
 and national observers to have been free and fair. However, President Rene and the
 SPPF dominated the electoral process and continued to rule-as they have since
 1977. The elections served to provide a voice to other parties.
 The President's SPPF party has utilized its political resources and those of the
 Government to develop a nationwide organization that extends to the village level.
 The opposition parties have been unable to match the SPPF's organization and pa-
 tronag, in part because of resource limitations.
 The main opposition party, the Democratic Party, is led by Sir James Mancham,
 the countr's first elected president, who was forced into a 15-year exile in 1977.
 Mancham was reelected President of the Democratic Party by acclamation at a con-
 troversial party convention in March. The party's sole directly elected member of the
 National Assembly was barred by government security forces from attending the
 convention, allegedly on Mancham's orders (see Section 2.b.). Critics of Mancham al-
 leged that his ties to the ruling SPPF were too close and that he discouraged his
 own party members from criticizing the Government.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or minority groups
 in politics. Women hold 3 ministerial positions in the 11-person Cabinet and 8 seats
 in the 33-member National Assembly. The white minority of Seychelles continues
 to dominate governmental institutions, but some Creoles (African Seychellois) have
 risen to senior positions of responsibility, particularly in the military. Of the six
 members of the Defence Forces Council, four are Creole.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no private groups devoted exclusively to investigating human rights
 practices. However, both the churches and some nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) have been strong voices for human rights and democratization, and the
 Government has not interfered with their activities. There were no known requests
 by international human rights groups to visit the Seychelles.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution affirms the right to be free from all types of discrimination, but
 does not specifically prohibit discrimination based on these factors. In practice, there
 is no overt discrimination in housing, employment, education, or other social serv-
 ices based on race, sex, ethnic, national, or religious identification.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly wife beating, remains a concern.
 Police seldom intervene in domestic disputes, unless the dispute involves a weapon
 or major assault. The few cases that reach a prosecutor are often dismissed, or if
 a case reaches court, a perpetrator is usually given only a light sentence. There is
 a lack of societal concern about domestic violence, and there are no nongovern-
 mental groups that address this issue.
 This society is largely matriarchal, and women have the same legal, political, eco-
 nomic, and social rights as men. There is no officially sanctioned discrimination in
 education or employment, and women are fairly well represented in the political
 process and in business.
 Children.-Children have legal protection from labor and physical abuse and are
 required to attend school. Free public education is available. In June the Govern-
 ment announced the National Program of Action for Children, which creates an in-
 stitutional framework for aiding children.
 Sexual abuse of young girls, usually in low-income families, is a serious problem.
 While complete statistics are not available, Ministry of Health data and press re-
 ports indicate that there are a significant number of rape cases of girls under the
 age of 15. Very few child-abuse cases are actually prosecuted in court. The strongest
 public advocate for young victims is a semiautonomous agency, the National Council
 or    ldren, not the Government. There is criticism that the police fail to inves-
 tigate charges of child abuse with vigor.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not discriminate against people
 with disabilities in housing, jobs, or education. However, there is no legislation pro-
 viding for access to public buildings, transportation, or government services. The
 Government promised the International Labor Organization (ILO) that it would im-
 plement a law providing for more jobs for disabled workers. However, there were
 no signs by year's end that such a law will be introduced.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There is a historical educational gap be-
 tween Creoles and Seychellois of white or Asian origin, which has been a factor in
 the continuing political and economic domination of Seychelles by whites and
 Asians. Despite a significant Creole majority, the President, the Health Minister,
 the Foreign Minister, most principal secretaries, and almost the entire merchant
 
 
 228
 
 and financial class are white or Asian. The Government is attempting to close this
 gap through universal access to public education, but the formalization and teaching
 of Creole has made it more difficult for Creole students to learn English and French
 at a competitive level. Further, the political domination by whites seems unyielding
 since the elected leadership of the majority party, and that of most of the severl
 opposition parties, is white.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Under the 1993 Industrial Relations Act (IRA),
 which took effect in January 1994, workers have the right to form and join unions
 of their own choosing. Police, military, prison, and fire-fighting personnel may not
 unionize. Under the Act, the former government-controed union, the National
 Workers Union (NWU), lost its monopoly position.
 There are currently four registered unions: two dominated by the SPFF and two
 independents. An attempt to organize an independent union incorporating employ-
 ees from both governmental ministries and government-owned entities was thwart-
 ed by government legal action.
 Unions can freely affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The IRA provides workers
 with the legal right to engage in collective bargaining. However, in practice free col-
 lective bargaining does not normally take place. The Government has the right to
 review and approve all collective bargaining agreements in the public and private
 sectors. There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. In the public sector, which
 employs about 60 percent of the labor force, the Government sets mandatory wage
 scales for employees. Wages in the private sector are generally set by the employer
 in individual agreements with the employee, but in the few larger businesses, wage
 scales are subject to the Government's right of review and approval. Private employ-
 ers historically have paid more than the Government in order to attract qualified
 workers. However, economic problems this year have led to downward pressures on
 wages.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union members.
 Independent unions allege that their members in the public sector have been dis-
 criminated against on the job because of their affiliation with non-SPFF unions.
 The Employment Act of 1989, which remains the basic labor law, authorizes the
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs to establish and enforce employment
 terms, conditions, and benefits. Workers have frequently obtained recourse against
 their employers through the Ministry. However, the 1995 Employment Act, intended
 to help attract foreign investment, appears to have weakened some workers rights.
 There are no export processing zones, but the Government is actively attempting
 to create one.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, and it does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 15 years, and children are encouraged to attend school until the loth grade or
 age 17, whichever occurs frst. The Government strongly encourages children to ful-
 I a year of NYS before entering the work force at age 16 or the Polytechnic School
 for Vocational Training, and it discourages public or private sector employment of
 workers under age 16. The Government sponsors aprenticeships and short-term (up
 to 6 months) work programs for those who leave school and do not participate in
 NYS. Children in these programs receive a training stipend which is below the mini-
 mum wage. The Government enforces child labor laws through inspections by the
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage
 scale, which is administratively regulated by the Government; it covers the public
 and state-owned sectors and differentiates among various job classifications. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs enforces minimum wage regulations. The
 official minimum wage is about $320 (1,600 Seychelles rupees) a month. Trade
 unions say that government entities are paying some workers at less than the legal
 minimum. Even with the free public services that are available, primarily health
 and education, independent labor unions dispute that a single salary at the low end
 of the pay scale provides a family with even a Spartan standard of living.
 Many families deal with the high cost of living by earning two or more incomes,
 although the number of households with two persons employed has reportedly
 dropped to 30 percent. In recent years there has been a growing trend for the Gov-
 ernment to import foreign workers, primarily from India and elsewhere in Asia, to
 work in the construction and industrial fishing sectors. Although it is difficult to de-
 termine the living and working conditions of these workers, there is strong evidence
 that the labor laws are routinely flouted by their employers, with the Government's
 
 
 knowledge. These workers are paid lower wages and forced to work longer hours
 than Seychellois, sometimes with the express consent of the Government.
 The legal maximum workweek varies from 45 to 52 hours, depending on the eco-
 nomic sector, while government employees work shorter hours. Each full-time work-
 er is entitled to a hal-hour break per day and a minimum of 21 days of paid annual
 leave. Workers are permitted to work overtime up to 60 additional hours per month.
 The Government generally enforces these ceilings. As noted above, foreign workers
 do not enjoy the same legal protections.
 The Government issued comprehensive revised occupational health and safety
 regulations in October 1991. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs has for-
 mal responsibility for enforcing these regulations; however the Ministry of Health
 seeks a role in this area. An ILO team which visited in early 1995 found serious
 deficiencies in the management and effectiveness of government monitoring and en-
 forcement efforts. Occupational injuries are most common in the construction, ma-
 rine, and pert industries. A worker who removes himself from a potentially dan-
 gerous situation on the job is considered to have resigned. Safety and health inspec-
 tors rarely visit job sites. In 1994 there were four deaths and 162 on-the-job injuries
 officially reported. In 1995 there were two deaths and 57 on-the-job injuries.
