 SEYCHELLES
 Seychelles is a one-party state ruled by President France
 Albert Rene, who took power in June 1977 in a military coup
 d'etat. The Constitution, adopted in 1979, abolished all
 political opposition to the ruling Socialist party, the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF), and established
 a strong presidency, which appoints ministers, and a People's
 Assembly of 22 elected party members and several appointed
 members.
 The Government has full control of Seychelles' security
 apparatus, which includes about 800 army personnel, a 300-man
 presidential protection unit, a 200-man navy, a 50-man air
 force, and a people's militia of about 2,000. Collectively,
 these units amount to roughly 5 percent of the total
 population. In the past, Seychelles' police force has engaged
 in surveillance against private citizens suspected of
 antigovernment sentiments, and both military and police
 personnel have been responsible for isolated instances of
 police brutality.
 Although private enterprise and private property are
 permitted, the public and quasi-public sectors drive the
 economy. The Government, through the Seychelles Marketing
 Board, other state organizations, and banking regulations,
 controls the importation, licensing, and distribution of
 virtually all goods and services and exercises significant
 control over all phases of the economy. Tourism is the most
 important sector, directly accounting for over 10 percent of
 the gross-domestic product.
 Human rights continued to be circumscribed in 1990; the
 country remains a one-party state where direct opposition to
 government policies is not tolerated. The Constitution does
 not provide for fundamental human rights, but rather includes
 them in a preamble as a goal of the people of Seychelles. The
 Public Security Act, which allows the President to order
 indefinite detention in security cases, serves to intimidate
 real and potential opposition elements. In 1990 the
 Government took a few people in for questioning as a means of
 harassment, and it also exhibited an unwillingness to allow
 exiled opponents to return. The Government and. party did take
 some very modest steps toward increased dialog with citizens,
 primarily on social issues.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no confirmed instances of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution expressly forbids torture. Nonetheless,
 government security forces have occasionally used excessive
 force and abusive practices when apprehending or detaining
 
 
 328
 SEYCHELLES
 suspects, although reports of random beatings by Police Mobile
 Units have subsided.
 In 1990 the most publicized example of mistreatment occurred
 in March when military personnel captured seven escaped
 convicts and beat and kicked them during their transport back
 to the maximum security facility at Police Bay, where they
 were again repeatedly beaten and mistreated. Local church
 officials complained of the mistreatment to government
 authorities, and the beatings reportedly ended soon
 thereafter. Access to Police Bay prison is severely limited,
 and prisoners are not allowed to be visited by family,
 friends, or attorneys. After church leaders had repeatedly
 expressed concern about conditions at Police Bay, in November
 the Government made an exception to its rules forbidding
 visits and allowed local Church officials, Red Cross, and
 media representatives to view the inside of the prison and
 talk briefly with the prisoners, who complained of isolation
 and Spartan living conditions and reported that some inmates
 were handcuffed and tied to poles in the midday sun as
 punishment. Church representatives also inspected one of the
 very small, dimly lit, unfurnished cells where recalcitrant
 prisoners are held in solitary confinement.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Penal Code provides that persons arrested must be brought
 before a magistrate within 48 hours. In nonpolitical cases,
 this provision is applied in practice and the detainee can
 effectively seek judicial review of the legality of detention
 (habeas corpus). Bail is available in most cases, as is free
 legal counsel for indigents.
 Under the authority of the Penal Code, police sometimes hold
 persons for 24 hours for "questioning" regarding alleged
 antigovernment activities. In particular, persons who seek to
 mobilize public opinion against the Government run a serious
 risk of being held for such interrogation. In late 1989. the
 Attorney General determined that the period of initial
 detention could be extended to -48 or even 72 hours, provided
 that an active investigation was being conducted "with
 reasonable dispatch." Defense attorneys have excellent access
 to detainees and to the police and can readily ascertain
 whether there is an active investigation. During 1990, there
 were a few brief detentions of persons possessing
 antigovernment literature.
 There were no confirmed reports in 1990 of persons being
 arrested and detained under the Public Security Act, which was
 passed in December 1981 in the aftermath of an attack by
 mercenaries. The Act allows for indefinite detention in
 security cases and has been used in the past to intimidate
 human rights activists and other critics of the Government.
 In the past, the Government has directly urged opponents to
 emigrate, an option that many have chosen over the years. It
 has also taken other actions to encourage potential opponents
 to leave the country, including dismissals from government
 service and social and economic harassment against businessmen
 and professionals.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system is patterned on English common law (e.g.,
 public trial by jury) but is also influenced by the Napoleonic
 
 
 329
 SEYCHELLES
 code, particularly in civil matters (e.g., torts and
 contracts). The judiciary includes the Supreme (or lower)
 Court, and an Appeals Court. Judges, primarily from African
 and Caribbean countries, are provided under arrangements with
 the Commonwealth of Nations. In ordinary cases, they have
 exhibited considerable independence from the Government.
 -Political and security cases are generally handled outside the
 court system. There are few procedural safeguards in such
 cases.
 The police are responsible for investigating crimes, but the
 Attorney General's office decides whether to prosecute.
 Criminal cases are heard by a magistrate or by the Supreme
 Court, depending on the gravity of the offense. A jury is
 called only in cases of murder or treason. The State bears
 the burden of proving the defendant's guilt, and the defendant
 has the right to be present at his trial and to confront
 witnesses. Trials are public, and the defendant has an
 automatic right to appeal. In addition, indigent defendants
 are provided free legal counsel.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. He has not
 only appointment authority but also broad detention authority
 when public security is involved. Seychelles law requires
 that a member of the armed forces be tried by court-martial
 unless the President decrees otherwise. At the end of 1990,
 there were no known political detainees or prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities have broad powers of search and seizure
 without a warrant, and they have used this authority in the
 past to suppress dissenting opinion. For instance, in 1990,
 the police searched the homes of certain persons who were
 suspected of possessing antigovernment literature and
 occasionally returned for a second search if the first was
 unsuccessful.
 In addition, the Government can legally open domestic and
 international mail, and it is widely believed that it does so
 regularly. It is also widely believed that, in the past, the
 Government assigned citizens to eavesdrop on conversations in
 the workplace and elsewhere to report on possible opposition
 plots. This monitoring activity has apparently decreased in
 recent years, most likely because many opponents are now in
 exile.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the 1979 Constitution,
 freedom of speech is exercised sparingly. There is no
 criticism of the President or the Government in Parliament,
 although specific issues are debated and reported in the media.
 The Government controls the country's principal newspaper and
 all local radio and television broadcasting. Legislation
 provides up to 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who, with
 intent to bring the President into hatred, ridicule, or
 contempt, publishes any defamatory or insulting matter whether
 in writing, print, or by word of mouth, or in any other
 manner." This same legislation authorizes a 2-year sentence
 for anyone who "prints, supplies, distributes, reproduces, or
 
 
 330
 SEYCHELLES
 has in his possession or control" any publication banned by
 the Government for security reasons.
 State-owned radio and television stations do not air programs
 critical of the Government. Occasionally, however, the local
 clergy broadcasts independent views during weekly religious
 programs. The country's two largest religious denominations,
 the Roman Catholic and the Anglican Churches, alternate each
 week broadcasting a live Sunday church service, using free
 radio time supplied by the government-owned radio station.
 Both Churches have taken advantage of this air time to comment
 on social and political issues. Until recently, the
 Government did not interfere with these live broadcasts;
 however, in November, the Ministry of Information banned a
 Seychellois Anglican priest from the airwaves after he
 broadcast a direct attack on the Government and the ruling
 party.
 The two Churches are also supplied with 15 minutes of free air
 time to broadcast pretaped radio segments on alternating
 weeks. These segments, which cover a wide range of topics,
 are regularly submitted to the Government for review prior to
 broadcast. In-general, the Government routinely approves
 these programs for broadcast without editing; however, in
 August the Government refused to allow the Catholic Church to
 run a segment critical of the country's National Youth Service
 (NYS).
 Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to and are uncensored.
 However, the Government has increased its range of available
 controls over broadcasts and telecommunications originating in
 Seychelles through the Broadcasting and Telecommunications Act
 of 1988. This Act authorizes the Government to restrict the
 transmission of messages and to prohibit the broadcast of any
 material which in the Government's opinion is objectionable.
 The Act also allows government officials to enter any premises
 and examine any apparatus in. connection with the provisions of
 the Act.
 The Ministry of Information publishes the country's principal
 newspaper, the Nation. The Nation generally presents the news
 with a progovernment slant and does not publish independent
 viewpoints on political matters. In 1990 the Government
 refused to allow Jean-Francois Ferrari, son of exiled former
 foreign minister Maxime Ferrari, to publish his own newspaper,
 and the police briefly detained him after he handed out an
 open letter of protest to passersby in the capital's main
 square. The Catholic Church publishes a lively monthly paper,
 Echo des Iles, which often runs editorials and letters
 criticizing the Government. Although the paper has not been
 subject to direct censorship, the President threatened to sue
 the paper for libel in November, after it ran an anonymous
 letter suggesting that the President's family and government
 ministers were profiting from their government positions. In
 general, international publications are imported and sold
 without hindrance.
 The Government has sought to prevent the importation of
 pamphlets printed by its opposition abroad. Government
 opponents living abroad have frequently used facsimile
 transmissions to distribute antigovernment literature. In
 early 1990, the police ordered the local cable and wireless
 company to send messages to all fax subscribers warning them
 that transmission of "seditious, subversive, abusive or
 obscene" material could result in criminal prosecution and
 
 
 331
 SEYCHELLES
 disconnection of their fax machine. In addition, on a few
 occasions the police briefly detained and questioned persons
 suspected of possessing copies of the Black Tortoise, an
 intermittently produced underground paper containing
 scandalous allegations about high government officials.
 There are no universities in Seychelles, and higher education
 is generally limited to practical training and vocational
 school. The local faculty is largely apolitical -and,
 consequently academic freedom has not been an issue.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While there were no incidents in 1990, the Government has in
 the past been quick to move against unauthorized
 demonstrations and has made arrests under an old British
 colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without a
 government permit. Opposition political parties are not
 allowed. All associations, clubs, and other organizations
 require government permission to organize, which is usually
 granted for nonpolitical groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no religious persecution in Seychelles, and church
 services are widely attended. The Roman Catholic, Anglican,
 and other Christian denominations worship freely, and Muslims
 and Hindus are unrestricted in their religious practices. In
 general, the Government routinely approves local church
 requests to bring in foreign missionaries.
 There is a clear separation between church and state, and
 religious instruction in public schools has been limited.
 Responding to religious institutions' complaints, the
 Government now permits children (ages 14 to 17) in the
 National Youth Service to attend church by allowing services
 to be held at their camps.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In general, there are no restrictions on internal movement or
 international travel or emigration. However, Seychellois
 traveling abroad for study at government expense are required
 to sign a bond that enables the Government to recoup the cost
 of their education if they fail to return. Persons who are so
 "bonded" must obtain government permission to travel abroad
 following their return.
 Although citizens who have left the country for nonpolitical
 reasons are generally guaranteed the right to return to
 Seychelles, the Government has denied passports to certain
 members of the exiled opposition community and has harassed
 others who have been allowed to return for brief visits. For
 example, in June Gabriel Hoareau, a prominent member of the
 overseas exile community and leader of the Seychelles Crusade
 for Multiparty Democracy, was permitted to return to
 Seychelles briefly to attend a family funeral; however,
 throughout his visit he was followed by police and, upon his
 departure, he was heckled by a group of women from the
 people's militia, apparently at government instigation.
 In addition, the Government refused to renew the expired
 passport of Kathleen Pilay, a Seychellois who had gone into
 exile in London after police arrested her for participating in
 
 
 SEYCHELLES
 an antigovernment demonstration. In August she attempted to
 return to Seychelles without a valid passport and was refused
 entry by immigration authorities at the airport. In October a
 Supreme Court judge upheld Ms. Pilay's challenge of this
 action and ordered the immigration authorities to reconsider
 her passport application. The Government, however, obtained
 an indefinite stay of the order and introduced a bill allowing
 immigration authorities to refuse passport applications when
 refusal is in the "national interest." It is widely assumed
 that former President James Mancham and certain members of his
 former government would also be denied the right to return to
 Seychelles.
 Seychelles has acceded to the 1951 United Nations Convention
 on the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. In 1990
 there was one known instance in which the Government refused
 to process an asylum request, that of a Chinese couple
 residing in Seychelles who feared that they would be forcibly
 returned to China to terminate the wife's pregnancy. The
 couple ultimately obtained protection from the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees and were resettled in the
 United States.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since 1979, when the current Constitution came into effect,
 there has been only one legal political party, the Seychelles
 Peoples Progressive Front (SPPF). Citizens cannot legally and
 peacefully change this one-party system, and therefore cannot
 freely change their government. The Constitution provides
 that the SPPF will nominate only one candidate for President
 of the Republic; the nominee, who must be a party member, runs
 unopposed and is elected by a yea or nay vote of the
 electorate every 5 years. The People's Assembly, which is
 largely subordinate to the President and the party, is elected
 by universal suffrage every 4 years, unless dissolved prior to
 that time. In the 1987 Assembly elections more than one
 candidate vied for some seats, but all candidates were
 members of the SPPF. President Rene was the only candidate in
 the June 1989 presidential election, receiving over 96 percent
 of the vote for a third 5-year term. There are no
 restrictions in law or practice against the participation of
 women or minority groups in politics.
 President France Albert Rene, both as President of the country
 as well as the Secretary General of the party, wields
 far-reaching power and influence. During the last SPPF
 Congress in December 1987, the President was again unopposed
 and was elected unanimously to a fourth 3-year term as
 Secretary General of the party. Opponents of the party can
 neither organize nor express public opposition. Within the
 party organization, regional offices hold meetings for
 citizens to discuss policies and problems.
 The Government uses various means to stifle political
 opposition. For example, since 1987 the Government has had a
 program of acquiring real estate owned by Seychellois abroad
 who are known to oppose the Government. Compensation,
 supposedly at market value, is usually in the form of bonds
 and paid to the owners over a period of 20 years. Under the
 Land Acquisition Act of 1977, it is impossible to challenge
 the acquisition itself--only the amount of compensation may be
 appealed in court. Acquisitions continued at a high rate
 during 1989 and into 1990. However, by the end of 1990,
 
 
 333
 SEYCHELLES
 expropriation procedures had become less arbitrary. The
 Government now attempts to contact nonresident property owners
 before initiating acquisition, and it has begun to pay
 compensation that is closer to fair market value.
 In 1990 the Government made tentative steps toward an
 increased dialog with its citizens. These included a series
 of seminars on social issues (health, housing, abortion, and
 the National Youth Service), in which representatives of
 various sectors of the society were invited to discuss
 problems and propose possible revisions to current government
 programs. The Government also established a Church-State
 Coordination Committee made up of the Minister of
 Administration and Manpower and the heads of the Roman
 Catholic and Anglican Churches to foster cooperation on
 social, cultural, and moral issues. *By year's end, few
 significant changes had resulted from these initiatives.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no private human rights groups in Seychelles.
 Requests for information from foreign organizations are sent
 to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, who acts as an
 interlocutor between human rights groups, such as Amnesty
 International, and the Government. There were no known
 requests for investigations in 1990.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education,
 or other social services based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high
 status in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the
 same legal, political, economic, and social rights as men.
 Violence against women, particularly wife beating, does occur
 in Seychelles, but, according to medical personnel, it is not
 widespread and is not tolerated by the Government or the
 courts. Under Section 31 of Seychelles' Criminal Procedure
 Code, a private civil complaint may be brought before a
 magistrate, free of charge, to impose a bond "to keep the
 peace" of up to appgoximately $200 against someone using or
 threatening violence against another. This provision in the
 Code is used by women against their harassers, and it is quite
 effective. Married women may easily obtain exclusion orders
 against abusive husbands and frequently do. Violence against
 women, whether domestic or otherwise, is considered assault
 and is subject to criminal prosecution. Police have no
 hesitation in intervening in domestic disputes in which
 violence has occurred or is threatened.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join unions of their
 own choosing, nor are they independent of the Government or
 the ruling party. All workers (except for some temporary
 workers) belong to the National Workers Union (NWU) by virtue
 of the fact that a percentage of their social security
 contributions is given to the NWU. The SPPF controls the
 NWU's funds and appoints its leaders. Workers and their
 
 
 334
 SEYCHELLES
 leaders have no legal right to strike or initiate any
 industrial action except with the permission of the SPPF
 Central Committee. There were no strikes in 1990.
 Workers are permitted to elect their shop stewards (also
 called Works Committee Members), but all candidates are
 screened by the NWU Executive Secretariat, which has the power
 to dismiss an elected shop steward.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) noted again in 1990, as in previous years,
 that the system of trade union monopoly under the direction of
 a political party is contrary to ILO Convention 87 on freedom
 of association, which Seychelles has ratified. The NWU's only
 international affiliation is with the Organization of African
 Trade Union Unity, but it maintains close relations with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 With only one, party-dominated union confederation permitted,
 there are serious limitations on the workers' right to
 organize. The NWU constitution calls for union members to be
 protected "from victimization in the carrying out of
 legitimate trade union activity" and requires its executive
 board to investigate shop steward dismissals so as to verify
 that the dismissal is not based on union-related activities.
 In the event of a disagreement between the NWU and a company
 over a shop steward's dismissal, the party would make the
 final determination.
 Free collective bargaining is not practiced in Seychelles.
 The Government has the right to review and approve all
 collective agreements from the private and public sectors.
 There is little flexibility in the setting of wages. The
 Government and state-owned corporations, which employ about
 two-thirds of the labor force, have mandatory wage scales for
 their employees, based on job classification. Wages in the
 far smaller private sector are generally set by individual
 agreements between employer and employee, subject to the
 statutory minimum wage and the Government's right of review
 and approval in collective bargaining cases.
 In practice, private employers often refer to public sector
 wage scales when setting salary levels, although they
 frequently pay somewhat more than the Government in order to
 attract qualified workers. The Employment Act of 1985,
 Seychelles' basic labor law, vests the Ministry of Employment
 and Social Affairs with authority to establish and enforce
 employment terms, conditions, and benefits. Although
 amendments passed in September 1990 resulted in a mqdest
 simplification and liberalization of the basic labor law, the
 amendments did not significantly modify the Government's
 dominant role in setting terms and conditions of employment.
 There are no export processing zones in Seychelles.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsorylabor is prohibited by law and does not
 exist in practice.
 
 
 335
 SEYCHELLES
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 15, and children are
 required to attend school until that age. The Government
 encourages children to attend a year of National Youth Service
 (NYS) before entering the work force at the age of 18 or going
 to the polytechnic for vocational training, and it discourages
 public or private sector employment of workers under 18 years
 of age. The Government offers voluntary short-term (up to 6
 months) work employment programs for school leavers not
 participating in the NYS. Children in these programs receive
 a training salary which is below the minimum wage. The
 Government effectively enforces its child labor laws through
 regular inspections by the Ministry of Employment and Social
 Affairs (see below).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Seychelles has a complicated minimum wage scale which depends
 upon job classifications. .The legislated minimum wages range
 from over $230 per month for an unskilled laborer to over
 $1,200 per month for a high-level civil servant. Given the
 free public services that are available, primarily in the
 areas of health and education, a single salary at the low end
 of the pay scale does provide a family with a decent, if
 Spartan, standard of living. Many families deal with
 Seychelles' high cost of living by. earning two or more
 incomes. The Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs has
 responsibility for enforcing minimum wage regulations. Due to
 a labor shortage, the de facto minimum wage is considerably
 higher than what is legally required, and there would be
 little reason for a worker to accept less than the minimum
 wage.
 The maximum workweek is 48 hours for hotel workers and 45
 hours for other industries (or 9 hours per day). Included in
 this is a mandatory half-hour break per day. All full-time
 workers are legally entitled to a minimum of 21 days of paid
 annual leave per year. Workers are permitted to work overtime
 up to 45 additional hours per month. The Government enforces
 these ceilings, though it is possible that some occasional
 abuses do occur.
 The 1978 Occupational Safety and Health Decree vests the
 Ministry of Employment and Social Affairs with authority to
 enforce the Government's rigorous occupational safety and
 health standards. In March 1989, the Decree was amended to
 cover government workplaces, and in August 1990 an 8-day
 workshop was held to raise worker safety awareness and to
 consider further expansion of safety regulations. Inspectors
 rigorously enforce safety standards through regular workplace
 visits, and the Government protects the identity of workers
 who complain of hazardous conditions. Historically, there
 have been relatively few work-related accidents in Seychelles
 each year, and last year's safety legislation and "current
 regulatory revisions are intended to build on and improve that
 record.
 
 
 336
