 SEYCHELLES
 The Government of Seychelles, led by President France Albert
 Rene, took power in June 1977 in a military coup d'etat and
 forced into exile a number of former leaders, including
 ex-Prime Minister James Mancham. In 1979 a new Constitution
 was promulgated which formally abolished all political
 opposition to the ruling Socialist party, the Seychelles
 People's Progressive Front (SPPF). This Constitution provides
 for a strong presidential executive, who appoints ministers
 and a People's Assembly of 23 elected members and several
 appointed members. The 1987 elections in the Assembly were
 competitive (more than one candidate vied for some seats), but
 all candidates were members of the SPPF.
 The Sdychelles has a defense force of about 800 army
 personnel, a 300-man presidential protection unit, a 100-man
 navy, and a 15-man air force, as well as a uniformed police
 force of 500 and a people's militia of about 2,000. Together
 these units comprise over 4.3 percent of the total population.
 Tanzanian troops, now no longer on the islands, helped put .
 down a mutiny in the armed forces in 1982. The defense force
 repulsed a November 1981 attack by mercenaries financed by
 Seychellois in exile.
 The Seychelles economy relies predominantly on tourism for
 foreign exchange. The tourism industry, which fell
 dramatically in the early 1980's, has since revived.
 Approximately 73,000 tourists visited Seychelles during 1987,
 an increase of 4.3 percent over 1986. Seychelles has actively
 sought to diversify the economy by granting fishing licenses
 to French, Soviet, Spanish, Korean, and Japanese trawlers and
 by expanding the fishing port in Victoria with foreign donor
 assistance.
 The human rights situation was little changed during 1987.
 The Constitution does not provide for fundamental human
 rights, but, rather includes them in a preamble as the goal of
 the people of Seychelles. In 1987 the President continued to
 use the Public Security Act, which allows for indefinite
 detention in security cases, thus reaffirming his determination
 to put down opposition elements. The Government also continued
 to use exile as a means of suppressing dissent and accelerated
 a program of acquiring real property belonging to Seychellois
 residing overseas and known to be opposed to the Government.
 There were no reported instances of torture in 1987 and fewer
 political arrests and detentions than in 1986. The President
 reaffirmed his commitment to freedom of religion,
 noninterference in church affairs, and the-right of religious
 groups to speak out, including through their influential media
 outlets.-
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no confirmed instances of killing for political
 motives. Members of the overseas opposition allege, however,
 that Gerard Hoareau, leader of the London-based Seychelles
 National Movement, who was killed in November 1985, was
 assassinated by government agents and that Marjorie Baker, a
 Seychellois radio broadcaster stabbed to death in September
 1986, was killed to prevent her from revealing a story of
 political intrigue.
 
 
 252
 SEYCHELLES
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution explicitly forbids torture. While reports of
 torture are infrequent, there were two instances in 1986 which
 were substantiated by credible evidence. Two prisoners, who
 had been detained for political reasons, were severely beaten;
 one had been burned with cigarettes and had his beard and hair
 set on fire, while the other had been tortured with a bayonet.
 Generally, prisoners are well fed and supervised by
 professional prison wardens. Prisoners are normally
 incarcerated on isolated islands, although family visits are
 routinely arranged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 During 1987 several persons were arrested and detained on
 presidential order under the Preservation of Public Security
 Act, which allows for indefinite detention without trial in
 security cases. There is a Review Tribunal which is supposed
 to monitor prisoner treatment, but the Tribunal has not been
 convened since the late 1970's. The Public Security Act was
 introduced in December 1981, following an attack by
 mercenaries, and has been used on several occasions in recent
 years under questionable circumstances, thereby tarnishing-the
 Government's reputation. For example, six persons were
 arrested in June 1986 under this Act, including Phillippe
 Boulle, the leading human rights activist in the country. The
 six were subsequently released in October 1986 without any
 formal charges being brought against them. In addition to
 those detained under the Act, police sometimes detain persons
 for 24 hours for "questioning" regarding alleged antigovernment
 activities. In particular, persons who seek to mobilize public
 opinion against the Government run a serious risk of being held
 for "questioning."
 The 1987 detentions under the Public Safety Act typically
 lasted only a few days. At the end of 1987, there were no
 known political detainees or prisoners, the last detainee
 under the Act having been released in September.
 The Government has taken various other actions against
 potential opponents. Some government workers have been fired
 without recourse to appeal or review. Other persons have
 suffered social and economic harassment and received direct or
 anonymous threats which they interpreted as signals to leave
 the country. Frequently, the Government has directly urged
 opponents to emigrate, an option that many have chosen over
 the years (see l.f. below).
 There is a prohibition against the use of forced or compulsory
 labor, and such practices have not been employed. There is,
 however, the National Youth Service for all persons age 14 to
 16, which has elements of military training and discipline, as
 well as academic study.
 
 
 253
 SEYCHELLES
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Defendants in nonpolitical (both civil and criminal) cases
 have access .to .counsel and have enjoyed speedy and fair
 trials., The right to trial is patterned in large measure on
 English common law, although there is also a heavy influence
 of Napoleonic code law. Judges are provided under arrangements
 with the British Commonwealth and, except for security cases,
 have exhibited considerable independence from both the
 executive and legislative branches. The Chief Justice, who is
 appointed by the President, has stressed on several occasions
 that it is the judiciary's responsibility to impose sentences
 as required by law and that it should reflect the will of the
 legislature.
 The President exercises quasi-judicial powers. 'He has not
 only appointment, authority but also has- broad detention
 authority where public security is involved. Seychelles' law
 requires that a member of the armed forces be tried by court
 martial unless the President decrees otherwise. Theoretically,
 the Constitution precludes the President from dismissing
 judges. However, the President dismissed the previous Chi'ef
 Justice, -an-action which has so far not been subjected to
 legal review.
 Amnesty International adopted Royce.Dias, a known opponent of
 the Government, as a "prisoner of conscience," reflecting
 suspicions that thecriminal charges against him appeared to
 have been fabricated for political reasons. Dias" 7-year
 sentence for possession-of drugs'was later reduced by the
 appeals court to 5 years. He remained-incarcerated in 1987.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with;Privacy, Famil- J,.Home, or
 Correspondence
 The authorities haye broad-powers of search and seizure
 withouta warrant. The Seychelles Marketing Board Act, passed
 in 1984, al-loWed porice to enter any premises,.private or
 public, -and to. seize any -documents which they believe may be
 in violation of the-Act. However, in August 1987 "the
 Government-repealed a 15-month-old law which had required all
 locally grown-produce to,be sold.through the Marketing Board,
 thereby'eliminating the justifioation for searches- relating to
 illegal sale of produce. Legislation exists which allows the
 Government to open mail, domestic as well as international,
 and it is"widely believed that the Government does so. Many
 persons complain that applications for-immigration to other
 countries mailed from overseas are confiscated. There was at
 least one confirmed instance of a person who'openly complained
 about'the lack of civil liberties in Seychelles having his
 home ransacked.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although theoretically protected under the 1979 Constitution,
 freedom of speech is exercised sparingly. The Government
 controls the major newspaper in the country, as well'as all
 radio and television broadcasting. Legislation provides up to
 3 years' imprisonment for anyone "who with intent to bring the
 President-into hatred, ridicule, or contempt, publishes any
 defamatory or -insulting matter whether in writing, print, or by
 word of mouth, -or in any other manner." This same legislation
 authorizes a 2-year sentence for anyone who "prints, supplies,
 
 
 254
 SEYCHELLES
 distributes, reproduces, or has in his possession or control"
 any publication banned by the Government for security
 reasons. The Government has sought to prevent the importation
 of pamphlets printed by its opposition abroad. There were no
 known arrests for distribution or importation of "seditious
 literature" in 1987.
 The President has promised not to interfere with the right of
 religious groups to speak out freely. The Catholic Church
 publishes a lively paper, Echo Des Isles, which is not subject
 to government control or censorship. This paper continues to
 publish some articles which obliquely criticize the Government.
 The two largest religious denominations in the country, the
 Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches, are each provided 2
 hours of free, uncensored broadcasting a month. Both Churches
 have taken advantage of the monthly broadcast to comment on
 social and political issues. Seychelles has for the past 17
 years granted a license for a Protestant radio station (FEBA)
 to broadcast religious programs throughout Asia and Africa.
 FEBA is planning to expand its facilities in Seychelles. The
 BBC has commenced building a relay facility on the main island
 of Mahe. Foreign broadcasts are widely listened to and are
 uncensored. Foreign publications have been imported and sold
 without hindrance.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has been-quick to move against unauthorized
 demonstrations and has made arrests under an old British
 colonial law which prohibits unlawful assembly without a
 government permit. All associations, clubs, and other
 organizations require government permission to organize, which
 is usually granted for nonpolitical groups.
 There is one legal union, the National Workers' Union (NWU),
 which is under direct control of the ruling party and is
 government subsidized. It does not function as a free trade
 union, although it serves in an advisory role for workers and
 seeks better working conditions for its members. The NWU lost
 a seat on the International Labor Organization governing board
 in 1981 because of its failure to attend a meeting in Geneva.
 Changes at the 1985 party conference further restricted the
 election of labor union officials who, in the future, will be
 appointed by the Government. A new labor law, enacted in 1985
 and effective beginning in 1986, set out guidelines for
 empioyee/employer relations. There have been no strikes in
 Seychelles since 1977. There is no collective bargaining.
 Most workers are government employees, whose wages are set by
 governmental guidelines through parastatal companies. The
 guidelines set upper limits on wages and preclude wage
 incentives. Nonetheless, industrial relations are harmonious.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There has been no official religious persecution in the
 Seychelles, and church services are widely attended. The
 Roman Catholic and Anglican churches have flourished, and
 Muslims and Hindus are unrestricted in their religious
 practices. There is a clear separation between church and
 state. Religious instruction in schools has been limited.
 The Government has addressed religious institutions'
 complaints that artificial impediments have made it difficult,
 if not impossible, for children (,ages 14-17) in the National
 Youth Service (NYS) to attend church by allowing services to
 be held at the NYS camps. As recently as 1984, the President
 
 
 255
 SEYCHELLES'
 publicly reiterated his support for religion and said there
 would be no government interference in the right of people to
 worship as they choose.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Passports may
 be acquired by virtually any citizen, although Seychellois ,
 traveling abroad for study.at government expense are required
 to sign a bond which enables the Government to recoup the cost
 of their education should they fail to return. Such persons
 who are "bonded" must have government permission to travel
 abroad following their return. There are no known cases in
 which 'passports are currently being withheld. There are no
 restrictions on voluntary repatriation for those willing to
 accept the present one-party political system.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since 1979 there has been only one legal political party, the
 Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF). All political
 (and much social) activity is channeled through this
 institution. -Citizens,cannot change the one-party system, and
 therefore cannot change the party in power. President Rene,
 both as President of the country as well as the Secretary
 General of the party,* wields much power and influence. During
 the SPPF Congress held December 10-12, 1987, the President
 once more was unopposed and was elected unanimously to a
 fourth 3-year term as Secretary General of the party.
 Opponents of the party can neither organize nor express public
 opposition. The party has 23 regional offices called
 "branches" which are responsible for organizing and supervising
 discussion about current government policies. These branches
 are encouraged to report public opinion in their regions.
 Such discussions do not often result in policy changes.
 The Government has used various means to stifle political
 opposition. In June 1983, the Government embarked on a
 campaign to nationalize 6rivate land, ostensibly to claim
 unused agricultural land. On March 13, 1987, the Government
 implemented a vigorous program of acquiring many parcels of
 Seychelles real estate owned by Seychellois abroad known to
 oppose the Government. The acquisitions are made under the
 Land Acquisition Act of 1977. Although the Government has
 stated that compensation will be paid, relatively few persons
 have been compensated, and it is anticipated that any
 compensation will generally be in the form of long-term
 government bonds at very low interest rates. Negotiations
 with previous owners were continuing at the end of 1987.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Requests for information are sent to the Chief Justice of the
 Supreme Court, who acts as an interlocutor between human
 rights groups, such as Amnesty International, and the
 Seychelles Government. There have been complaints that
 correspondence relating to the Amnesty International case of
 Royce Dias has been interfered with, but to date it has not
 been possible to confirm the validity of those complaints. In
 other cases, however, inquiries have led to the release of
 some detainees.
 
 
 256
 SEYCHELLES
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no discrimination in housing, employment, education,
 or other social services based on sex or on racial, ethnic,
 national, or religious identification. Women enjoy high
 status in this essentially matriarchal society. They have the
 same legal, political, economic, and social rights as men.
 One woman was recently elevated to the rank of minister. Two
 women are serving as Central Committee members of the party.
 Many senior officials, up to and including the rank of state
 secretary, are women.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Seychelles, located in the Indian Ocean about 1,000 miles
 east of Kenya, has a population of only 66,000 and a land
 surface of 171 square miles. The Government dominates the
 labor scene in the small economy. Labor laws were
 consolidated in the Employment Act of 1985, which went into
 force in 1986 and provides for a minimum working age of 14 and
 a minimum wage of $165 per month. According to officials of
 the National Workers Union, occupational safety and health
 conditions are one element monitored by the union's inspection
 program. Labor laws are enforced. The Government has used
 these laws to keep people on the job, thus holding down an
 already high unemployment rate. There are no child labor laws
 beyond the setting of the minimum age noted above. The
 minimum wage, high by African standards, is not adequate in a
 severely overpriced economy.
 
 
 257
