 SYRIA
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime which does not
 hesitate to use force against its citizens when it feels it is
 threatened. President Hafez al-Asad wields almost absolute
 authority. Key decisions regarding foreign policy, national
 security, and the economy are made by him and his principal
 advisers. These are often ratified by the party leadership or
 the Parliament. The Parliament is elected every 4 years, but
 has no independent authority. All three branches of
 government are guided by the views of the Ba'ath party, whose
 primacy in the State is assured by the Constitution.
 Independent, nonsanctioned political opposition is forcibly
 repressed. Except for a hiatus in 1973-74, Syria has been
 under.  state of emergency since 1963. The Government has
 justified martial law by the state of war with Israel and
 continuing threats posed by terrorist groups (Islamic
 fundamentalist, Iraqi, and Lebanese). From the late 1970's
 until its brutal suppression in 1982, the Muslim Brotherhood
 represented the greatest internal challenge to the regime.
 Since then, public manifestations of antiregime activity have
 been very limited.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. The several main branches of the security services
 operate-independently of each other and outside the normal
 legal system; each has been responsible for severe human
 rights violations.
 Syria has a mixed economy, with public,-private, and joint
 sectors. Under a state Socialist ideology, it nationalized
 most major enterprises and espoused economic policies designed
 to correct previous regional and class disparities. A small
 private sector is continuing to expand. Most agricultural
 land is privately owned, and the regime has begun to promote
 the private sector to spur investment. Nonetheless, the
 economy remains stagnant, and real growth has been minimal,
 with 1989 gross domestic product roughly equivalent to that in
 1985.
 Human rights remained tightly restricted in virtually all
 categories, and there was no significant improvement in 1990.
 The Government did continue to respond positively to specific
 requests from the U.S. Government about the status of Syrian
 Jews. Nonetheless, major human rights abuses--including
 torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and denial of freedom
 of speech, press, association and the right of citizens to
 change their government--continued to characterize the
 regime's record in 1990.
 Respect for Human Rights
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 . Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of executions for political beliefs in
 1990. Shortly after the Syrian-led assault on Lebanese
 Christian rebel General Michel Aoun on October 13, some
 sources claimed that Syrian troops executed a number of
 officers loyal to General Aoun as well as some civilians.
 Lebanese government sources claimed that pro-Aoun troops
 opened fire on Syrians who believed the rebel forces had
 
 
 1647
 SYRIA
 surrendered, resulting in high loss of life. None of these
 conflicting claims has been confirmed or substantiated.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been credible reports in the past that some Syrians
 arrested for security reasons have disappeared. None of these
 cases are known to have been investigated or resolved by the
 Government. There were no new reports of disappearances in
 1990.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the penal code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe penalties for it, there continue to be numerous
 credible reports of torture, primarily during arrest and
 interrogation in political or security-related cases. In its
 1990 report, covering the year 1989, Amnesty International
 (AI), noting that routine torture and ill-treatment of
 prisoners continued to be widely reported, cited cases in
 which prisoners were reportedly beaten-resulting in some
 cases in serious injury--and subjected to electric shock and
 other brutal methods of torture. AI accused Syrian
 authorities of denying medical treatment to prisoners whb
 developed serious or life-threatening medical problems brought
 on by torture or prison conditions. Middle East Watch, in a
 1990 report, termed as appalling the conditions in Syrian
 prisons, especially for political prisoners. Conditions in
 security prisons are markedly worse than in civilian prisons.
 Security forces in the past have arrested family members of a
 fugitive and detained or tortured them until the fugitive
 surrendered to authorities. There were no reports that this
 occurred in 1990, but there was also no evidence of a
 government decision to end such practices. No international
 groups are allowed access to security detention facilities.
 Families are usually not allowed to visit security prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 While the civil law code generally provides for due process,
 it is almost totally lacking in provisions covering security
 or political offenses. Under the- state of emergency law,
 normal safeguards may be suspended, especially in security and
 political cases, and a person may be arrested secretly, with
 no legal restraint; held indefinitely without charge or trial;
 and denied the right to a-judicial determination of the basis
 for pretrial detention. The accused has no redress for false
 arrest and cannot be contacted by family or friends, who most
 often do not know where the accused is being held. Many
 "disappeared' persons are believed to be alive and held by the
 security forces. Frequentl-, the detained individual is
 released without ever being charged. There are no reliable
 estimates of the number of persons detained without trial. Al
 claims that in 1989 Syrian forces detained at least 122
 persons without charge in Syria and Syrian-occupied Lebanon,
 while releasing more than 320 such detainees, many of whom had
 been held without trial for over 5 years.
 Exile has been used in the past, but there were no known
 instances in 1990.
 
 
 1648
 
 SYRIA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Syrian court system comprises separate civil courts; penal
 or criminal courts, whose jurisdiction includes economic
 crimes; and religious, military, security, and constitutional
 courts, as well as a Higher Court.
 Civil and criminal courts are part of the Ministry of
 Justice. The defendant in a criminal case is detained
 provisionally upon the accusation of the Public Prosecutor,
 then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The judge may
 either dismiss the charges against the defendant on the basis
 of insufficient evidence or refer the case to a criminal
 court, Defendants are entitled to legal representation of
 their choice; if they cannot afford a lawyer, one will be
 appointed by the court. Civil-and criminal courts impose no
 restrictions on lawyers in representing their clients and
 allow the right of appeal. Criminal courts also provide for a
 bond guarantee of a usually moderate sum. In noncontroversial
 cases, courts are usually free of governmental coercion,
 although the Government can bring pressure to bear if it
 wishes to do so. Defendants in criminal cases are presumed
 innocent until proven guilty. Defendants are allowed to
 present evidence and confront their accusers. Trials are
 public except for cases involving juveniles and crimes such as
 rape. Cases are tried before a judge; there is no jury
 system. The slow and cumbersome legal system can leave
 suspects languishing in prisonfor months.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the State Security Court. Such persons
 have no say in the selection of a lawyer, who is chosen by the
 court. All court sessions are closed, and there are no
 official channels for obtaining information on the trial or
 sentencing, although relatives with influence in the
 Government ultimately may succeed in obtaining information and
 even effecting the release of the accused.
 There is also a Higher Court, under the authority of the Prime
 Minister, which reviews issues related to the legality of
 government contracts and other government-private sector
 issues.
 The Government does not release information on the number of
 persons detained for political or security offenses, but with
 detentions dating back to at least 1970, unconfirmed reports
 indicate that up to 1,200 citizens associated with the Muslim
 Brotherhood or the League of Communist Action may have been
 arrested. Some of these persons were released in the
 mid-1980's. In its 1990 Report, AI said that "thousands" of
 political prisoners continued to be detained in 1989. There
 were reports of at least one arrest in connection with
 antiregime graffiti in 1990. The Government contends that it
 holds no political prisoners and that persons are detained not
 because of their political beliefs but because of actions in
 contravention of the state of emergency.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the legal system provides for safeguards, including
 the requirement of an arrest or search warrant before police
 are allowed to enter private homes, regulations under the
 state of emergency suspend these protections in
 security-related cases. Domestic intelligence organizations
 
 
 1649
 SYRIA
 maintain a network of guards to protect officials and
 important buildings, as well as to monitor the activity of
 people living in those neighborhoods. The presence of police
 and security officials is pervasive, especially in Damascus,
 although less pronounced in the provinces. It is widely
 believed that some telephone conversations are recorded. The
 government-run postal system selectively censors the mail,
 including foreign publications.
 Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere by government
 authorities, and no warrant for search or .arrest is required
 at them. Security forces are mostly.concerned with suspected
 subversives but also search for smuggled goods. There were
 few reports of checkpoints having been set up.during 1990,
 except at the border with Lebanon.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the President is'not permitted, and
 criticism of the Government and the Ba'ath party is
 effectively discouraged. One notable exception in 1990 was
 the successful criticism by several prominent Syrian lawyers
 of government interference in court proceedings. When the
 Justice Minister ordered the arrest of some of the lawyers,
 senior Syrian officials overruled the Minister and restricted
 his authority. The criticisms were given wide publicity in
 the official press.
 The Government or the Ba'ath party wholly owns and operates
 all broadcast media and publishing houses and strictly
 controls the dissemination of all information. Censorship of
 foreign and domestic news is exercised through offices in the
 Ministries of Information and of Culture and National
 Guidance. Any subject deemed sensitive to government
 interests will not .appear in the press or in daily
 broadcasts. In 1990 proscribed subjects included the Arab
 League summit in Baghdad, certain statements attributed to the
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and its various
 factions, and some civil unrest in the Soviet Union and
 Eastern Europe.
 Since the beginning of the Persian Gulf crisis, there has been
 some jamming of pro-Iraqi Jordanian television programs,
 which, without jamming, can be easily received in Damascus and
 most of southern Syria. However, most radio and television
 broadcasts from neighboring countries, including Israel and
 Iraq, are not jammed, and reports not carried in Syrian media
 are generally well known. Newspapers.provide no medium for
 political opposition. Criticism of government policies or
 their operations is usually limited to economic issues, minor
 administrative failings, and domestic corruption, and even
 this criticism is usually orchestrated from above. Officials
 above the middle rank are rarely criticized.
 Imported printed material and films are subject to
 censorship. Articles critical of Syria or Syria's role in
 Lebanon are occasionally deleted from foreign magazines and
 newspapers before distribution. Fictional and nonfictional
 literature is censored by the Union of Arab Writers if it is
 considered overly critical of Syria, offensive to one of
 Syria's religious groups, or treats sex too graphically.
 Films are often censored for a variety of reasons, such as
 unfavorable interpretations of the Middle East conflict,
 
 
 1650
 SYRIA
 rianism, or the use of actors or production companies targeted
 by the Arab boycott. Control is particularly strict on
 materials in Arabic.
 Public schools at all levels are government operated. Private
 primary and secondary schools run by the United Nations Relief
 and Wbrks-Agenc: (UNRWA)-for the Palestinian refugees and by
 minority religious groups are required to follow the Ministry
 of Education curriculum and are subject to regular
 inspection. One hour of the day in all schools is devoted to
 instructibiion Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not permitted
 to express ideas cohtrary to government policy, although some
 freedom of expression is tolerated at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations may be held
 only with official permission, and are usually held at the
 instigation of the Government or the Ba'ath party. Private
 societies, including religious groups,-are allowed to meet if
 they have received governmental permission to organize. While
 usually granted, such permission authorizes only nonpolitical
 activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although nearly two-thirds of Syrians are Sunni Muslim, the
 Constitution does not establish a state religion. As a
 concession to Islamic fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi
 secularism, the 1973 Constitution requires that the President
 be Muslim. Otherwise, there is no official preference given
 to one religion over another, and all major Christian and
 Muslim holidays -are officially observed by the Government.
 Many key positions in the Government, most notably the
 presidency, are controlled by members of the minority Alawi
 sect (not more than 10-12 percent of the population), which is
 considered heretical by many Sunni Muslims.
 Ba'athi secular ideology and modernizing influences have had
 some impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and
 ethnicity; but individual Syrians continue to identify
 themselves by their communal associations. Most religious
 groups, including Syria's 4,000 member Jewish community, are
 largely free to practice their different religions. However,
 fund-raising, construction of worship sites, and the holding
 of all meetings except for worship are tightly restricted and
 sometimes banned. Religious training is permitted within the
 curriculum for Jews and Christians in Jewish and Armenian
 schools, among others. Non-Muslim groups may maintain links
 with coreligionists outside Syria. One exception to the
 official policy of religious tolerance is the treatment of
 Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh-Day Adventists, who are
 forbidden to practice their religion or to own church
 property. Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and
 practice. While proselytizing and conversion are not legally
 proscribed, in practice the Government discourages such
 activities aimed at Muslims. The publication of religious
 materials is subject to the same strict controls as secular
 material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is restricted only in the security zone of the
 Golan Heights and occasionally near the borders with Lebanon,
 
 
 1651
 SYRIA
 Jordan, and Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must
 acquire passports and exit visas. In theory, Syrians may
 travel to other Arab countries, except Iraq, on their
 identification cards alone, although in practice this applies
 only to Lebanon. Syrian women over the age of 18 are free to
 travel without the permission of a male relative. However, a
 husband is allowed to file a request with the Ministry of
 Interior to prevent his wife's departure from Syria.
 In general, the Government prohibits foreign travel for
 persons liable for military service and for certain categories
 of professionals, such as pharmacists, architects, and
 engineers, who have been trained at public expense and who
 have not fulfilled 5 years of government service. Under
 exceptional circumstances, however, persons in these groups
 may obtain passports valid for 3 months and limited for travel
 to specific countries. Students traveling abroad for higher
 education must obtain permission from the Foreign Ministry
 and, like all Syrians, are subject to recall by the
 Government. Travel to Israel is illegal for all Syrian
 citizens.
 Palestinians living in Syria must also obtain an exit visa
 from Syrian authorities. Young Palestinians sometimes
 experience difficulties obtaining the requisite travel
 document.
 Jews, particularly those with significant holdings and
 financial ties in Syria, have found it somewhat easier to
 travel abroad since the mid-1970's.' With some exceptions, the
 Government continues its policy of not issuing passports and
 exit visas to all members of a Jewish family at the same
 time. In theory, any Syrian can be required to post a bond of
 between $300 and $1,000, which would be forfeited in the event
 of nonreturn. In practice, only Jews are routinely required
 to post such bonds. While Jewish emigration in general is
 frowned upon, the Syrian Government has stated that it looks
 positively at cases of family reunification and of unmarried
 Jewish women unable to find suitable husbands in the small
 Syrian Jewish community. The- number of unmarried Jewish women
 allowed to emigrate jumped dramatically in the middle of 1989
 following U.S.-Syrian discussions on this issue, and a steady
 outflow continued in 1990. Any Syrian citizen caught trying
 to emigrate or travel abroad without permission, or suspected
 of having visited Israel illegally, may be arrested and
 subject to prosecution. The Soued brothers, two Syrian Jews
 arrested in 1987 for traveling to Israel, still remain
 incarcerated. Four Syrian Jews were arrested in 1990 while
 trying ta leave the country without permission across the
 border to Turkey. Two of those arrested, both women, were
 released in December 1990.
 In response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August, Syria
 opened its borders to persons fleeing Kuwait and Iraq through
 Jordan and even directly from Iraq. Syria absorbed more than
 70,00 returned Syrians, Palestinians, and Lebanese, and in
 conjunction with U.N. relief agencies assisted several
 thousand Egyptians, Somalis, Ethiopian, Lebanese and
 Pakistanis displaced as a result of the invasion.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Change: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Syrians do not have the ability to change their government
 legally and peacefully. President Asad and his senior
 
 
 1652
 
 SYRIA
 advisers effectively control all aspects of political and
 economic life. The'ruling Ba'ath party, which emphasizes
 Socialism and secular Arabism, is now dominated by the
 military, which consumes a large share of Syria's scarce
 economic resources. In recent years, the party has served
 principally to legitimize President Asad's rule. Although
 Ba'ath party doctrine seeks to build national rather than
 ethnic identity, ethnic, religious, and regional allegiances
 remain important. Members of President Asad's own sect, the
 Alawis, hold most of the important military and security
 positions.
 Although popular participation in presidential elections, held,
 every 7 years, is provided for in the Constitution, Syriahs
 have little say in the determination of their political
 leadership. President Asad won the presidency for the third
 time in 1985 when,'according to official sources, 99 percent
 of the population voted, with 99 percent of those voting for
 Asad, who ran unopposed.
 Presidential decrees, issued when the Parliament is not in
 session, have the force of law and usually involve key
 domestic issues such as the raising of public sector wages and
 the prices of critical commodities. Regular quadrennial
 parliamentary elections took place in May.
 A certain degree of regional autonomy is permitted as long as
 it does not challenge the central Government's authority.
 Certain ethnic and social groups, such as the Bedouin and
 people living in small villages, have little contact with the
 central Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Syrians are generally afraid to criticize the Government
 publicly for human rights actions, and there are no active
 local human rights groups in Syria operating publicly. The
 Government denies charges of human rights violations, often
 ignoring them or calling them an intrusion into its internal
 affairs. However, it responded to a 1988 U.N. Human Rights
 Commission (UNHRC) investigation of Syrian practices, based on
 a complaint by AI. The UNHRC eventually'dismissed the case.
 AI officials visited Syria in June 1989 to attend an Arab
 lawyers' convention, during which they met privately with Vice
 President Khaddam and other Syrian officials for the first
 time since 1978. According to AI's 1990 Report, the-
 delegation urged the release of prisoners of conscience and
 the prompt, fair trial or release of other untried political
 detainees, the impartial investigation of torture allegations
 and deaths in custody, and abolition of the death penalty.
 Government.officials reportedly said they would be prepared to
 establish contact with AI and in the future would respond to
 its inquiries. AI presented the names of over 400 political
 detainees who had not been tried; the officials stated they
 would examine them 'and respond in detail. However, the
 Government had not provided further information by the end of
 1990, nor responded to AI's pending offer to send a mission to
 Syria.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross has only limited
 access to prisoners.
 
 
 1653
 SYRIA
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Ba'ath party, or being a close relative of a
 prominent Ba'ath party member, can be important to prospering
 in Syria. Party connections can pave the way for entrance
 into better elementary and secondary schools, access to more
 lucrative employment, and greater power in the Government.
 Religion is also a factor. Members of the Alawi sect often
 enjoy job preference. Jews are prohibited from joining the
 military, and Jewish professionals are exempt from the
 requirement to give the 5 years of government service expected
 of other Syrians trained at public expense.
 Although the official state of war with Israel continues to
 influence the status of Syrian Jews, the community's situation
 continues to improve. The Jewish community enjoys freedom of
 economic opportunity, a relatively high standard of living,
 access to higher education, and entrance into the professions.
 Jews are subject to foreign travel restrictions (see Section
 2.d.), however, and are the only minority whose passports and
 identity cards note their religion. Jews, like all other
 citizens of Syria, are subject to the close purview of the
 intelligence services. Contact between Syrian Jews and
 Israelis is prohibited. Jews hold some low-level government
 jobs such as clerks and teachers.
 Syria's Palestinian community numbers approximately 250,000
 registered with the-UNRWA and consists primarily of refugees
 from the 1948 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand
 Lebanese and Palestinians also fled to Syria in 1982 following
 the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Palestinians are officially
 considered to be temporary residents pending the resolution of
 the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 Under Syrian law, resident Palestinians enjoy equal access to
 employment, social services, and education. In addition,
 Palestinian organizations sanctioned by the Government operate
 social institutions within their community. Palestinians may
 choose their place of residence and occupation, and the
 majority participate fully in the local economy. With
 government permission, they may own more than one building or
 plot of land. The Government allows the operation of those
 Palestinian groups that espouse the officially sanctioned
 position .against Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
 leader Yasir Arafat's policies, although their activities are
 carefully circumscribed. Palestinians may not vote in Syrian
 elections or acquire Syrian citizenship except through
 marriage to a Syrian male citizen. Although they currently
 occupy several senior positions in the bureaucracy,
 Palestinians are unofficially barred from the highest echelons
 of the Government.
 The Constitution provides for the equal-rights of women and
 calls for the elimination of all obstacles to women's
 development. Historically, Syrian women have benefited from
 government policies, including equal pay for similar work.
 -Syrian women are active in both the public and private
 sectors. According to official statistics, 43 percent of all
 women are literate, compared to a national average of 49
 percent. The Government encourages women's enrollment at all
 levels of education, and large numbers of women attend
 universities. The National Women's Union, founded in 1967,
 pursues many of the issues facing women and seeks to protect
 rights already won as well as to strengthen the position of
 
 
 1654
 
 SYRIA
 women. It is considering a legislative proposal that would
 extend a-nother's custody of children to the age of 15 or 16
 in divorce cases (instead of the current age of 9 for boys and
 11 for girls, when custody shifts to the father) and is
 actively seeking to eradicate illiteracy among adult women.
 Traditional concepts of male guardianship of women continue to
 run counter to official policies. Particularly among Muslims,
 these concepts often limit a woman's rights in matters of
 marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and personal
 decisions.
 Wife beating and other physical abuse of women is known to
 occur,-but conservative social m6res in Syrian society
 discourage public discussion of the issue, and it is therefore
 difficult to estimate the extent of the problem. There are no
 official statistics- on domestic abuse. Under the Syrian legal
 system, vomen have-access through the courts to redress any
 grievance caused by violent acts against them, but many cases
 of domestic abuse are not pursued because of the social stigma
 that is attached to legal proceedings in such cases.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The 1973 Constitution provides for the right to form trade
 unions. Although the Syrian General Federation of Trade
 Unions (GFTU) is purportedly an independent popular
 organization, in practice the Government uses it as a
 framework for controlling nearly all aspects of union
 activity. Effectively, workers are not free to form labor
 unions independent of the government-prescribed structure.
 While unions are used primarily to transmit instructions and
 information to the labor force from the Syrian leadership,
 there are indications that elected union leaders also act as a
 conduit through which workers' dissatisfaction is transmitted
 to the leadership. While strikes are not prohibited (except
 in the agricultural sector), in practice they are effectively
 discouraged. There were no reported strikes in 1990. A bill
 is pending to rescind the 1958 ban on strikes in the
 agricultural sector.
 Syrian labor unions are organized sectorally and at local,
 provincial, and national levels. Under Syrian labor law, any
 group of workers may form a labor committeee. These local
 committees may join a provincial union. The provincial unions
 may join with others in the same profession to form a national
 syndicate or union. Officials at all levels are elected
 through secret ballot, and the provincial unions are
 financially independent of the national syndicate. According
 to the Government, there are 198 national unions in Syria
 which are part of the GFTU structure, and 9 professional
 unions. The Government maintains that while it is not illegal
 to establish competitive unions, the unions which belong to
 the GFTU chose voluntarily to do so because it most
 effectively advances workers' interests. GFTU officials also
 note that Syrian unions first developed during the 1920's and
 the GFTU was formed in the 1930's, long before the advent of
 the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party or the Asad Government, so
 that Syrian legislation recognizing a single trade union
 system merely codifies existing practice which reflects the
 will of Syrian workers. The GFTU is charged with providing
 opinions on legislation, devising rules for workers, and
 organizing labor. The elected president of the GFTU is a
 
 
 1655
 
 SYRIA
 senior member of the ruling Ba'ath Party and a member of the
 Regional Command and, along with his deputy, participates in
 all cabinet sessions. The secretaries general of the 9
 professional unions, some of whom are not Ba'ath Party
 members, are also elected officials. The GFTU is affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions and
 the Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 The International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of
 Experts (COE) has noted critically that there is only one
 trade union established for the same occupation within the
 same province; that unions in a province can only group
 themselves into one provincialfederation of workers; and all
 must group themselves into the GFTU. The COE has also noted
 that the GFTU has the exclusive power to determine which
 unions may be constituted and the right to dissolve the
 management committee of any trade union. Also, trade unions
 have a legal obligation to allocate a certain percentage of
 their income to the higher trade union bodies, and the
 Government enjoys wide powers of intervention in trade union
 finances. The Government contends that this intervention
 takes the form of supervision to assure that accounts are
 properly maintained.
 The COE in its 1987 and 1988 reports concluded that the GFTU
 structure amounted to a legally mandated system of trade union
 unity. Other COE observations dealt with restrictions on the
 right of foreign workers to join or form trade unions of their
 own choosing; the interference of public authorities in trade
 union administration; and the prohibition of strikes in the
 agricultural sector. In its 1989 report the COE once again
 raised these issues, noting that the Syrian Government had
 established a working group, including worker and employer
 representatives, to examine the COE's comments.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 In the public sector, unions do not normally bargain
 collectively on wage issues, but union representatives
 participate with the representatives of the employer and the
 respective ministry to establish sectoral minimum wages
 according to legally prescribed cost of living levels. The
 law governing this process also provides for production
 allowances and incentive rewards for public sector workers.
 The Government has cited 10 specific examples of such sectoral
 collective bargaining agreements. Workers make up the
 majority of each board of directors in public enterprises, and
 union representation is always included on the boards. They
 also monitor and enforce compliance with the labor law. In
 the private sector, unions are active in monitoring compliance
 with the laws and ensuring workers' health and safety. The
 unions, under the law, may undertake negotiations for
 collective contracts with employers, and unions have the right
 to litigate in defense of their.own interests or those of
 their members (individually or collectively) in cases
 involving labor relations. Union organizations may also claim
 a right to arbitration. There are no reports of any
 discrimination practiced by employers against members and
 organizers of any unions affiliated with the GFTU.
 No information is available on labor practices in Syrian
 free-trade zones.
 
 
 1656
 
 SYRIA
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Article 36 of the Constitution establishes that it is the
 right and duty of:every citizen tb work. There is no law in
 Syria banning forced or compulsory labor. There are a few
 instances in which such practice can be imposed as punishment,
 usually in connection with prison sentences for criminal
 offenses.
 The COE referred in its 1990 report to certain provisions of
 -the Syrian economic penal code, the penal code, the
 agricultural labor code, and the press act which prescribe
 prison sentences involving compulsory-labor in certain cases.
 The COE-hoted that Syrian legislative authorities were
 examining a draft decree amending sections of the penal code
 to eliminate all compulsory prison labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age in the predominant public sector is
 14, though it is higher in certain industries. The minimum
 age varies more widely in the private sector; the absolute
 minimum age is 12, with parental permission required for-
 children under age 16 to work. Children are forbidden to work
 at night. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor is
 responsible for enforcing minimum age-requirements, but the
 number of labor investigators is small and violation of the
 law"may b'extensive, particularly in the agriculture sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor    -
 The Government provides minimum and maximum wage limits in the
 public sector. Salaries are set on a monthly scale. The
 Government claims public sector workers receive periodic
 raises averaging 5 to 9 percent every 2 years, not including
 production and incentive rewards and various allowances, e.g.,
 fuel and overtime. The Government sets limits on maximum
 allowable overtime for public sector employees. Since 1989,
 the lowest salary scale for an entry position, with no
 experience or credentials and involving no physical labor, is
 approximately $118 per month at the official rate of
 exchange. The highest public sector starting salary is
 approximately $235 per month for someone with a Ph.D. degree.
 Neither of these rates alone is sufficient to proVide a decent
 standard of living. As a result, many workers take additional
 jobs or rely-on extended families for support.
 There is no single minimum wage in the private sector for
 permanent employees. However, the monthly minimum would not
 be less, in-practile, than that in the public sector.
 According to the 1959 labor law, minimum wage levels in the
 private sector are set by sector and are fixed by the Minister
 of Social Affairs and Labor. Recommendations are put to him
 by a committee, formed by representatives of the Ministries of
 Industry and Economy plus representatives of the employers'
 association and the employees' unions.
 Syrian labor law extensively regulates conditions of work.
 This-includes rules and regulations which severely limit the
 ability of an employer to fire an employee without due cause,
 an issue which the employee may take to a labor committee,
 composed of a representative of the municipality, a judge, the
 Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor, the union, and the
 employer. In the majority of cases, such labor committees
 have decided in favor of the employee. Workers, once hired,
 
 
 1657
 SYRIA
 .cannot easily be fired. One exception in the heavily
 regulated labor field relates to day laborers. They are not
 subject to minimum wage regulations and receive compensation
 only for job-related injuries. They are commonly employed in
 small private firms and businesses in order to avoidthe costs
 of permanent employees who are well protected, even against
 firing.
 The statutory workweek consists of six 6-hour days, although
 in certain fields in which workers are not continuously busy,
 a 9-hour day is permitted. Labor laws also mandate a full
 24-hour rest day per week. Public laws mandate safety
 standards in all sectors, and managers are expected to
 implement them fully. A special department of the Social
 Security establishment works, through its regional branches,
 with inspectors at the Ministries of Health and Labor to
 ensure compliance with safety standards. In addition, workers
 may file suit against their employers if dangerous conditions
 on their jobs threaten their health. Guest workers
 theoretically receive the same benefits but are often
 reluctant to press claims because workers' permits may be
 withdrawn at any time. 'Moreover, many work illegally and are
 not covered by the government system.
 
 
 1658
