 SYRIA
 The Syrian government is dominated by the Baath Party.
 Hafez Al-Assad has served as President since 1970, the
 longest a head of state has served in Syria in modern times.
 The past year witnessed serious attacks by underground
 terrorist groups. In particular, on June 16, terrorists
 killed 60 military cadets at the training school in Aleppo.
 Political and civil rights are subject to significant
 limitations, and during the past year, increased numbers of
 individuals have been detained under martial law provisions.
 Conditions for religious minorities have improved substantially
 over the past few years.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Allegations of torture are frequent. Amnesty International's
 1979 report on Syria states that "torture is commonly employed
 in detention centers and military prisons..." Allegations
 of slapping the suspect, beating or interrogation for long
 periods of time without interruption are not uncommon.
 There are also a few reports from relatives of those
 arrested, which the Department of State tends to credit, of
 physical injury occurring during arrest and critical
 interrogation. Torture is illegal under Article 391 of the
 Syrian penal code, which establishes stiff prison sentences
 for those employing torture.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Fifteen Syrian political dissidents accused of terrorism,
 were executed on June 28, 1979. They were tried by the
 state supreme security court. There were no other executions
 .carried out during the preceding year. Mandatory exile is
 constitutionally prohibited, but political prisoners
 detained for long periods sometimes reportedly have been
 offered the choice of voluntary exile.
 Prisoners, once tried and incarcerated, are not generally
 subject to cruel or inhuman punishment. Health care, food
 and family access in prison are generally adequate, although
 detainees convicted of security offenses are not allowed
 visits by family members. Prison diets are frequently
 supplemented by food brought by family members. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross has not been
 allowed access to prisoners held for security offenses.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Constitutional guarantees of life, liberty and personal
 security are sometimes ignored by the security services.
 The civilian legal code, based on the French model, provides
 for unlimited investigative detention with certain safeguards
 against abuse through powers assigned to the Prosecutor
 General. However, under martial law the role of the
 Prosecutor General in these matters is eliminated.
 
 (829)
 
 
 830
 in 1978 President Assad publicly recognized that under
 martial law abuses of detention powers had taken place, and
 a number of individuals who had been wrongly detained were
 released. Matters, however, regressed in 1979. The Syrian
 government responded to the security threat of politically
 inspired violence by arresting many members of the Muslim
 Brotherhood or supposed sympathizers. Some were released
 after interrogation; others still are being held, apparently
 without charges. The families of those detained are not
 notified that a family member has been arrested and are not
 allowed to visit the relative detained for security-related
 offenses.
 In some cases where a person has been suspected of engaging
 in terrorist activities or belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood
 and the security services are unable to apprehend the
 individual, members of his immediate family have been
 detained without charges. Such individuals have no access
 to attorneys or other family members.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The independent Syrian judicial system generally provides
 fair and open trials of ordinary offenses. Syrian courts
 often act in practice as a check on confessions obtained
 under duress, either rejecting confessions where coercion is
 suspected or refusing to accept a confession not made before
 a judge in court. Defendants in non-security related cases
 are entitled to representation by a lawyer of their choice.
 If a defendant cannot afford legal representation, the court
 appoints and pays for a lawyer. No restraints are placed on
 the lawyer by the court in representing his client.
 The procedures in military court and the state security
 court, however, differ from those of courts dealing with
 ordinary offenses. The rights of individuals charged with
 security offenses may be abridged by a number of measures.
 The defendant may not choose his attorney; he is appointed
 by the court. In addition, no recourse to habeas corpus
 exists for individuals charged with security offenses, as is
 the case for ordinary offenses. Sessions of the military
 courts and the state security court usually are held in
 camera. The Department of State has no reliable information
 regarding the frequency of such violations.
 The judicial system benefits from the interest shown by the
 lawyers' syndicate in vigorously defending the independence
 and the prerogatives of the legal profession in representing
 their clients. In the spring of 1979, the lawyers'
 syndicate passed a resolution stating that it would no
 longer represent defendants in trials held by the state
 security court so long as the court continued its practice
 of holding closed sessions and appointing legal representation.
 At the request of the Syrian government,-the lawyers'
 syndicate has so far refrained from implementing this
 resolution; discussions are currently taking place between
 the two parties to try to resolve the conflict.
 The Syrian League for the Defense of Human Rights is also
 active, particularly in cases involving prolonged detention
 or trial procedures.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides formal safeguards in this
 area, supplementing strong cultural values regarding the
 sanctity of the home and family. In ordinary crimes, the
 
 
 831
 police must have an arrest warrant as well as a search
 warrant. Martial law regulations, however, suspend this
 legal protection in security-related cases. There have been
 credible reports during the past year that security
 officials have entered homes without warrants either to
 arrest individuals suspected of terrorism or to search for
 weapons.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 The pace of Syria's economic development program, has slowed
 as a result of the costly presence of a large army in
 Lebanon and the maintenance of a significant military
 capability. Development spending accounts for about 60
 percent of planned expenditures. The government's
 developmental policies concentrate on poor and rural
 populations and have helped to provide laborers and
 agricultural workers a more equitable share of the country's
 resources of potable water, electrification, access to
 markets, and services. The government maintains subsidies
 on basic foodstuffs, Efforts to help the urban poor have
 precipitated an ever-increasing migration from rural areas
 to cities, thereby increasing the strain on burdened urban
 public services.
 The government, army and labor unions are engaged in major
 efforts to relieve a chronic housing shortage exacerbated by
 the high rate of population growth. Population growth has
 been surpassed over the last five years by economic growth;
 the average annual increase in real gross domestic product
 for 1974-78 has averaged nine percent. Corruption is
 prevalent but its potential effects on current programs
 providing vital needs cannot accurately be measured.
 Basic health care is free. Education is free through the
 university level. Most of the country's primary school-age
 children are enrolled in educational institutions; however,
 school buildings and teachers are not sufficient to
 accommodate all. The government has made a major effort to
 ease overcrowding through construction of new facilities at
 all levels of education, including the university level.
 Army conscripts are not discharged until they have met
 minimum literacy standards.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Syria's population is predominantly Sunni Muslim. Its
 Christian,Druze, Bahai', Jewish and Shi'a Muslim minorities
 are permitted to practice their faiths. There were several
 instances during 1979 in which conservative Muslim elements
 attempted to harass Christians. The government promptly
 intervened to protect those being harassed. A small group
 of Seventh Day Adventists has been prohibited from openly
 practicing their religion and their church property has been
 held in trust for many years.
 In late 1976 and early 1977, the government issued decrees
 eliminating virtually all officially sponsored forms of
 discrimination against Syria's Jewish community, except the
 prohibition against emigrating freely. However, implementation
 
 
 832
 has reportedly been uneven and restrictions qn internal
 travel were briefly reimposed in early 1979, later to be
 rescinded. A number of Syrian Jews were apprehended while
 attempting to leave the country without permission in the
 past year. They have, with one exception, been released
 after investigation by security authorities after periods
 ranging from several days to several weeks.
 There are significant restraints on freedom of speech and
 assembly, although these freedoms are guaranteed by the
 Syrian constitution. The five political parties, the
 legislature, the trade unions, and the special and professional
 interest associations provide for debates which are frequently
 uninhibited and critical of foreign and domestic topics.
 The government and the Baath Party control virtually all
 media. Newspapers have considerable latitude to criticize
 domestic programs of the government, but this does not apply
 to foreign or internal policy issues considered sensitive.
 Self-censorship is practiced by the local press. The
 broadcast media and wire services function as the official
 voice of the government. The Syrian government has proven
 to be particularly sensitive about reporting sectarian
 violence. During the past year, foreign correspondents have
 encountered difficulties on at least two occasions from the
 Syrian government in transmitting their reports on this
 subject. While the government did not censor the stories,
 the correspondent's were confronted with officially inspired
 delaying actions.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Travel within Syria is unrestricted except in security
 zones. Syrian citizens wishing to travel abroad must obtain
 passports and exit visas that are sometimes difficult to
 secure. Any Syrian can be required to post a bond which
 would be forfeited in case of non-return. This requirement
 applies particularly to Syrian Jews who must often post
 large sums to obtain exit visas. Nevertheless, it is
 relatively easy for Syrians to travel abroad; by way of
 example, in August 1979, almost 25,000 exit visas were
 issued.
 Emigration is discouraged. A formal ban on emigration
 exists in the case of certain categories of all citizens,
 such as persons liable for military service, doctors,
 scientists and engineers trained at public expense who have
 not practiced their profession in Syria for a ten-year
 period, and members of the Jewish community. There has been
 no lifting of the formal prohibition against emigration by
 members of the Jewish community since fourteen girls were
 allowed to leave in 1978.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Syria's political system is authoritarian with the President
 holding wide powers. The constitution stipulates that the
 Baath Party is the leading political organization within
 Syria. Some other political parties have been permitted,
 but in reality they exercise little actual political power
 and are subordinate to the Baath Party. There is no legal
 
 
 political party which is in open opposition to the government.
 All legal political parties participate in the Progressive
 National Front, a mechanism which in theory is the highest
 political organization in the country. Two political
 groupings currently are illegal: the Syrian Socialist Party,
 which was banned in the 1950s after carrying out a series of
 assassinations against government officials, and the Muslim
 Brotherhood, also accused of assassinations and other acts
 of violence.
 Candidates for Parliament are selected by the ruling Baath
 Party and the four other parties, all of whom compose the
 Progressive National Front. Opposition lists of independents
 are offered but do not enjoy the organizational Support of
 the Progressive National Front and only rarely prevail.
 The Syrian constitution guarantees women rights equal to
 those of men and stipulates that the state shall remove all
 impediments hindering their development and participation-in
 Syrian society. In practice, opportunities for women are
 limited by custom and tradition. The women's union works to
 expand the participation of women in all aspects of society,
 utilizing the media and a network of chapters to convey its
 message.
 Labor organizations exist, usually in nationalized industries,
 but basically they are instrumentalities of the ruling Baath
 Party. Strikes are illegal, although air controllers and
 other groups successfully struck for higher wages in 1979
 without reprisals.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Syrian Government has often reacted to human rights
 criticisms by rejecting allegations outright or ignoring
 them. The Syrian authorities have responded in the past to
 some queries from Amnesty International and have received
 officials from that organization in Damascus. Syria has
 also proven receptive to visits by members of the American
 Jewish community and has allowed them to establish and
 maintain contacts with the Jewish community in Syria.
 
 
 834
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 1977     1978     1979
 ----       -----------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL-.         99.7     105.4    110.8
 LOANS..............        89.0      93.4     93.1
 GRANTS.............        1.7      12.0     17.7
 A.AID ................          80.0     90.1     90.0
 LOANS ...........         74.7      80.1     75.0
 GRANTS..........            5.3     10.0     15.0
 (SECSUPPASSIST.)...        80.0     90.0     90.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE......         19.7     15.3     20.8
 LOANS..............         14.3     13.3     18.1
 GRANTS...........            5.4      2.0      2.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         14.3     13.3     18.1
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS ....         14.3     13.3     18.1
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ...   .          5.4      2.0      2.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,          5.4      2.0      2.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST .           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS..,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG...,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.......          0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. r NIL..         99.7     105.4    110.8
 LOANS..............        89.0      93.4     93.1
 GRANTS...............      10.7      12.0     17.7
 -----------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS,...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 -----------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 -----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........    70.9     60.8      57.8    520.5
 IBRD              70.0     58.0     51.0     428.1
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     47.3
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.1      2.8      4.9      38.7
 OTHER-UN           0.8      0.0       1.9      6.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
