 SYRIA
 The Syrian government is dominated by the Baath party.
 which seized power in 1963. The head of state, Hafez
 al-Assad, came to power in 1970 through a coup dletat and
 has given Syria, a country marked by political instability,
 the longest period of uninterrupted rule since Syria attained
 independence in 1946. Despite Assad's ten years in power,
 Syria has experienced considerable internal strife, which
 culminated in serious domestic violence during 1979-80.
 During this period underground terrorist groups, opposed to
 President Assad's regime and to the primacy of the Baath
 Party, carried out numerous assassinations of political and
 military figures, as well as bombings of governmental
 institutions. Internal unrest reached its height in early
 1980 when the major cities of northern Syria virtually were
 closed down as a result of general strikes which were
 accompanied by armed attacks on institutions representing
 the government.
 Initially, the Syrian government attempted to strike
 a balance between applying harsh measures to counter security
 threats to the regime and satisfying broader demands for
 increased liberalization. The Syrian government, stating
 that its authority was seriously undermined, reacted finally
 to the domestic violence by moving troops to Aleppo, Hama
 and Homs in order to put down all opposition. During this
 period, between April and September 1980, violations of
 human rights and civil liberties occurred. Large numbers of
 individuals were detained under martial law with no provision
 for their being charged with specific offenses or brought to
 trial. There also were credible reports that security
 forces tortured dissidents and carried out summary executions
 of persons they considered to be terrorists. The internal
 unrest peaked during late summer of 1980: since then there
 has been some relaxation of tension. The Syrian government
 has continued to limit the exercise of political and civil
 rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been numerous credible reports of torture being
 used on a wide scale, primarily during the arrest and inter-
 rogation periods. Article 391 of the Syrian penal code
 prohibits the use of torture and establishes stiff penalties
 for those employing such practices. There are no reported
 instances in which security or police officials have been
 punished. A special report on Syria, issued by Amnesty
 International in October 1979, states that "torture is
 commonly employed in detention centers and military prisons,
 where it is used during interrogation in order to obtain
 confessions by detainees."  During the period of internal
 unrest in northern Syria in the spring of 1980, reliable
 observers witnessed detainees with their hands tied behind
 their backs being beaten with rifle butts and clubs by military
 
 
 1100
 personnel. In some instances, it appeared that the military
 personnel were attempting to elicit information pertaining
 to terrorist activities from the detainees; in other cases,
 detainees seemed to be subjected to beatings simply for the
 purpose of intimidation. There also are reliable reports
 that security forces dragged people from their residences
 and brutally beat them during house-to-house searches that
 took place over a period of several months. The use of
 force by security elements was protested, to no avail, to
 a high level of the Syrian government by local delegations
 from the affected cities. The government stated that such
 measures were necessary to deal with continued terrorism.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Credible reports suggest that security forces, carrying out
 house-to-house searches in Aleppo and Hama in April 1980,
 summarily executed individuals either related to or having
 links with suspected members of terrorist groups. Following
 an unsuccessful assassination attempt against President
 Assad on June 27, 1980, security forces reportedly killed
 250-300 political detainees at a prison in eastern Syria.
 Information concerning this incident is contradictory:
 several accounts reported stated that the prisoners were
 killed while attempting a mass escape. Others reported   by
 Amnesty International and by sources in another Arab state
 alleged that they were released and then strafed by helicop-
 ter gunships as they departed the prison compound. The
 government has never acknowledged that this incident occurred.
 On July 7, 1980 the Syrian parliament enacted a law decree-
 ing the death penalty for membership in the Muslim Brother-
 hood, an organization illegal under Syrian law and charged
 with responsibility for terrorist attacks against government
 officials over the past two years. A thirty-day grace
 period, during which members of this proscribed organization
 were allowed to renounce their membership, was provided for
 in the law, and this grace period was extended twice. There are
 no reports that anyone actually has been tried or executed
 as a result of the law.
 Little detailed information is available about Syrian prison
 conditions. No international organizations, such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross, are allowed access
 to detention facilities. Persons charged or convicted for
 criminal offenses are held separately from those charged
 with political and security offenses. Health care, food and
 access by family members for persons held in ordinary
 prisons generally are adequate. Conditions at prisons where
 political and security prisoners are held are reported to be
 more severe. Visits by family members, for example, are not
 allowed,but health care and food are believed to be reasonably
 adequate.
 c. Disappearances
 During operations carried out by the security forces in 1980,

1101
 many suspected members or sympathizers of the Muslim Brother-
 hood were arrested by Syrian military and internal security
 elements. Families generally are not notified of such
 arrests, nor are detainees allowed to notify their next-of-
 kin. Although many of those detained in this fashion
 were released after several days of interrogation, an
 unknown number are believed still to be under detention.
 The government justified these arrests as necessary to
 restore law and order.
 During intervention by the Syrian army in Lebanon, which
 began in 1976, an estimated several hundred Lebanese and
 Palestinians were seized by Syrian security forces and
 detained in Syria without trial. In the intervening years,
 some detainees were released, including approximately 25 in
 the summer of 1980. About 50-75 individuals reportedly
 are still under detention.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Life, liberty and personal security are guaranteed by
 the Syrian constitution. The civilian legal code, modeled
 after French law, provides for due process for the accused,
 although detainees have been held for indefinite periods
 during the investigative process. Under the state of
 emergency currently in force, an individual loses these
 safeguards and may be held indefinitely. One example of
 such arbitrary arrest occurred April 9, 1980, when the
 Syrian government dissolved the executive councils of
 Syria's professional associations, composed of lawyers,
 doctors and engineers. A number of professionals were
 arrested, and with the exception of the former president of
 the lawyers' association, none has been released or tried
 in court.
 Approximately twenty Baath party officials and government
 members of the previous regime have been under detention
 since 1970. In August 1980, the former President of Syria,
 Dr. Nur al-Din Atassi, was released from prison, but he
 remains under house arrest. None of these imprisoned
 officials has been brought to trial. Outside estimates vary
 (whether from foreign government sources or from private
 organizations) on the number of detainees being held
 by the Syrian.government. The number of those under detention,
 however, may be significant. One private legal organization
 estimates that there are approximately 5,000 such detainees.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with security or political offenses
 fall under the jurisdiction of military courts or the
 state security court. Under this system, the accused
 has no recourse to habeas corpus and may not choose his
 lawyer; counsel is appointed by the court. All court
 sessions are closed. Reliable information on the number of
 individuals tried by these courts or the verdicts rendered
 is not available.
 During 1979 and early 1980,the lawyers association and the
 
 
 1102
 League for the Defense of Human Rights solicited the Syrian
 government to end the state of emergency and abolish the
 state security court. The government arrested the organizers
 of this appeal in April 1980. Defendants in civil courts are
 entitled to legal representation of their choice; if they
 cannot afford an attorney, the court appoints and pays for a
 lawyer. The court imposes no restrictions on the lawyer in
 representing his client and allows the right of appeal.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides formal safeguards, including
 the requirement to obtain arrest and search warrants, before
 police are allowed to enter private homes. These procedures
 are generally followed in cases relating to ordinary crimes.
 Martial law regulations, however, suspend these safeguards
 in security-related cases. During security operations
 in northern Syria in 1980, especially in the cities
 of Aleppo and Hama, there were frequent house-to-
 house searches by military and security personnel
 who entered private residences with no warrants.
 This has been the practice rather than the exception
 during the past year.
 2. Government    Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Syria has a per capita income of approximately $1,000. The
 government's economic development projects reflect continued
 emphasis on projects designed to fulfill the country's
 basic needs. Government subsidies contribute substantially
 to improving nutritional standards and raising the general
 standard of living of the entire population. Rice, tea,
 cooking oil, and other consumables are subsidized at rationed
 quantities. More basic items such as bread and fuel oil are
 heavily subsidized and not rationed. The government also
 defrays some of the cost of medicines. Health care benefits
 to both urban and rural residents are provided at nominal
 costs. Education is free through the university level.
 Facilities are frequently overcrowded, but government
 construction of additional classrooms is underway. The
 primary school teacher:pupil ration is 1:30. Major develop-
 ment programs for housing, roads, potable water (distribution
 has been increasing at an average annual rate of 10 percent),
 and rural electrification also indicate the priority Syria
 places on fulfilling basic human needs.
 Although (in government and Baath party rhetoric) a socialist
 country, Syria has, in fact, a mixed economy, and the right
 to hold private property is recognized. There has been no
 repetition of the nationalization of commercial and industrial
 enterprises that took place in the mid-1960s, although the
 fear of such an occurrence remains. During 1980 the Syrian
 government limited further the size of individual holdings
 of agricultural land, but proclaimed that it had no intention
 of similarly limiting and redistributing holdings of urban
 real estate.
 Syria has low unemployment (less than 2 percent, according to
 official figures for 1978), and a range of regulatory and
 legislative provisions that protect the interests of workers.
 
 
 1103
 In 1980, government salaries were raised an average of more
 than 40 percent to offset inflation, which had increased
 at an estimated 25 percent . This step also caused indirect
 increases in private-sector wage rates.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, press, and assembly are guaranteed by the
 Syrian constitution. In practice, exercise of these rights
 is severely restricted. Demonstrations against the Syrian
 government's internal policies, which on occasion turned
 violent, occurred in March 1980 in cities in northern Syria.
 In April 1980, the government used military force to supress
 such demonstrations,and they have not recurred since then.
 The government's actions during the spring and summer
 of 1980 had the effect of intimidating citizens in the
 exercise of freedom of assembly, as well as freedom of
 speech. Opposition viewpoints were expressed in early 1980
 through underground leaflets and pamphlets calling for
 political reforms. After the government disbanded the
 executive councils of the professional associations in April
 1980 and arrested a number of prominent professionals,
 clandestine distribution stopped.
 There are some labor organizations in nationalized industries,
 but they are instrumentalities of the ruling Baath party.
 Strikes are illegal in Syria.
 Thd Syrian press, in effect, speaks for the government.
 Criticisms of non-controversial internal matters are
 tolerated. On foreign issues and matters dealing with
 internal security or opposition to the government, the media
 follow closely the government line. The press adheres to
 editorial guidance from the government and practices self-
 censorship. The same is true of the broadcast media and
 wire services, which function as the official voice of the
 government. Foreign language publications generally are not
 censored, but Arabic language newspapers and magazines
 published outside Syria and considered by the government to
 present viewpoints contrary togovernment policy, are banned
 in Syria.
 During 1980 the government has been sensitive to international
 reporting on Syria's internal proflems. Foreign correspondents
 were not allowed to enter Syria during the height of the
 disturbances. Some correspondents residing outside Syria,
 especially in Lebanon, were threatened with assassination
 if they filed reports considered antithetical to Syrian
 interests. These threats intimidated foreign correspondents
 from reporting on some internal developments in Syria.
 Although Syria is ruled by a minority Alawite regime (10
 percent), its population is predominantly Sunni Muslim. The
 Shi'a Muslim, Christian, Druze, and Jewish minorities
 continue to practice their faiths freely.
 
 
 1104
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Travel within Syria is unrestricted except in security
 zones. All Syrian citizens wishing to travel abroad,
 must obtain passports and exit visas. These documents are
 sometimes difficult to obtain. Any Syrian can be required
 to post a bond which would be forfeited in case of non-
 return. This requirement applies particularly to Syrian
 Jews who must often post larger bonds to obtain exit visas.
 Nevertheless, it is relatively easy for Syrians to travel
 abroad.
 Emigration is discouraged. A formal ban on emigration
 exists in the case of certain categories of citizens:
 e.g., persons liable for military service, doctors, scientists,
 and engineers trained at public expense who have not practiced
 their professions in Syria for a ten-year period, and
 members of the Jewish community. Those Jews who attempt to
 emigrate from Syria illegally are subject to fines and
 detention. There are no restrictions on repatriation although
 political opponents of the Syrian government might be
 subject to arrest if they returned to Syria.
 There is a large Palestinian community, estimated at 200,000,
 who are refugees from the 1949 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars.
 The majority live in refugee camps maintained by the United
 Nations Relief and Works Agency. Palestinians participate
 fully in the. Syrian economy and experience little discrimina-
 tion by virtue of their refugee status. They continue to
 maintain their identity as Palestinians.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Syria's political system is authoritarian, with the president
 holding wide powers. The constitution stipulates that the
 Baath party is the leading political organization within
 Syria. Some other political parties are permitted, but in
 reality they exercise little actual political power and are
 subordinate to the Baath Party. There is no legal political
 party which is in active opposition to the government. All
 legal political parties participate in the Progressive
 National Front, a mechanism which in theory is the highest
 political organization in the country. Two political
 groupings are currently illegal: the Syrian Socialist party,
 which was banned in the 1950s after carrying out a series of
 assassinations against government officials, and the Muslim
 Brotherhood, which has carried out assassinations and other
 acts of political violence.
 Candidates for parliament are selected by the ruling Baath
 party and four other parties which comprise the Progressive
 National Front. Opposition lists of independents are
 offered, but do not enjoy the organizational support of the
 Progressive National Front and rarely prevail.
 The Syrian constitution guarantees women rights equal
 to those of men and stipulates that the state shall remove
 
 
 1105
 all impediments hindering their development and participation
 in Syrian society. In practice, opportunities for women are
 limited by custom and tradition. The women's union works to
 expand the participation of women in all sectors of society,
 utilizing the media and a network of chapters throughout
 Syria to convey its message.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Syrian government is sensitive to charges of human
 rights violations and usually has turned them aside, either
 by charging that they are an intrusion in Syrian internal
 affairs or by ignoring such charges altogether. The govern-
 ment has received inquiries from Amnesty International
 during the past year, but reportedly has declined to respond.
 The last visit to Syria by Amnesty International delegates
 occurred in March 1978. The sole internal group which
 involved itself with monitoring human rights affairs was the
 Syrian League for the Defense of Human Rights. Some officers
 of the League were arrested in April 1980 and have not
 been released. This action intimidated the League which,
 for all practical purposes, ceased to exist. The Syrian
 government regularly participates in United Nations conferen-
 ces on human rights but has not taken part in regional
 meetings on this subject.
 
 
 1106
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 1978     1979      198n
 .-- --............---... ..........---....... ................. .
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL*.         105.4    110.8      7.3
 LOANS...............       93.4     93.1      0.0
 GRANTS.............       .12.0      17.7       7.3
 A.AID ..................        90.1     90.0      6.2
 LOANS..............         80.1     75.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        10.0     15.0      6.2
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.).           90.0     90.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE......          15.3     20.8       1.1
 LOANS..............         13.3     18.1      0.0
 GRANTS.............         2.0      2.7      1.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         13.3     18.1       0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         13.3     18.1       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR..,            0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL,........          2.C      2.7       1.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEv & wFP,          2.0      2.7       1.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI,,o.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS .....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS,.....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS..            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL NILED.TRNG...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL,,.        105.4    110.8      7.3
 LOANS ..............        93.4     93.1      0.0
 GRANTS..............        12.0     17.7      7.3
 OTHER US LOANS--------- 0.0               0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980      1946-80
 ----------------------57;      ----- 1-  -i-----------
 TOTAL..........60.8       57.8     21.6    581.8
 IBRD              58.0      51.0      0.0    468.1
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0     47.3
 IDB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                2.8      4.9      5.6     44.0
 OTHER-UN            0.0      1.9      0.3      6.7
 EEC                 0.0      0.0     15.7     15.7
 
 
 1107
