 SYRIA
 According to its Constitution, the Syrian Arab Republic is a
 representative democracy. In fact, Hafiz al-Asad, as
 President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, and
 Secretary General of the Syrian Ba'ath Party, wields virtually
 absolute power. During Asad's rule, the Ba'ath Party has
 functioned principally to legitimatize his regime. The regime
 has not permitted other centers of governmental power, such as
 an independent legislature or judiciary, to develop. It has
 resorted to extreme brutality and forcible repression to ensure
 its survival, but it has also pursued a policy of providing for
 the basic economic and social needs of its people.
 The Ba'ath Party, with its emphasis on socialism and secular
 Arabism, gained ascendancy in 1963 but has since that time been
 dominated by the military. Ba'athism has sought to overcome
 sectarian and class consciousness by building a sense of
 national rather than ethnic identity. Since Asad's accession
 to power in 1970, members of the minority Alawi Muslim sect, to
 which he belongs, have greatly improved their own economic
 well-being; historically, they were among Syria's poorest
 groups. At the same time, elements within the Sunni majority
 have suffered economically as the regime moved gradually to
 eliminate all major private industry.
 Islamic fundamentalists in Syria oppose the secular emphasis of
 Ba'athism and Asad's Alawi background, and in 1979-1982
 frequently resorted to terrorism. Violent resistance to the
 regime, however, largely came to a halt after the Government
 killed thousands in suppressing an insurrection'by the Muslim
 Brotherhood, a banned, secret organization of Sunni Islamic
 fundamentalists, in Hama in 1982. The ferocity of that
 repression remains ever-present in the minds of the Syrian
 people and has apparently succeeded in discouraging antiregime
 activity. In January 1985, President Asad made a limited offer
 of amnesty to some Muslim Brotherhood exiles.
 Syria officially has a Socialist economy. Although
 agricultural production and some small enterprises remain in
 private hands, an increasing proportion of agricultural
 processing and distribution and all large-scale industry have
 been placed in the hands of state enterprises.
 During 1985, Syria continued to be ruled by a repressive
 dictatorship. There was popular participation in decisions
 concerning economic and social issues on a limited basis via
 the Ba'ath Party, unions, and other organizations controlled by
 the State or the party. However, while the more public forms
 of repression have diminished in the past 3 years, there have
 been no indications of a trend toward a more open political
 system or greater respect for the integrity of the person.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political executions in Syria are typically a reaction to
 direct and violent threats to the regime; when the threats
 subside, the executions subside. Following the army's bloody
 suppression of an Islamic fundamentalist uprising in Hama in
 
 
 1394
 SYRIA
 1982, both antiregime terrorism and executions for political
 reasons have subsided. A few unconfirmed reports of political
 executions surfaced in the period 1983-85. Two bombs were set
 off in Damascus in July, and one in September 1985. A number
 of Palestinians were detained in the aftermath of these
 incidents, but it is not known if there have been any
 executions.
 Syrian artillery devastated parts of the Lebanese city of
 Tripoli in September-October 1985. The attack was directed
 against an alliance of Islamic fundamentalists who fought to
 control the city with support from Palestinians opposed to
 Syria. This alliance may have included a number of Syrian
 Islamic fundamentalists who fled Hama in 1982.
 Syria provides sanctuary and support to Arab terrorist groups
 such as Abu.Nidal. Anti-Turkish Armenian terrorist groups are
 also thought to operate in Syria. Syria continues to permit
 Iran ,to support Lebanon-based terrorist groups in
 Syrian-controlled parts of Lebanon.
 b. Disappearance
 According to plausible reports, some Syrians arrested for
 security reasons are never heard from again; families are not
 notified, nor are detainees allowed to contact their next of
 kin. It is possible that many of these people are dead.
 Disappearances reached a high point in 1979-82 and dropped
 considerably in 1983-85.
 c. Torture-and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although the penal code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe penalties for such practices, there have been numerous
 credible reports of torture, primarily during arrest and
 interrogation. There are no reports of punishment of security
 or police officials for acts of torture, however. According to
 Amnesty International's 1985 Report, use of torture by the
 Syrian security forces is routine.
 Little detailed information is available about prison
 conditions. No international organizations, such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), are allowed
 access to detention facilities. The ICRC has, however, visited
 such special category detainees as the U.S. airman captured in
 December 1983 and Israeli prisoners-of-war. Persons charged
 with or convicted of criminal offenses are held separately from
 those charged with political and security offenses. Health
 care, food, and access by family members for persons held in
 ordinary prisons are reported to be adequate. Conditions at
 prisons where political and security prisoners are held are
 reported to be more severe, and visits by family members are
 not allowed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The civilian legal code, modeled after French law, provides for
 due process, although it permits indefinite pretrial detention
 during the investigative process. Under the state of emergency
 in force since 1963, these safeguards can be suspended, and an
 individual may be held indefinitely without charge or trial,
 especially in political and security cases.
 
 
 1395
 SYRIA
 The number of people currently held without trial or charge is
 not known but is probably significant. Approximately 20 Ba'ath
 party and government officials of the previous regime have been
 under detention since 1970. According to unconfirmed press
 accounts, possibly as many as 150 military officers were
 arrested in January 1982 in connection with an alleged coup
 plot, and several dozen more in 1983 for questioning government
 policies. In 1984, however, a power struggle between the
 President's brother, Rif'at al-Asad, and several military and
 security force commanders did not lead to sweeping arrests or
 detentions, nor have scattered bombings and other acts of
 terror and sabotage in Syria in 1985 led to such a result.
 There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to a French-based legal code. The defendant is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public
 prosecutor, then remanded to a judge of arraignment, who may
 either free him on the basis of insufficient evidence or refer
 the case to a criminal court. Defendants are entitled to legal
 representation of their choice; if they cannot afford an
 attorney, the court appoints and pays for a lawyer. Civilian
 courts impose no restrictions on lawyers in representing
 clients and allow the right of appeal. In noncontroversial
 criminal cases, the civilian courts are typically free from
 governmental interference; nevertheless, pressure from the
 party, state security forces, or other special units affects
 the course of the trials or the verdicts if there is high-level
 interest in a case.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Arrests are made secretly and with no legal
 safeguards. The accused cannot be contacted by family or
 friends, who most often do not know the place of detention.
 The accused has no right to a judicial determination of the
 basis for pretrial detention, no redress for false arrest, and
 no say in the selection of a lawyer, who is chosen by the
 court. All court sessions are closed, and there are no
 official channels for obtaining information on the trial or
 sentencing, though relatives with influence in the Government
 may ultimately succeed in obtaining reliable information and
 even effecting the release of the accused.
 The Government does not disseminate information on the number
 of persons detained without a fair trial for political or
 security offenses, and it is impossible to make an accurate
 estimate. Relatives of persons arrested by security forces
 have no way to publicize their cases and would be, in any case,
 too intimidated to do so.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Electronic surveillance is believed to be widespread.
 Intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to
 protect officials and important buildings, as well as to
 monitor the activity of people living in those neighborhoods.
 The presence of police and security officials is pervasive,
 especially in Damascus. The postal system censors the mail but
 
 
 1396
 SYRIA
 does not check every letter or package. Although the legal
 system provides safeguards, including a requirement of arrest
 and search warrant before police are allowed to enter private
 homes, regulations under the state of emergency currently in
 effect suspend these safeguards in security-related cases.
 Section 2 -Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, the Ba'ath Party, or
 related institutions is not permitted. The broadcast media and
 publishing houses are wholly owned and operated by the
 Government or the Ba'ath Party and usually give only the
 official views on important issues. The very occasional
 criticism of governmental bodies or operations is sanctioned
 criticism directed at administrative failings. Officials above
 the middle ranks are rarely criticized.
 Imported foreign printed matter and films generally are not
 censored, although articles are occasionally deleted from
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. This news
 material, along with fictional and nonfictional literature on
 the Middle East, is banned if considered critical of Syria.
 Control is-much stricter-on, materials.in Arabic. Censorship is
 exercised through offices in the ministries of Information and
 of Culture and National Guidance. During the November 1983
 assault by Syrian-suported Palestinian organizations against
 pro-Arafat Palestinian forces in Tripoli, television news from
 neighboring Jordan was jammed, and Beirut periodicals were
 often withheld from the market. Even the publications of
 several Syrian-supported Palestinian organizations were
 suppressed-during the war against the Palestinian camps in
 Beirut in May and June 1985.
 Aside from a few church-run, private primary and secondary
 schools that .are carefully inspected and follow the Education
 Ministry -urriculum, schools at all levels are
 government-operated. Teachers are not permitted to express
 ideas-contrary to government policy, although there is more
 openness of :expression at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can be held only
 with .official acquiescence and usually at the instigation of
 the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private societies are
 allowed to meet if they have received governmental permission
 to organize. These are limited to nonpolitical activities,
 including religious groups.
 Professional organizations and labor unions function as parts
 of the government apparatus and are primarily used to transmit
 instructions and information from the Syrian leadership to
 -their members. Unofficially, the unions also function as a
 means to keep the leadership informed of grievances and
 concerns at the grass roots level. Strikes are forbidden by
 law.
 In response to observations by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the Syrian Government is reported to have
 made efforts to bring its legislation into conformity with the
 Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the
 Right to Organize. In its 1985 report, however, the ILO's
 
 
 1397
 SYRIA
 Committee on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations
 stated that it hoped the Government would soon be in a position
 to report real progress in both its legislation and the
 application of the convention.
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party is politically expedient but not
 forced; indeed, membership is achieved only through
 recommendation and invitation. There are a significant number
 of senior government officials who are not members of the party
 or whose membership is only honorary.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although Syria is predominantly Muslim, the Constitution does
 not espouse a state religion. As a concession to Islamic
 fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi secularism, the present
 regime wrote into the Constitution the requirement that the
 president be Muslim, but otherwise there is no official
 advantage given to one religion over another. Sunni Arabs
 constitute over two-thirds of the populace. Many key positions
 in the Government, however, are controlled by members of the
 minority Alawi sect (10-12 percent of the population), which
 some Islamic fundamentalists do not accept as Muslim.
 Ba'athi ideology and modernizing influences have had some
 impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and ethnicity,
 but an individual Syrian continues to be defined by his
 communal background. In this communally divided society,
 prejudice is virtually a way of life, though less so now than
 in the past. Non-Alawi minority groups do enjoy freedom to
 practice their religions. While members of non-Alawi
 minorities, as well as the Sunni majority, cannot usually
 aspire to more than marginal political power, every minority
 has members who prosper economically, and no minority can be
 said to be economically oppressed as a class. Proselytizing is
 discouraged. In an exception to the general official policy of
 religious tolerance, Seventh Day Adventists are forbidden by
 law to practice their religion, and all Adventist church
 property has been confiscated.
 The 3,000-4,000 Jews are free to practice their religion. The
 situation of the Jewish community has improved in recent years,
 despite continuing uncertainty over the community's future, and
 today it enjoys a relatively good standard of living, access to
 higher education, and entrance into the professions. Jews are
 subject to restrictions on foreign travel, however, and, unlike
 other Syrian communal groups, the passports and identity cards
 of Jewish citizens contain a notation that the holder is
 Jewish. Given the officially proclaimed state of war with
 Israel, direct contact between Syrian Jews and Jews in Israel
 is not possible. There are unconfirmed reports that Jews are
 not permitted to hold government jobs, and, as in the cases of
 other small minority groups in Syria, no Jews are known to hold
 senior government or party office. Jews cannot serve in the
 military and, upon receiving degrees in technical fields, are
 not required to undertake 5 years of obligatory public service.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is unrestricted except in the security zone of
 the Golan and close to the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and
 Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must obtain
 passports and exit visas. In theory, any Syrian can be
 
 
 1398
 SYRIA
 required to post a bond which would be forfeited in case of
 nonreturn. Syrian Jews, however, are the only travelers
 routinely required to post such a bond, which varies from $250
 to $10,000 (recently the required bonds have been toward the
 lower end of the scale), depending on the person's position in
 the community and economic circumstances. In recent years,
 Jews have found it somewhat easier to travel overseas, although
 an official ban on their emigration has continued. The
 Government continues its policy of not issuing passports to all
 members of a Jewish family at the same time, although there
 have been some recent exceptions.
 The Government generally forbids foreign travel for certain
 categories of citizens, e.g., persons liable for military
 service, and pharmacists, architects, and engineers trained in
 Syria at public expense who have not yet completed a 5-year
 government service obligation. Those who attempt to travel
 illegally are subject to fines and detention. Frequent
 exceptions are granted for students who receive permission from
 the Foreign Ministry to continue higher studies abroad.
 Emigration is not discouraged for groups other than those
 mentioned above.
 There are no formal restrictions on the repatriation of Syrian
 citizens, although political opponents of the regime are
 arrested if they return. There have been no reports of
 revocation of citizenship. The Government does not recognize
 renunciation of citizenship or the acquisition of another
 nationality.
 There is a Palestinian community of over 240,000, predominantly
 refugees from the 1948 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars. Several
 thousand Lebanese and Palestinians entered Syria in 1982,
 fleeing Israel's invasion of Lebanon. Many participate fully
 in the Syrian economy, although Palestinians claim that
 procedures for the purchase of real property are cumbersome and
 they are allowed to own only one building or plot of land.
 Palestinians are free to choose their place of residence and
 occupation, and they occupy several senior positions in the
 Syrian bureaucracy. They are issued special Palestinian travel
 documents by the Government in lieu of Syrian passports. They
 may not acquire citizenship or vote in Syrian elections.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Power in Syria resides with a single individual, President
 Asad. He and other members of the Alawi Muslim sect control
 many of the key positions in the Government, the Ba'ath Party,
 and the military and security forces. Popular participation in
 the political process is severely restricted. The Constitution
 stipulates that the Ba'ath Party is the leading political
 organization. Several other parties are permitted by law, but
 they exercise little power. There is no legal party in active
 opposition to the Government. All legal parties participate in
 the Progressive National Front, a mechanism which in theory is
 the highest political organization. Several political
 groupings are illegal, including the Syrian Socialist National
 Party, which was banned in the 1950's after carrying out a
 series of assassinations against government officials. It is
 now regaining favor with the regime. Also illegal are the
 Communist Party Political Bureau and the Party for Communist
 Action.
 
 
 1399
 SYRIA
 President Asad was reelected to a third seven-year term in
 March 1985. He was unopposed in a referendum in which,
 according to government claims, over 99 percent of the eligible
 electorate participated and returned the President to office by
 a vote of over 99 percent.
 Candidates for Parliament--which has no power independent of
 the will of the President--are selected by the ruling Ba'ath
 Party and, in theory, by four other parties which comprise the
 Progressive National Front. Personal loyalty to the regime and
 the President is a necessary qualification. Opposition lists
 of independents are offered but rarely prevail, probably
 because of the Front's far greater resources and organization
 and because of restrictions on freedom of expression. No
 independents were elected in the most recent elections in 1981.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government reacts to charges of human rights violations
 either by claiming that such charges are an intrusion in its
 internal affairs or by ignoring the charges altogether. The
 only internal group monitoring human rights ceased to exist in
 practical terms after some of its officers were arrested in
 April 1980. The last visit by Amnesty International delegates
 took place in March 1978; its periodic inquiries since then
 have received no response. The 1985 Amnesty International
 Report expressed concern over the imprisonment of over 260
 prisoners of conscience, wide powers used by the security
 forces to arrest and detain thousands of political prisoners,
 long-term detention without trial, the routine use of torture
 by security forces, disappearances, extrajudicial executions,
 and the death penalty. Freedom House calls Syria "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Syria's population is over 10 million and is growing at a rate
 of 3.7 percent annually. Per capita gross national product was
 $1,760 in 1983. Syria under Hafiz al-Asad officially has a
 Socialist economy. Although agricultural production and some
 small enterprise remain in private hands, an increasing
 proportion of agricultural processing and distribution and all
 large-scale industry have been placed in the hands of state
 enterprises. Petroleum extraction has been a primary source of
 foreign exchange in recent years, although declining production
 and greater local consumption have begun to erode the
 contribution oil exports have made to Syria's balance of
 trade. Prices, wages, rents, imports, exports, and exchange
 rates are heavily regulated. Nationalization remains a threat
 for any private investor who grows too big or successful.
 Personal and corporate income taxes are very high.
 In recent years, most wealth has accrued to a new class of
 government officials, particularly the military, and those with
 connections to them. Syria's traditionally very dynamic
 entrepreneurial class has been deprived of most legitimate
 investment opportunities. Many individuals continue to
 maintain a comfortable existence, however, primarily through
 their contacts in the Government and (illegal) investment
 abroad.
 At the same time that the Syrian Government tolerates
 widespread inefficiency and corruption, it has implemented
 
 
 1400
 SYRIA
 extensive economic development programs of benefit to Syria's
 less-privileged classes. Land redistribution and
 infrastructure development (roads, electricity, water,
 telephones, radio and television, health, education, and
 agricultural extension service) have improved the quality of
 life for the poor throughout Syria.
 The economy is not operating efficiently in the straitjacket of
 government controls, the balance of payments is in chronic
 crisis, and Syria has come to rely heavily on foreign aid and
 remittances to finance essential imports.
 Life expectancy at birth is 67.3 years, and the declining
 infant mortality rate is 52.1 deaths per 1,000 live births.
 Both figures reflect the priority the Government has placed on
 improving health care and extending delivery systems in rural
 areas. According to 1980 statistics, 71 percent of Syria's
 population had access to safe drinking water, 98 percent in
 urban areas and 54 percent in rural areas. Caloric supply
 exceeds requirements. Virtually all urban areas are now
 electrified, and considerable progress has been made in rural
 parts of the country. Primary school education is compulsory
 for both male and female children until the age of 13.
 Syrian labor statutes provide for comprehensive working
 standards. The minimum age in the predominant public sector is
 18. In the private sector it is more variable: the absolute
 minimum age in the private sector is 12, while parental
 permission is required for children to work below the age of
 16. The Labor Ministry has an enforcement mechanism, but the
 number of labor investigators is small, and violations of
 minimum-age laws may be extensive. Labor statutes provide for
 a 48-hour work week (six 8-hour days), though in certain fields
 in which workers are not continuously busy a 9-hour day is
 permitted. In actual practice, government employees rarely put
 in more than a 5-to-6 hour day. The statutes also stipulate a
 full 24-hour rest day per week and a minimum of 1 hour of rest
 per day; 14 days per year of annual leave (which rises to 21
 days per year after 10 years' service); 70 percent of wages
 during the first 90 days of illness, then 80 percent for the
 next 90 days; and overtime pay (25 percent for daytime
 overtime, 50 percent for night, 100 percent for holiday).
 Employers are required to provide limited medical care, and if
 there are more than 100 employees, a nurse must be hired and
 the service of a physician provided as necessary. Minimum
 wages are prescribed in all sectors. Typically, a government
 employee earns no more than $150-200 per month. However, many
 of them have second jobs. Rent controls and price subsidies
 allow such employees to enjoy a moderately comfortable
 existence despite nominally low wages.
 The equality of women is guaranteed by the Constitution. Women
 participate extensively in the work force, particularly in
 Damascus, and the women's union works to expand the
 participation of women in all sectors of society, utilizing the
 media and a network of chapters throughout Syria to convey its
 message. At the same time, traditional religious law continues
 to apply in matters of personal status. Particularly among the
 majority Muslim population, this continues to limit women's
 rights in matters such as marriage, divorce, and inheritance.
 
 
 1401
