 SYRIA
 The Syrian Arab Republic is according to its Constitution a
 representative democracy and has the trappings of a
 legislature and a multiparty system. In fact, Hafiz al-Asad,
 as President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, and
 Secretary General of the Syrian Ba'ath Party, wields virtually
 absolute power. Only the Ba'ath Party is allowed any
 importance, and it functions only as a device to legitimate
 President Asad's regime. The regime has not permitted
 alternative centers of governmental power, such as an
 independent legislature or judiciary. It has been willing to
 resort to extreme brutality and forcible repression, although
 its survival for 14 years has been due also to a policy of
 meeting economic needs of the populace.
 Prior to Asad, no leader lasted more than four years. Syria's
 French colonial history, which left political institutions
 undeveloped, and the population's ethnic mix made it a
 difficult country to govern. Syria had an unsatisfactory
 experience with non-military rule after independence in 1945,
 as scions of wealthy families bickered incessantly, and after
 the debacle of the war with Israel, civilian government gave
 way in 1949 to military rule. Civilian rule briefly returned
 in the mid-fitties, when Syria's only free election moved the
 country radically leftward. The Ba'ath Party, with its
 emphasis on socialism and secular Arabism, then gained
 popularity and power and has dominated Syria for most of the
 time since, usually in the person of a military officer.
 Ba'athism sought to overcome sectarian and class cleavages by
 building a sense of national rather than ethnic identity.
 Cleavages remain but have somewhat eased, perhaps contributing
 to Asad's longevity. President Asad has continued the policy
 of his Ba'athi predecessors in promoting a socialist economy,
 redistributing wealth, and building roads, schools, and
 clinics throughout the country, but without the ideological
 severity that characterized much of the decade of the 1960's.
 He is particularly careful not to exceed what is acceptable to
 the military, the leadership of which is dominated by fellow
 Alawis.
 Asad and other members of the minority Alawi Muslim sect
 (10-12 percent of the population) control key positions in the
 Government, the Ba'ath Party, and the military and security
 forces. During Asad's rule, the Alawis have greatly improved
 their own economic well-being; historically they were among
 Syria's poorest groups. Partly because of the regime's
 minority status and Ba'athism's quintessentially secular
 nature, Syria's many religious and ethnic minorities have not
 suffered severe oppression and have on the whole been able to
 extract some economic benefit from Ba'athi rule. At the same
 time, the entrepreneurial and commercial elements within the
 Sunni majority have suffered as the regime has moved gradually
 to eliminate all major private industry. Ba'athist secularism
 formally espouses a more equal role for women and has to some
 extent countered Islamic traditionalism that previously
 impeded their advancement.
 Periodic outbreaks of violence against the regime have
 occurred during Asad's rule. Islamic fundamentalists in Syria
 oppose the secular emphasis of Ba'athism and Asad's Alawi
 background, and in 1979-1982 frequently resorted to
 terrorism.
 
 
 1401
 SYRIA
 The Muslim Brotherhood, a banned, secret organization of Sunni
 Islamic fundamentalists, is dedicated to the regime's
 overthrow and was one of the principal sources of anti-regime
 activity in that period. In 1980 the Government made
 membership in the Muslim Brotherhood punishable by death.
 Efforts to suppress the organization during 1979-82 included a
 series of ruthless massacres; thousands of suspected Muslim
 Brotherhou members were summarily executed, frequently after
 brutal treatment, including torture; and thousands of innocent
 bystanders were killed by the heavy fire used to root out the
 Brotherhood in Hama. The Government also suppressed
 nonviolent sources of dissent, arresting the leaders of the
 hitherto independent lawyers' and engineers' syndicates in
 1980 and placing the groups under regime control. Reports of
 politically inspired arrests have declined substantially
 during 1983 and 1984, and violent resistance to the regime has
 virtually ceased.
 Israel occupied the Golan Heights in southwest Syria in the
 1967 war, but withdrew from portions of the area in 1974
 following a disengagement agreement with Syria. In December
 1981 it extended Israeli law, jurisdiction, and administration
 to the Golan areas still under occupation. Human rights
 conditions there are covered under the report on
 Israeli-occupied territories.
 Syrian military units have controlled large areas of Lebanon
 since 1976, originally as the principal contributor to the
 Arab deterrent force formed by the Arab League in response to
 the 1975-76 Lebanese civil war. Despite their original role
 as peacemakers, the Syrians have at times been charged with
 serious violations of human and political rights in Lebanon.
 However, since the departure of the Multinational Force from
 Beirut in February, Syria's ostensible objective has been to
 promote a stable, pro-Syrian Lebanese government, and Syria
 has made a significant attempt to reduce violence and enhance
 government authority in the Beirut area. In July 1984 an
 exchange of 300 Syrian prisoners of war for 3 Israeli
 prisoners of war from the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon was
 arranged through the International Committee of the Red
 Cross. The Popular Front for the Liberation of
 Palestine-General Command, a radical Palestinian group under
 Syrian control, continues to hold three Israeli prisoners.
 Syria provides sanctuary, and reportedly support, to Arab
 terrorist groups such as Black June. Anti-Turkish Armenian
 terrorist groups are known to operate in Syria. Syria
 continues to permit an Iranian Revolutionary Guard presence in
 Syria and in Syrian-controlled parts of Lebanon.
 During 1984, the Syrian regime continued to restrict freedom
 of speech, press, association, and assembly and to deny the
 right of citizens to change their government. It pursued
 dissident elements, carried out cordon-and-search operations
 without judicial safeguards against invasion of the home, and
 reportedly engaged in torture and other brutal practices.
 Limited popular participation in decisions concerning economic
 and social issues occurs on a limited basis via the Ba'ath
 Party, unions, and other state- or party-controlled
 organizations. However, there were no indications of any
 trend toward a more open political system or toward greater
 respect for the integrity of the person.
 
 
 1402
 SYRIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political executions are typically a reaction to direct and
 violent threats to the regime; when the threats subside, the
 executions similarly subside. Since the army attacked the old
 quarter of Hama in February 1982, destroyed much of it, and
 killed thousands of its inhabitants as well as the core of the
 fundamentalist (at least partially Muslim Brotherhood) groups
 that mounted the insurrection, Syria has been relatively free
 of terrorist attacks and political killings. A handful of
 unconfirmed reports of executions surfaced in 1983 and 1984.
 There were unconfirmed reports of at least indirect Syrian
 involvement in the April 1983 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in
 Beirut and the October 1983 bombings of U.S. and French
 Multinational Force billets in Beirut, each of which caused
 extensive loss of life. At a minimum, Syrian permissiveness
 of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards' presence in Lebanon
 facilitated these terrorist operations.
 Internecine Palestinian squabbles and executions in Syria
 appeared to cease in 1984 as Syrian-dominated factions gained
 the upper hand in Syria and Syrian-controlled Lebanon.
 B. Disappearance
 Reportedly, people arrested for security reasons are sometimes
 never heard from again; families are not notified, nor are
 detainees allowed to contact their next of kin. It is
 possible that many of these people are dead.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been numerous credible reports of torture,
 primarily during arrest and interrogation. The penal code
 prohibits torture and establishes severe penalties for such
 practices. There are no reports or official acknowledgements
 or punishment of security or police officials for acts of
 torture, however. According to Amnesty International's 1983
 report on Syria, commonly used methods of torture in recent
 years include beatings, whipping of prisoners suspended in
 tires, beatings on the sole of the feet, cigarette burns,
 sexual molestation, and electric shocks.
 Little detailed information is available about prison
 conditions. No international organizations, such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), are allowed
 access to detention facilities. The ICRC has, however,
 visited such special category detainees as the U.S. airman
 captured in December 1983 and Israeli prisoners of war.
 Persons charged with or convicted of criminal offenses are
 held separately from those charged with political and security
 offenses. Health care, food, and access by family members for
 persons held in ordinary prisons are reported to be adequate.
 Conditions at prisons where political and security prisoners
 are held are reported to be more severe; visits by family
 memuers, for example, are not allowed, and Amnesty
 International, in its report Torture in the Eighties,
 
 
 1403
 SYRIA
 indicated that it has continued to receive allegations of
 torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Tne Constitution guarantees life, liberty, and personal
 security. The civilian legal code, modeled after French law,
 provides for due process, although it permits indefinite
 pretrial detention during the investigative process. Under
 the state of emergency in force since 1963, these safeguards
 can be suspended, and an individual may be held indefinitely
 witnout charge or trial, especially in political and security
 cases.
 The number of people currently held without trial or charge is
 not known, but is probably significant. Approximately 20
 Balath Party and government officials of the previous regime
 have been under detention since 1970. According to
 unconfirmed press accounts, possibly as many as 150 military
 officers were arrested in January 1982 in connection with an
 alleged coup plot, and several dozen more in 1983 for
 questioning government policies. In 1984, however, a power
 struggle between the President's brother Riflat al-Assad and
 several military and security force commanders did not lead to
 sweeping arrests or detentions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to the Code Laws passed down from the French. The
 defendant is detained provisionally upon the accusation of the
 public prosecutor, then remanded to a judge of arraignment,
 who may either free him on the basis of insufficient evidence
 or refer the case to a criminal court. Defendants are
 entitled to legal representation of their choice; if they
 cannot afford an attorney, the court appoints and pays for a
 lawyer. Civilian courts impose no restrictions on the lawyer
 in representing his client and allow the right of appeal. In
 noncontroversial criminal cases, the civilian courts are
 typically free from governmental interference; nevertheless,
 pressure from the party, state security forces, or other
 special units affects the course of the trials or the verdicts
 if there is sufficiently high-level interest in a given case.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 tne jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Arrests are made secretly and with no legal
 safeguards. The accused cannot be contacted by family or
 friends, who most often do not know the place of detention,
 which may be one of many secret or semisecret prisons
 maintained by different security forces. The accused has no
 right to a judicial determination of the basis for pretrial
 detention, no redress for false arrest, and no say in the
 selection of a lawyer, who is chosen by the court. All court
 sessions are closed, and there are no official channels for
 ootaining information on the trial or sentencing, though
 relatives with influence in the Government may ultimately
 succeed in obtaining reliable information and even effecting
 the release of the accused.
 The Government does not disseminate information on the number
 of persons detained for political or security offenses, and it
 is impossible to make an accurate estimate. It is clear that
 such arrests are relatively frequent. Relatives of persons
 
 
 1404
 SYRIA
 arrested by security forces have no way to publicize their
 cases and would be, in any case, too intimidated to do so.
 There is no opposition able to challenge the Government on
 this matter or to make estimates of its own.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government interferes with the private lives of its
 citizens in a number of ways. Electronic surveillance is
 believed to be widespread. Intelligence organizations
 maintain a network of guards to protect officials and
 important buildings, as well as to monitor the activity of
 people living in those neighborhoods. The postal system
 censors the mail but does not check every letter or package.
 Private schools are carefully inspected by the Government and
 follow the governmental curriculum. Although the legal system
 provides safeguards, including a requirement of arrest and
 search warrant before police are allowed to enter private
 homes, regulations under the state of emergency currently in
 effect suspend these safeguards in security-related cases.
 During security operations, especially in 1979-1982, there
 have been warrantless house-to-house searches by security
 personnel.
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party is politically expedient but
 not forced; indeed, membership is only achieved through
 recommendation and invitation.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Pudlic criticism of the Government, the Balath Party, or
 related institutions is not permitted. The broadcast media
 and publishing houses are wholly owned and operated by the
 Government and the Ba'ath Party and usually give only the
 official views on government policies and other important
 issues. The very occasional criticism of governmental bodies
 or operations is sanctioned criticism directed at
 administrative failings. Officials above the middle ranks are
 rarely criticized.
 Imported foreign printed matter and films generally are not
 censored, although articles are occasionally deleted from
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. This news
 material, along with fictional and non-fictional literature on
 the Middle East, is banned when considered critical of Syria.
 Control is much stricter on materials in Arabic. Censorship
 is exercised through offices in the Ministries of Information
 and of Culture and National Guidance. During the November
 1983 assault by Syrian-surrogate Palestinian organizations
 against pro-Arafat Palestinian forces in Tripoli, television
 news from neighboring Jordan was jammed and Beirut periodicals
 were often withheld from the market.
 Aside from a few church-run, private primary and secondary
 schools that are carefully inspected and follow the Education
 Ministry curriculum, schools at all levels are government
 operated. Teachers are not permitted to express ideas
 contrary to government policy, although in practice there is
 more openness of expression at the university level.
 
 
 1405
 SYRIA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can occur only
 with official acquiescence and usually at the instigation of
 t~ie Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private societies are
 allowed to meet if they have received governmental permission
 to organize. These are limited to nonpolitical activities,
 and include religious groups, e.g., the St. Vincent de Paul
 Society.
 In response to observations by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the Syrian Government is reported to have
 made efforts to oring its legislation into conformity with the
 Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the
 Right to Organize. In its 1984 report, however, the ILO's
 Committee of Experts stated that various provisions of Syrian
 legislation were still at variance with the convention.
 Professional organizations and labor unions function as parts
 of the government apparatus and are primarily used to transmit
 instructions and information from the Syrian leadership to
 their members. Unofficially, the unions also function as a
 means to keep the leadership informed of grievances and
 concerns at the grass roots level. Strikes are forbidden by
 law.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although predominantly Muslim, Syria does not espouse Islam as
 a state religion. As a concession to Islamic fundamentalists,
 who object to Ba'athi secularism, the present regime wrote
 into the Constitution the requirement that the President be
 Muslim, but otherwise there is no official advantage given to
 Islam or a particular sect of Islam. Sunni Arabs constitute
 over two-thirds of the populace, but most key positions in the
 Government are controlled by members of the Alawi sect (10-12
 percent of the population), which some Islamic fundamentalists
 do not accept as Muslim.
 Ba'atni ideology and modernizing influences have had some
 impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and ethnicity,
 Out an individual Syrian continues to be defined by his
 communal background, and the Iranian Revolution has encouraged
 the growth of Islamic fundamentalism. In this communally
 divided society, prejudice is virtually a way of life, though
 less so now than in the past. However, non-Alawi minority
 groups--which include Druze, Isma'ili Shi'a, Imami Shila,
 Jewish, Greek Orthodox, Greek Catholic, Roman Catholic,
 Maronite Catholic, Armenian Catholic, Armenian Orthodox,
 Syrian Catholic, Syrian Orthodox, Nestorian, and Protestant,
 not to mention Kurdish, Circassian, Turkoman, and Turkish
 Sunni--enjoy freedom to practice their religion. While
 members of non-Alawi minorities, as well as the Sunni
 majority, cannot usually aspire to more than marginal
 political power, every minority has members who prosper
 economically, and no minority can be said to be economically
 oppressed as a class. At the same time, the non-Muslim
 minorities are wary of potential political developments and
 keep their options open to emigrate through bank accounts and
 contacts abroad. Proselytizing is discouraged. In an
 exception to the general official policy of religious
 tolerance, Seventh Day Adventists are forbidden by law to
 practice their religion, and all Adventist church property has
 been confiscated.
 
 
 1406
 SYRIA
 The 3,000-4,000 Jews are free to practice their religion. The
 situation of the Jewish community has improved in recent
 years, despite continuing uncertainty over the community's
 future, and today it enjoys a relatively good standard of
 living, access to higher education and entrance into the
 professions. Jews are subject to restrictions on foreign
 travel (see below), however, and unlike other Syrian communal
 groups, there is always an entry in the space for religion on
 the identity cards and passports of Jewish citizens. Given
 the officially proclaimed state of war with Israel, the Syrian
 Government does not permit contact between Syrian Jews and
 Jews in Israel.
 There are unconfirmed reports that Jews are not permitted to
 hold government jobs, and, as in the cases of other small
 minority groups in Syria, no Jews are known to hold senior
 government or party office. Jews cannot serve in the military
 and, upon receiving degrees in technical fields, are not
 required to undertake five years of obligatory public
 service. There is no compelling evidence to indicate that the
 murder of members of a Jewish family in Aleppo in December
 1983 had a religious motivation. The authorities'
 investigation continues, but the crime remains unsolved.
 There were no reported incidents of violent crime involving
 members of the Jewish community in 1984.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is unrestricted except in the security zones
 of the Golan. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must
 obtain passports and exit visas. In theory, any Syrian can be
 required to post a bond which would be forfeited in case of
 non-return. Syrian Jews, however, are the only travelers
 routinely required to post such a bond, which varies from $250
 to $10,000 (recently the required bonds have been toward the
 lower end of the scale), depending on the person's position in
 tne community and economic circumstances. In recent years,
 Jews have found it somewhat easier to travel overseas,
 although an official ban on their emigration has continued.
 The Government continues its policy of not issuing passports
 to all the members of a Jewish family at the same time,
 although there have been some recent exceptions.
 The Government generally forbids foreign travel for certain
 categories of citizens, e.g., persons liable for military
 service, and pharmacists, architects, and engineers trained in
 Syria at public expense who have not yet completed a five-year
 government service obligation. Those who attempt to travel
 illegally are subject to fines and detention. Frequent
 exceptions are granted for students who receive permission
 from the Foreign Ministry to continue higher studies abroad.
 Emigration is not discouraged for groups other than those
 mentioned above.
 There are no formal restrictions on repatriation of Syrian
 citizens, although political opponents of the regime risk
 arrest if they return. There have been no reports of
 revocation of citizenship. The Government does not recognize
 renunciation of citizenship: a Syrian may acquire other
 nationalities but when within the borders of Syria is
 recognized as a Syrian citizen, subject to all rights and
 responsibilities.
 
 
 1407
 SYRIA
 There is a large Palestinian community estimated at 240,000,
 predominantly refugees from the 1948 and 1967 Arab-Israeli
 wars. Several thousand Lebanese and Palestinians entered
 Syria in 1982, fleeing Israel's invasion of Lebanon. Many
 participate fully in the Syrian economy, although Palestinians
 claim that procedures for purchase of real property are
 cumbersome for them and they are allowed to own only one
 building or plot of land. There have been no incidents of
 forced repatriation of displaced persons to Lebanon.
 Palestinians are generally free to choose their place of
 residence and occupation, and they occupy several senior
 positions in the Syrian bureaucracy. However, they are issued
 special Palestinian travel documents by the Government in lieu
 of Syrian passports, and they may not acquire citizenship or
 vote in Syrian elections.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Asad uses the Ba'ath Party as the instrument of his
 rule. Popular participation in the political process is
 severely restricted. The Constitution stipulates that the
 Ba'ath Party is the leading political organization. Several
 other parties are permitted by law, but they exercise little
 power and are subordinate to the Ba'ath Party. There is no
 legal party in active opposition to the Government. All legal
 political parties participate in the Progressive National
 Front, a mechanism which in theory is the highest political
 organization. Two political groupings are currently illegal:
 the Syrian Social National Party, which was banned in the
 1950's after carrying out a series of assassinations against
 government officials, and the Muslim Brotherhood, some
 elements of which carried out a series of assassinations and
 acts of political violence in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
 Candidates for parliament are selected by the ruling Ba'ath
 Party and, in theory, by four other parties which comprise the
 Progressive National Front. Personal loyalty to the regime
 and the President is a necessary qualification. Opposition
 lists of independents are offered but rarely prevail, probably
 because of the Front's far greater resources and organization
 and because of restrictions on freedom of expression. No
 independents were elected in the most recent elections, in
 1981.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental.Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government reacts to charges of human rights violations
 either by claiming that such charges are an intrusion in its
 internal affairs or by ignoring the charges altogether. The
 last visit by Amnesty International delegates occurred in
 March 1978; its periodic inquiries since then have received no
 response. The 1984 Amnesty International report expressed
 concern over the imprisonment of over 250 prisoners of
 conscience, wide powers used by the security forces to arrest
 and detain thousands of political prisoners, long-term
 detention without trial, summary procedures and the lack of
 legal safeguards in trials by military and state security
 courts, the routine use of torture by security forces,
 disappearances, and the death penalty. Freedom House calls
 Syria 'not free.'
 
 
 1408
 SYRIA
 The Government regularly participates in U.N. conferences on
 human rights and is currently a member of the U.N. Human
 Rights Committee. The only internal group monitoring human
 rights ceased to exist in practical terms after some of its
 officers were arrested in April 1980.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Traditionally, Syria has been an agricultural country growing
 wheat, cotton, barley, and tobacco. Since independence,
 however, it has built a substantial industrial base focusing
 on textiles, food processing, and light manufacturing.
 Although the Government is the sole purchaser of many
 agricultural commodities, most agricultural land is privately
 owned. Syrian observers estimate that roughly 15 percent of
 industrial production originates with private-sector,
 small-scale factories. Recently, Syria has undertaken several
 large-scale industrial projects, totally government-owned, to
 manufacture cement, fertilizer, and chemicals, refine
 petroleum, mine phosphate, and process steel.
 Petroleum extraction (8.4 million tons in 1983) has been a
 primary source of foreign exchange in recent years, although
 declining production and greater local consumption have begun
 to erode the positive contribution oil exports have made to
 Syria's balance of trade.
 Syria's population is slightly over 10 million, with a
 relatively high growth rate of 3.7 percent. Per capita gross
 national product in 1982 reached $1,680, up from $1,569 in
 1981, in part due to inflation. Life expectancy at birth is
 66.8 years, and the declining infant mortality rate is 57.6
 deaths per 1,000. Both figures reflect the priority the
 Government has placed on improving health care and extending
 delivery systems in rural areas. The most recent World Bank
 data available (1976) indicate that 75 percent of Syria's
 population had access to safe drinking water, 80 percent in
 urban areas and 70 percent in rural areas. Virtually all
 urban areas are now electrified and considerable progress has
 been made in rural areas. One of the hallmarks of the Ba'athi
 regime is its emphasis on improving living conditions in the
 rural parts of the country. Primary school education is
 compulsory for both male and female children until the age of
 13, although female enrollment lags far behind that of males.
 The equality of women is guaranteed by the Constitution.
 Women participate extensively in the work force, particularly
 in Damascus, and the Women's Union works to expand the
 participation of women in all sectors of society, utilizing
 the media and a network of chapters throughout Syria to convey
 its message. At the same time, traditional religious law
 continues to pertain in matters of personal status.
 Particularly among the majority Muslim population, this
 continues to limit women's rights in matters such as marriage,
 divorce, and inheritance.
 
 
 1409
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. .0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............     . 0.0      0.0     0.0
 A.AID ....................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0          0.0     0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............     . 0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.0      0.0     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. 0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0          0.0     0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   .. .0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............     . 0.0      0.0     0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............     . 0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ................. 0.0        0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL .........  23.6      5.0     30.0    676.2
 1BRD             22.0      0.0     30.0   555.7
 IFC               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDA               0.0      0.0      0.0    47.3
 IDS               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ADB               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFDB              0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNDP              0.1      5.0      0.0    49.3
 OTHER-UN           1.5     0.0      0.0     8.2
 EEC               0.0      0.0      0.0    15.7
 
 
 1410
