 SYRIA
 Although Syria is nominally a representative democracy,
 President Hafez al-Asad wields virtually absolute power, and
 his Government remains a sometimes repressive dictatorship.
 The regime has not permitted other centers of government
 authority such as an independent judiciary and legislature to
 develop, and it has at times resorted to forcible repression
 to insure its survival. At the same time, the Government has
 tried to provide for the basic needs of its people, and it
 allows a certain amount of regional autonomy exercised through
 local administrative councils affiliated with the Ba'ath Party.
 The ruling Ba'ath Party, with its emphasis on social and
 secular Arabism, gained ascendancy in 1963 and over time has
 become dominated by the military, which consumes a large share
 of Syria's scarce economic resources. In recent years, the
 Party has served principally to legitimize Asad's rule.
 Although Ba'ath Party doctrine seeks to overcome sectarian and
 class consciousness by building a sense of national rather
 than ethnic identity, ethnic, religious, and regional
 allegiances remain important. Members of Asad's own sect, the
 Alawis, hold most of the important military and security
 positions and run many of the nationalized corporations.
 Syria has been under emergency powers since 1963, except for a
 hiatus in 1973-74. Martial law has been justified by the
 state of war with Israel and continuing threats posed by
 terrorist groups (Islamic fundamentalist, Iraqi, Palestinian,
 and Lebanese), which were blamed in 1986 for several bloody
 incidents of terrorism in Syria. The Muslim Brotherhood
 remains the greatest internal threat to the regime. This
 group of Islamic fundamentalists openly challenged the secular
 Ba'athist Alawi-dominated regime in the late 1970's and early
 1980's, but the uprising was brutally repressed in 1982.
 Thousands of people were killed in the Islamic stronghold of
 Hama, the memory of which lingers in Syria and serves to
 discourage any widespread activity against the Government.
 The League for Communist Action is the second most prominent
 opposition group. There were several incidents in 1987 which
 indicated that opposition groups were still active, albeit on
 a very limited scale. Public manifestation of antiregime
 activity was limited to wall slogans critical of the economic
 situation and ome distribution of antigovernment literature.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. Several security services exist, and each is
 suspected of human rights violations.
 Syria has a socialist economy. Although a private sector
 remains, most major enterprises are nationalized. The economy
 continued its serious downturn in 1987, the result of which
 has been a/sharp decrease in the standard of living. The
 Government has undertaken limited initiatives such as joint
 public/private sector projects to encourage private investment.
 However, a lack of confidence in the Government's ability to
 improve the economy has discouraged the private sector from
 taking a major part in these ventures. The Government has
 continued efforts begun in 1986 to suppress the once
 flourishing black markets in currency exchange and imported
 goods, levying harsh prison sentences on violators. An
 anticorruption campaign resulted in the arrest and conviction
 of a number of individuals, including senior officers and some
 related to the most powerful regime officials. However,
 corruption among the ruling elite remains pervasive.
 
 
 1314
 SYRIA
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation
 in 1987. Syria, remained under the rule of a dictatorship and
 there.wqre no,signs of progress towards a freer political
 system or a greater~respecJ for individual human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section-1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 -a. Political Killing
 Executions for political beliefs in Syria are typically a
 reaction to direct and violent threats to the regime. The
 decreae in,the number of terrorist incidents in 1987
 corresponded to a decrease in reports of executions. Six
 persons, sentenced tp death for involvement in terrorist
 operation s.in 1986, wert hanged in August 1987.
 Killings by politically motivated groups are usually directed
 at the gene,al, public to stir up popular unrest against the
 regime. However, attacks against military targets have
 occurred, such as the bomb attacks in 1986 and 1987 against
 buses carrying Syrian military personnel.
 b. Disappearance
 There hpye'been credible reports over recent years that some
 Syrians arrested for security reasons have never been heard
 from again. lThere were, however, no such reports in 1987.
 C. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the penal, code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe penalties for it,-there have been numerous credible
 reports'of torture, primarily during arrest and interrogation.
 In a special report, "Syria: Torture by the Security Forces,"
 issued in October 1987, Amnesty International (AI) described
 systematic abuses inflicted on detainees arrested in Syria,
 including Palestinians from refugee camps, and on other
 detainees seized in Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon. The
 report said that at least five security units have for years
 arrested people in Syria at will, often without explanation,
 and tortured them during periods of incommunicado detention
 that have sometimes lasted for several years, The report said
 that savage beatings with fists and sticks and whippings with
 leather belts and electric cable were the usual forms of
 torture but that AI had received descriptions of at least 35
 different methods used, many in specially equipped torture
 chambers. Among the methods often cited, the report said, is
 the "Washing Machine," in which the victim's arms and fingers
 are crushed in a rotating drum. Al noted that it has
 repeatedly called on the Government to end torture by its
 forces but never received a response.
 An eyewitness detained by security officials in 1987 observed
 implements of torture, including clubs, during his brief
 confinement in a detention center. Security forces often will
 arrest family members of a fugitive and detain or torture them
 until the fugitive surrenders to authorities'. There have been
 no reports of punishment of officials who engage in such
 practices.
 
 
 1315 ,
 
 SYRIA
 Persons charged with or convicted of criminal offenses are
 held separately from those charged with security crimes.
 Conditions in prisons for ordinary criminals are adequate and
 are better for foreigners than for Syrians. Meals ate
 adequate, and provision is made for exercise. Much less is
 known about conditions in security prisons. No international
 groups are allowed access to detention facilities. Families
 are usually not allowed to visit security prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The civilian legal code, modeled after French law, generally
 provides for due process, although it permits indefinite
 pretrial detention during the investigative process. Under
 the state of emergency, normal safeguards can be suspended,
 and a person may be held indefinitely without charge or trial,
 especially in security and political cases.
 In cases involving security or political offenses, arrests are
 made secretly, with no legal restraints. The accused has no
 right to a judicial determination of the basis for pretrial
 detention, no redress for false arrest, and cannot be
 contacted by family or friends, who most often do not know
 where the accused is being held.
 There does not appear to be any forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to the French-based legal code. The defendant is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public
 prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The
 judge may either free him on the basis of insufficient
 evidence or refer the case to a criminal court. Defendants
 are entitled to legal representation of their choice; if they
 cannot afford a lawyer, they will have one appointed by the
 court. Civilian courts impose no restrictions on lawyers in
 representing their clients and allow the right of appeal. In
 noncontroversial criminal cases, the civilian courts are
 usually free of governmental coercion, although the Government
 can and often does bring pressure to bear if it wishes to do
 so. The slow and cumbersome legal system can leave suspects
 languishing in prison for months.
 Defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty, and are
 allowed to present evidence and confront their accusers.
 Trials are public except for cases involving juveniles and
 crimes which may have a negative impact on moral sensitivity,
 such as rape. Religious courts usually deal with marriage,
 divorce, and inheritance.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Such persons have no say in the selection of a lawyer,
 who is chosen by the court. All court sessions are closed,
 and there are no official channels for obtaining information
 on the trial or sentencing, although relatives with influence
 in the Government ultimately may succeed in obtaining
 information and even effecting the release of the accused.
 Families without influence have no way to publicize prisoners'
 cases.
 The Government does not release information on the number of
 persons detained for political or security offenses, but
 
 
 1316
 SYRIA
 the number is probably significant. Some 20 Ba'ath Party and
 government officials have been under detention since 1970.
 According to unconfirmed press reports, as many as 150
 military officers were arrested in 1982 in connection with a
 repotpd coup attempt, and 60 were arrested in the summer of
 1986. or the same reason. Some reportedly have been released
 duringthe past year;
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to
 protect officials and important buildings as well as to
 monitor the activity of people living in those neighborhoods.
 Somd telephone conversations are almost certainly recorded.
 The presence of police and security officials is pervasive,
 especially in Damascus. The postal system censors the mail,
 including-foreign publications, but does not check every
 letter or package. Although the legal system provides
 safeguards, including a requirement of an arrest and search
 warrant before police pre allowed to enter private homes,
 regulations under the state of emergency suspend these
 protections in security-related cases.
 Security- checkpoints can be set up anywhere, and no warrant
 for search or arrest is required. Security forces are most
 concerned with terrorists but also search for smuggled goods.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 According to press and other reports, Syrian forces in Lebanon
 killed some 200 people in Beirut and Tripoli in late December
 1986 in apparent retaliation for the killing of Syrian
 soldiers on duty in Lebanon. Many of the victims of the
 Syrian action were reported to be unarmed civilians. There
 were also reports that many other people--perhaps as many as
 several hundred, according to information received by Amnesty
 International--were missing after having been.detained by
 Syrian troops.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, the Ba'ath Party, and
 related institutions is not permitted. The Government or the
 Ba'ath Party wholly own-and operate all broadcast media and
 publishing houses, and strictly control the dissemination of
 all information.
 Censorship of foreign and domestic news is exerczised through
 offices in the Ministries of Information, Culture, and,
 National Guidance. Any subject deemed sensitive to the
 Government's interests will not appear in the press or in
 daily broadcasts. In 1987 this included the Palestinian '
 National Council meetings in Algiers, the-issue of U.S./Iran
 relations, and the actions taken by-Western states against
 Syria because of its involvement in terrorism.
 Newspapers provide no medium for opposition opinion. The-
 occasional criticism of government bodies or their operations
 is limited to pointing out minor administrative failings and
 instances of domestic corruption, or to airing complaints
 about problems in the economy. In this way, the media acts to
 
 
 1317-
 
 SYRIA
 portray itself as a defender of the interests of the people.
 Officials above the middle rank are rarely criticized.
 Imported printed material and films ate subject to censorship.
 Articles about Syria occasionally are deleted from foreign
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. News material,
 as well as fictional and nonfictional literature, are
 sometimes banned if they are considered overly critical of
 Syria. Films often are censored for a variety of reasons,
 such as an unfavorable interpretation of the Middle East
 conflict, sectarianism, or the use of actors or production
 companies targeted by the Arab boycott. Control is much
 stricter on materials in Arabic.
 Schools at all levels are government operated. Even the few
 church-run private primary and secondary schools are required
 to follow the Ministry of Education's curriculum and are
 subject to regular inspection. One hour of the school day is
 devoted to instruction on Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not
 permitted to express ideas contrary to government policy,
 although more freedom of expression is tolerated at the
 university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can be held
 only with official permission, and usually at the instigation
 of the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private societies,
 including religious groups, are allowed to meet if they have
 received government permission to organize. They are limited,
 however, to nonpolitical activities.
 Professional organizations and labor unions function as
 dependent parts of the government apparatus and are primarily
 used to transmit instructions and information from the Syrian
 leadership. The unions have no political role and generally
 function only as a means of keeping the Government informed of
 grassroots grievances and concerns. Strikes are forbidden by
 law. In 1986 and 1987, there were brief work stoppages by
 taxi drivers in Damascus over gas price increases.
 Professional organizations have a somewhat greater voice in
 the Government, but they too are restricted. In 1987 the
 lawyers' union successfully petitioned for the release of
 several of its members who had been imprisoned since 1982.
 In response to observations by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the Syrian Government is reported to have
 made efforts to bring its legislation into conformity with the
 Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the
 Right to Organize. The ILO has made clear that steps taken by
 the Government to date have been insufficient to achieve
 compliance.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although Syria is predominantly Sunni Muslim, the Constitution
 does not espouse a state religion. As a concession to Islamic
 fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi secularism, the current
 regime amended the Constitution to require that the president
 be Muslim. Otherwise, there is no official preference given
 to one religion over another. Sunni Arabs constitute over
 two-thirds of the population. Many key positions in the
 Government are controlled by members of the minority Alawi
 sect (10 to 12 percent of the population), which is considered
 heretical by some Islamic fundamentalists.
 
 
 1318
 SYRIA
 Ba'athi ideology and modernizing influences have had some
 impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and ethnicity,
 but individual Syrians continue to be identified by their
 communal associations. Non-Alawi and non-Sunni groups do have
 the freedom to practice their individual religions, but
 religious training, fund raising, construction, and the
 holding of all meetings except for worship are tightly
 restricted and sometimes banned. -
 One exception to the official poLicy of religious -olerance -is-
 the treatment of Seventh-Day Adventists, who are forbidden to-
 practice their religion or own'churah property.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to operate, although
 prosdlytizing is strictly forbidden. The publication of
 religious materials is subject to the same strict controls as
 secular material.
 The status of Syrian Jews continues to be influenced by the
 ongoing state of war with Israel. The 2,000 to 3,000 Jews in
 Syria are free to practice their religion, and the. situation
 of the Jewish.community haw improved in recent years, despite
 the uncertainty dictated by regional developments.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is unrestricted except in the security zone of
 the Golan Heights and near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan,
 and Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must acquire
 passports and exit visas. In theory, Syrians can travel to
 other Arab countries, except Iraq, on their identification
 cards alone, although in practice this applies only to
 Lebanon. Women and children under 16 must have permission to
 travel abroad from husbands or fathers:
 In general; the Government prohibits foreign travel for
 persons liable for military service and for certain categories
 of professionals--such as pharmacists, architects, and
 engineers--trained at public expense who have not fulfilled 5
 years of government service. Under exceptional circumstances,
 however, persons in these groups can obtain-passports valid
 for 3 months. Students traveling abroad for higher education
 must obtain permission from the Foreign Ministry and, like all
 Syrians, are subject to recall by the Government. Persons
 caught trying to travel illegally are subject to fines and
 detention..
 Palestinians must also have permission to leave Syria before
 they can receive an exit permit. Young Palestinians sometimes
 experience difficulties in obtaining the requisite Palestinian
 travel document.
 In theory, any Syrian can be required to post a bond of
 between $300 and $800 which would be forfeited in the event of
 nonretutn. In reality, only Palestinians and Jews are
 routinely required to post such bonds. Whereas Palestinians
 can pay less than $20 to a bank to serve as a guarantee, Jews
 must post the full bond. Jews, particularly those with
 significant holdings and financial ties in Syria, have found
 it somewhat easier to travel abroad in recent years. A ban
 against Jewish emigration still exists, and groups have been
 caught trying to emigrate illegally. With some exceptions,
 the Government generally continues its policy of not issuing
 passports to all members of Jewish families at the same time.
 
 
 1319
 SYRIA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Asad and his senior advisers maintain strict control
 over the political life of the nation. Syrians have little
 say in the determination of their political leadership.
 Popular participation in presidential elections is provided
 for in the Constitution. The Parliament is a rubber stamp
 organization which, though freely elected, has little real
 power. Major initiatives normally take the form of
 presidential decrees and Ba'ath Party resolutions, which are
 later ratified by the Parliament. The Constitution provides
 that the Ba'ath Party is the leading political organization,
 and other legal parties, which nominally are members of a
 broad-based national front, are severely restricted. Some
 parties, such as the League for Communist Action, are outlawed.
 According to official sources, during the 1985 presidential
 elections, President Asad received 99 percent of the vote,
 with 99 percent of the public participating. There was no
 opposition candidate.
 A certain degree of regional autonomy is permitted as long as
 it does not challenge the central Government's authority.
 Major city centers, for example, exercise local control, while
 the Druze in the Jebel Druze region have their own governorship
 and sheikhs handle tribal matters. Certain ethnic and social
 groups, such as the Bedouin, and people living in small
 villages have little contact with the central Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government denies charges of human rights violations,
 often ignoring them or calling them an intrusion into internal
 affairs. There are no internal groups monitoring human
 rights. Amnesty International's inquiries are ignored and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross has had only limited
 access to prisoners. No Syrian is willing to criticize the
 Government publicly for human rights actions.
 The Government exerts great efforts in the U.N. and other
 international bodies to highlight human rights abuses by other
 countries--especially Israel, South Africa, and, in 1987, the
 United States.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party is an important factor in
 prospering in the Syrian economy. Party connections can pave
 the way for entrance into better schools, access to more
 lucrative employment, and greater power in gov.ernment.
 The official state of war with Israel continues to influence
 the status of Syrian Jews, although the community's situation
 has improved in recent years. Today the Jewish community
 enjoys a relatively high standard of living, access to higher
 education, and entrance into the professions. Jews are
 subject to foreign travel restrictions, however, and are the
 only mihority whose passports and identity cards note their
 religion. Contact between Syrian Jews and Israelis is still
 prohibited. There are unconfirmed reports that Jews are
 denied government positions and, like members of other small
 
 
 1320
 SYRIA
 min oiiids, no Jews hold senior positions in the Ba'ath
 Party. Jews are not required to perform government service
 and are barred from the military.
 Syria's Palestinian community numbers approximately 250,000
 and consists predominantly of refugees from the 1948 and 1967
 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand Lebanese and Palestinians
 also fled to Syria in 1982 following the Israeli invasion of
 Lebanon. Palestinians are officially temporary residents
 pending the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 Under Syrian law, resident Palestinians enjoy equal access to
 employment, social services, and education. In addition,
 Palestinian organizations sanctioned by the Government operate
 sociarl institutions within their community. Palestinians may
 choose their place of residence and occupation, and the
 majority participate fully in the local economy. With
 government permiission, they may now own more than one building
 or plot of land.
 The Government allows those Palestinian political groups which
 espouse the official anti-Arafat policy to operate, although
 their activities are carefully controlled. Palestinians may
 not acquire Syrian citizenship or vote in Syrian elections.
 Although they currently occupy several senior positions in the
 bureaucracy, Palestiniansiane unofficially barred from the
 highest echelobs of the Government.
 The Constitution assures the rights of-women and calls for-the
 elimination of all obstacles to women's development.
 Historically, Syrian women-have benefited from government
 policies, including the right to vote (1949) and equal pay for
 work of equal value.
 Syrian women hold positions in all sectors of the Government
 and the economy. _They presently comprise about 12 percent of
 the documented work force, although the figure probably rises
 in rural areas. The literacy rate for Syrian women is 43
 percent, compared to a national average of 49 percent. The
 Government encourages women's enrollment at all levels of
 education.
 Traditignal concepts of male guardianship of women continue to
 counteract.official policies. Particularly among Muslims,
 these concepts often limit a woman's rights in matters of
 marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and personal
 decisions.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Syrian labor laws provide comprehensive working standards for
 the public An private sectors. Minimum wages are prescribed
 in all seceorg. The minimum age in the predominant public
 sector is 18. The minimum -age varies in the private sector;
 the absolute minimum age is 12, while parental permission is
 required'for children under age 16 to work. Children, are-
 forbidden from working at night- The Labor Ministry is
 responsible for enforcing minimum age practices, but the
 number of labor investigators-is-small and violation of the
 law may be extensive.
 Women may not engage in jobs involving heavy labor and must
 obtain permission to work at night.
 
 
 1321
 SYRIA
 The workweek consists of 6 workdays of 6 to 8 hours a day,
 although in certain fields in which workers are not
 continuously busy a 9-hour day is permitted. Labor laws also
 mandate a full 24-hour rest day per week. Employees are
 guaranteed 15 days of paid leave per year during the first 5
 years, rising to 30 days per year for persons over age 50 or
 with 20 years' employment. An employee may take up to 200
 days of sick leave per year, receiving 80 percent of his
 salary during the first 30 days and 100 percent for the
 remaining 170 days. Employers are required to provide limited
 medical care, and establishments with more than 100 employees
 must hire a nurse and offer access to a physician when
 necessary.
 Public laws mandate safety standards in all sectors, although
 actual enforcement depends on individual managers and may
 therefore vary. The Government provides disability insurance
 for job-related injuries, totaling 80 percent of a worker's
 salary for the first 30 days and up to 100 percent for a
 year. Permanently disabled workers who do not return to their
 job receive severance pay of up to 75 percent of their last
 salary, with a sliding scale based on the extent of the
 disability. Employees often experience delays in receiving
 compensation but have recourse to the legal system in the
 event of nonpayment.
 Guest workers theoretically receive the same benefits, but
 their right to workers' permits is constantly in flux. Many
 work illegally and are not covered by the government system.
 
 
 1322
