 SYRIA
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime which does not
 hesitate to use force against-its citizens when it feels it is
 threatened. Although the forms of a democratic system exist,
 President Hafez al-Asad wields almost absolute authority. Key
 decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, and the
 economy are made by him with counsel from his principal
 advisers. The Parliament, in which the Ba'ath Party is
 guaranteed a majority, is elected every 4 years but has no
 independent authority. It cannot initiate laws; it may only
 react to initiatives by the executive. All three branches of
 government are guided by the views of the Ba'ath Party, whose
 primacy in state institutions is assured by the Constitution.
 Independent political opposition is forcibly repressed. From
 the late 1970's until its brutal suppression in 1982, the
 Muslim Brotherhood represented the greatest internal challenge
 to the regime. Since then, public manifestations of antiregime
 activity have been very limited. Except for a hiatus in
 1973-74, Syria has been under a state of emergency since 1963.
 The Government has justified martial law by the state of war
 with Israel and continuing threats posed by terrorist groups
 (Islamic fundamentalist, Iraqi, and Lebanese).
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. The several main branches of the security services
 operate independently of each other and outside of the legal
 system. Each continues to be responsible for severe human
 rights violations.
 Syria's mixed economy is dominated by an inefficient public
 sector but also includes private and joint sectors. During the
 1960's, citing its state Socialist ideology, the Government
 nationalized most major enterprises and espoused economic
 .policies designed to correct previous regional and class
 disparities. The small private sector continues to expand,
 with the regime promoting it to spur investment. Most
 agricultural land is privately owned. Nonetheless., the economy
 remains stagnant. Average real growth during the 1980's lagged
 behind the average population growth, and living standards for
 most income groups have declined. Per capita income in 1991 is
 estimated at $980.
 Virtually all basic human rights remain tightly restricted.
 The major human rights problems include torture, arbitrary
 arrest and detention, lack of a fair trial in security cases,
 and the denial of freedom of speech, press, association, the
 right of citizens to change their government, and certain
 worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 t There were no reports of executions for political beliefs in
 1991. However, there were two known incidents of extrajudicial
 killings of criminal suspects. In May Syrian customs officers,
 without warning, shot dead a fugitive who was a suspect in the
 slaying of another customs officer. In the second instance,
 Syrian army forces in August reportedly summarily executed a
 number of persons in the town of Medaya, a black market center
 near the border with Lebanon.
 
 
 1605
 
 SYRIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1991, but the
 welfare and whereabouts of hundreds of persons held
 incommunicado from previous years remain unknown (see Section
 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Despite the fact that the penal code prohibits torture and
 provides severe penalties for it, there continued to be
 numerous credible reports of widespread and systematic tortlire,
 primarily during arrest and interrogation in political or
 security-related cases, and often in specially equipped torture;
 chambers. One case in 1991 involved a Syrian detained for 10
 days by Syrian military intelligence following a fatal traffic
 accident. During his detention, he was subjected to both
 physical and psychological abuse; at one point he reportedly
 was bent over, placed in a tire, suspended from the ceiling,
 and beaten on the exposed parts of his feet. He also claimed
 to have been forced to watch as interrogators pulled another
 detainee's mustache out, hair by hair. Gouging out of eyes,
 extraction of fingernails and toenails, and electric shocks to
 sensitive parts of the body are only a few of the methods
 reportedly used by government-employed torturers.
 Prison conditions in Syria are poor, particularly in older,
 more overcrowded facilities, and security prisons are markedly'
 worse than civilian prisons. Medical treatment and facilities
 are inadequate in both types, and injuries and chronic ailments
 from torture and grossly inadequate detention conditions are
 either not treated or are treated unsatisfactorily.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 While the civil law code generally provides for due process,
 these provisions do not apply to security or political
 offenses, which are treated under the state of emergency law.
 Under provisions of the state of emergency, originally imposed
 in 1963 and maintained in force except for a brief hiatus in
 1973-74, the Government may suspend normal safeguards. A
 person may be arrested secretly, held indefinitely without
 charge or trial, and denied the right to a judicial
 determination of the basis for pretrial detention. The
 detainee has no redress for false arrest and usually cannot be
 contacted by family or friends, who most often do not know
 where the detainee is being held. Many "disappeared" persons
 are believed to be held in the security prisons.
 Frequently, the detained person is released without being
 charged. No exact estimates of the number of persons detained
 without trial exist. Scores of Ba'ath Party members were
 arrested in Syria in 1970 and 1971 following the coup that
 brought Hafez Al-Asad to power. Eighteen of these persons,
 including a former president and five former cabinet members,
 were released from prison in December and placed under house
 arrest; none has ever been formally charged or tried. Scores
 of Syrians and Palestinians resident in Syria and Lebanon and
 pro-Iraqi Lebanese were detained in early 1991 as a preventive
 measure before and during the Persian Gulf War. Most of these
 detainees were reportedly released shortly after their arrest.
 The Government has exiled persons in the past, but there were
 no known instances in 1991.
 
 
 1606
 SYRIA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Syrian court system comprises separate civil courts; penal
 and criminal courts, whose jurisdiction includes economic
 crimes; and religious, military, security, and constitutional
 courts. Civil and criminal courts are under the jurisdiction
 of the Ministry of Justice. The accused in a criminal case is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the Public
 Prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The
 judge may either dismiss the charges on the basis of
 insufficient evidence or refer the case to a criminal court.
 Defendants are entitled to legal representation of their
 choice. If they cannot afford a lawyer, one will be appointed.
 by the court. Civil and criminal courts impose no restrictions
 on lawyers in representing their clients and allow the right of
 appeal to criminal or civil appellate courts found in each
 province. Criminal courts also provide for bail. In
 noncontroversial cases, courts are normally free of
 governmental coercion, although the Government can bring
 pressure to bear if it wishes to do so. Defendants in criminal
 cases are allowed to present evidence and confront their
 accusers. Trials are public, except for cases involving
 juveniles or crimes such as rape.- Cases are tried before a
 judge; there is no jury system. The slow and cumbersome legal
 system can leave suspects languishing in prison for months.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the State Security Court, which is under
 military control. Such persons have no say in the selection of
 a lawyer, who is chosen by the court. All court sessions are
 closed, and no official channels for obtaining information on
 the trial or sentencing exist. Relatives with influence in the
 Government, however, may ultimately succeed in obtaining
 information and even effecting the release of the accused. A
 further military "field court" exists to deal with grave
 security infractions applicable under the state of emergency,
 though this field court's precise nature and the types of
 offenses over which it has jurisdiction are not clear. The
 accused is not permitted legal representation at field court
 proceedings, which are held in secret.
 According to the Constitution, the High Constitutional Court
 investigates and rules on petitions submitted by the President
 or at least one-fourth of the members of the People's Assembly
 challenging the constitutionality of laws or legislative
 decrees. The Court has no appellate jurisdiction over cases
 from the civil or criminal- courts.
 The Government does not release information on the number of
 persons detained for political or security offenses, but
 credible sources believe a figure of 7,500 such prisoners
 (including more than 2,000 held in Syrian detention facilities
 in Lebanon) to be the minimum. In the spring, the Government
 reportedly released 80 political prisoners and 700
 Palestinians, mostly members of Fatah arrested between 1983 and
 1990 (a period of extreme tension between Palestine Liberation
 Organization (PLO) leader Yasir Arafat and Syrian President
 Asad). Seven Lebanese army officers loyal to former Lebanese
 Army Commander Michel Aoun arrested in October 1990 were
 released from Syrian custody on March 10. In September a
 Lebanese newspaper reported the release of 12 Lebanese
 following the personal intervention of a Lebanese
 parliamentarian. The Government contends that it holds no
 political prisoners and that persons are detained not because
 of their political beliefs but because of criminal acts or
 
 
 1607
 SYRIA
 actions that violate the state of emergency; it is clear,
 however, that many persons have been jailed as a result of
 unfair trials and for nonviolent opposition (real or suspected)
 to the regime.
 In December the Government granted amnesty to 2,864 Syrians
 accused of security offenses. .This amnesty included Syrian
 communists and persons believed by the Government to have
 sympathized with or indirectly assisted persons accused of
 having been involved in violent attacks during the Muslim
 Brotherhood rebellion of the late 1970's and early 1980's.
 Many of those amnestied are known to have been released,
 although by year's end the Government had not yet made a list
 of names available.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the legal system provides safeguards, including the
 requirement of an arrest or search warrant before police are
 allowed to enter private homes, regulations under the state of
 emergency suspend these protections in security-related cases.
 Domestic intelligence organizations maintain a network of
 guards to protect officials and important buildings, as well as
 to monitor the activity of people living in the neighborhoods
 of protected officials. The presence of police and security
 officials is pervasive, especially in Damascus, although it is
 less pronounced in the provinces. It is widely believed that
 telephone conversations are monitored and sometimes recorded.
 The government-run postal system selectively censors the mail,
 including foreign publications.
 Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere by government
 authorities. Security personnel require no warrant for search
 or arrest in dealing with persons stopped at such locations.
 Security forces at the checkpoints are mostly concerned with
 clandestine shipments of weapons and subversive literature but
 also search for smuggled goods. The number of checkpoints and
 spot vehicle checks rose immediately before and during the
 Persian Gulf War; after the war, there were few reports of new
 checkpoints, except at the border with Lebanon.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the President is not permitted, and
 criticism of the Government and the Ba'ath Party is effectively
 discouraged.
 The Government or the Ba'ath Party wholly owns and operates all
 broadcast media and publishing houses and strictly controls the
 dissemination of information. Censorship of foreign and
 domestic news is exercised through offices in the Ministries of
 Information and of Culture and National Guidance. Any subject
 deemed'sensitive to government interests will not appear in the
 press or in daily broadcasts. In 1991 censored subjects
 included details of Syria's military participation in the Gulf
 War coalition, Syria's human rights record, foreign media
 reporting of or speculation about Syria's discussions with U.S.
 officials about the Middle East peace process, the post-Gulf
 war presence of U.S military forces in the Persian Gulf,
 various aspects of Syria's continuing political and security
 role in Lebanon, and aspects of Middle East peace negotiations
 in Madrid and Washington.
 
 
 1608
 SYRIA
 Jamming of Jordanian television programs, which otherwise could
 be received in Damascus and most of southern Syria, continued
 in 1991, except for 2 days when Jordan's King Hussein made a
 state visit to Syria. Most other radio and television
 broadcasts from neighboring countries, including Israel and
 Iraq, are not jammed, and reports not carried in Syrian media
 are generally well known. Criticism of government policies or
 their operations is usually orchestrated from above, and
 officials above the middle rank are rarely criticized.
 Imported printed material and films are subject to censorship.
 Articles critical of Syria or Syria's role in Lebanon are
 occasionally deleted from foreign magazines and newspapers
 befoe distribution. Fictional and nonfictional literature is
 censored if it is considered overly critical of Syria,
 offensive to one of Syria's religious groups, or too graphic in
 its description of sex. Control is particularly strict on
 materials in Arabic. Films are often censored for a variety of
 reasons, such as unfavorable interpretation of the Middle East
 conflict, sectarianism, or the use of actors or production
 companies targeted by the Arab boycott. In June the United
 States Information Service (USIS) and the Syrian Ministry of
 Culture jointly organized a festival of classic and
 contemporary American films, but the Syrian Government refused
 at the last minute to allow the festival to be held because the
 production-distribution company for three of the films was on
 the Syrian boycott list.
 Public schools at all levels are closely controlled by the
 national Government. Private primary and secondary schools run
 by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) for the
 Palestinian refugees, as well as those operated by minority
 religious groups, are required to follow the curriculum
 dictated by the Ministry of Education and are subject to
 regular inspection. In all schools, 1 hour each day is devoted
 to instruction on Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not
 permitted to express ideas contrary to government policy,
 although some freedom of expression is tolerated at the
 university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstration may be held only
 with official permission, and are usually held at the
 instigation of the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private
 societies, including religious groups, are allowed to meet if
 they have received government permission to organize. Such
 permission is usually granted, but only for nonpolitical
 activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although nearly two-thirds of Syrians are Sunni Muslim, the
 Constitution does not establish a state religion. As a
 concession to Islamic fundamentalists who object to Ba'athi
 secularism, the 1973 Constitution requires that the President
 be Muslim. Otherwise, no official preference is given to one
 religion over another, and all major Christian and Muslim
 holidays are officially observed by the Government. Many key
 positions in the Government, most notably the presidency, are
 controlled by members of the minority Alawi Muslim sect (a sect
 comprising not more than 10-12 percent of the population),
 which is considered heretical by many Sunni Muslims.
 
 
 1609
 SYRIA
 Ba'athi secular ideology and modernizing influences have had
 some impact in diminishing the importance attached to religion
 and ethnicity, but individual Syrians continue to identify
 themselves by their communal associations. Most religious
 groups, including Syria's 3,600-member Jewish community, are
 largely free to practice their different religions.
 Fund-raising, the construction of worship sites, and the
 holding of all meetings except for worship are tightly
 controlled by the Government but generally permitted under
 restrictive conditions. Religious training in the language of
 the religion is permitted within the curriculum for Jews and
 Christians in Jewish and Armenian schools, among others.
 Non-Muslim groups maintain links with coreligionists'outside
 Syria. One exception to the official policy of religious
 tolerance is the treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses and'
 Seventh-Day Adventists, who are forbidden to practice their
 religion or to own church property. Syrian authorities
 reportedly arrested an unknown number of Jehovah's Witnesses in
 early 1991, apparently as part of the heightened security
 measures in effect during the Gulf War.' Eleven who are
 believed to have been held in incommunicado detention without
 formal charges were reportedly released at the end of
 November. Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and
 practice. While proselytizing and conversion are not legally
 proscribed, in practice the Government discourages such
 activities aimed at Muslims. The publication of religious
 material is subject to the same strict controls as secular
 material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is restricted in the security zone of the Golan
 Heights and occasionally near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan,
 and Iraq. Syrian women over the age of 18 haVe the legal right
 to travel, but, in practice, a husband may file a request with
 the Ministry of Interior to prohibit his wife's departure from
 Syria. Similarly, a father may request that the Ministry '
 prohibit travel abroad by minor or dependent children, as well
 as by unmarried daughters, even if they are over 18 years of
 age.
 In general, the Government restricts foreign'travel for
 citizens liable for military service and for certain categories-
 of professionals trained at public expense who have not
 completed required government service. Students traveling
 abroad for higher education mustfobtain'permissibh_ from the
 Foreign Ministry and, like all Syrians, are subject to recall
 by the Government. Travel to Israel is illegal for all Syrian,-
 citizens. "Druze inhabitants of the Israeli-occupied Golan
 Heights-may visit relatives in Syria under a system operated by
 the International Committee of the Red Crobs {ICRC); Syria has
 set an annual quota of 120-adult visitors per year.- In 1991.,
 for the first time since the odcupation, Syria allowed, 34 Druze
 students from the area to study at Syrian universities.
 Syrian citizens of the Jewish faith,- particularly those with
 significant holdings and financial ties in the country, have
 found it somewhat easier to travel abroad siice the
 mid-1970's. The Government continues, as a general policy, not
 to issue passports and exit visas to all members of a Jewish
 family at the same time. In theory, any Syrian may be required
 to post a bond of between $300 and $1,000, which would be
 forfeited in the event of nonreturn. In practice, only Syrians
 in the categories mentioned above'and Jews are routinely
 required to post such bonds. The Syrian Government closely
 
 
 1610
 SYRIA
 restricts Jewish emigration, although it stated in 1989 that it
 would look positively at cases of family reunification and of
 unmarried Jewish women unable to find suitable husbands in the
 small Syrian Jewish community. 'The number of unmarried Jewish
 women allowed to emigrate jumped dramatically in the middle of
 1989, following U.S.-Syrian discussions on this issue, and 20
 were given permission in 1991. There was no progress in 1991
 on the issue of divided families seeking reunification,
 although one case was resolved in early January 1992 when two
 minor children were permitted to emigrate to join their
 parents. Young Palestinians sometimes experience difficulties
 obtaining the requisite travel document. Any Syrian caught
 trying to emigrate or travel abroad without permission, or
 suspected of having visited Israel illegally, may be arrested
 and subject to prosecution.
 The Soued brothers, two Syrians arrested in 1987 for traveling
 to Israel, remained incarcerated after receiving sentences in
 May of 6 years and 8 months each, including time already
 served. They were charged with "illegally traveling to enemy-
 occupied territory" and traveling abroad without legally valid
 passports. Two of the four Syrian Jews arrested in 1990 while
 trying to travel without permission to Turkey were released in
 November 1991, as were two Syrian Jews arrested in April for
 planning to depart from Syria illegally.
 After Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, Syria absorbed more
 than 70,000 Syrians returned from Kuwait. Several thousand
 third-country nationals, mostly Egyptians, were repatriated
 through Syria. Currently, approximately 4,000 Iraqi nationals,
 many of them Iraqi Christians, remain in refugee camps in Syria
 under U.N. auspices.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Syrians do not have the ability to change their government
 legally and peacefully. President Asad and his senior advisers
 effectively control all aspects of political and economic
 life. The ruling Ba'ath Party, which emphasizes socialism and
 secular Arabism, is now dominated by the military, which
 consumes a large share of Syria's scarce economic resources.
 In recent years, the party has served principally to legitimize
 President Asad's rule. Although Ba'ath Party doctrine seeks to
 build national rather than ethnic identity, ethnic, religious,
 and regional allegiances remain important. Members of
 President Asad's own sect, the Alawis, hold most of the
 important military and security positions. President Asad won
 the presidency for the fourth time in December as the result of
 a referendum on his candidacy. According to the results
 announced by the Government, Asad, who ran unopposed, received
 a 99-percent affirmative vote with a reputed 99 percent of the
 eligible electorate voting. Asad's term will expire in March
 1999, 7 years from the date his current term ends.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups openly operating inside Syria,
 and the Government would likely discourage the formation of any
 such organizations unless they were under its control. Most
 Syrians are afraid to criticize their Government publicly for
 human rights violations.
 
 
 1611
 
 SYRIA
 The Government denies charges of human rights violations, often
 ignoring them or calling them an intrusion into its internal
 affairs. In August Syria sought to postpone action by the U.N.
 Subcommission on Minorities and Racial Discrimination on a
 motion to submit complaints by Amnesty International (AI) and
 other human rights organizations to the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission (UNHRC). AI has still received no response to the
 concerns raised by the mission it sent to Syria in 1989,
 despite subsequent communications and offers to send a followup
 mission.
 The ICRC has only limited access to prisoners.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party or close familial relations with
 a prominent Ba'ath Party member can be important to prospering
 in Syria. Party connections can pave the way for entrance into
 better elementary and secondary schools, access to more
 lucrative employment, and greater power in the Government.
 Religion is also a factor in determining one's obligations and
 opportunities. Members of the Alawi sect often enjoy job
 preference.
 Though Jews hold some low-level government jobs, such as clerks
 and teachers, they are generally barred from government
 service. Jews are also prohibited from joining the military,
 and Jewish professionals are exempt from the requirement to
 give the 5 years of government service expected of other
 Syrians trained at public expense. Jews are subject to foreign
 travel restrictions (see Section 2.d.), however, and are the
 only minority whose passports and identity cards note their
 religion. Jews, like all other citizens of Syria, are subject
 to the close purview of the intelligence services but are under
 more thorough surveillance than is the general population.
 Without prior authorization by security officials, contact
 between Syrian Jews and foreigners outside the conduct of
 business is prohibited. Although the official state of war
 with Israel continues to influence the status of Syrian Jews,
 the community's situation has improved since the mid-1970's.
 The Jewish community enjoys freedom of economic opportunity, A
 relatively high standard of living, access to higher education,
 and entrance into the professions.
 Syria's Palestinian community numbers over 300,000, 290,000 of
 whom are registered with UNRWA, and consists primarily of
 refugees from the 1948 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars. Seeral
 thousand Lebanese and Palestinians also'fled to Syria in 1982
 following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Palestinians are
 officially considered to be temporary residents pending the
 resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. They may not vote in
 Syrian elections or acquire Syrian citizenship except through
 marriage to a Syrian male citizen. While they currently occupy
 several senior positions in the bureaucracy, Palestinians are
 unofficially barred from the highest echelons of the Government.
 Syrian law provides for the equal dights of women, and
 historically the Government has made serious efforts to
 overcome conservative, religiously inspired, discriminatory
 attitudes toward and treatment of women. The Government has
 called for the elimination of all obstacles to women's
 development and encourages women's enrollment at all levels of
 education. Government policies include equal pay for similar
 work.
 
 
 1612
 SYRIA
 Traditional concepts of male guardianship of women continue to
 run counter to official policies, however. Particularly among
 Muslims, these concepts often limit a woman's rights in matters
 of marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and personal
 decisions. Moreover, the Government accords religious
 authorities or courts the right to rule in the majority of
 matters involving social and interpersonal relations. Wife
 beating and other physical abuse of women are known to occur,
 but conservative social mores in Syrian society discourage
 public discussion of the issue, thereby making it difficult to
 estimate the extent of the problem. There are no official
 statistics on domestic abuse. Under the Syrian legal system,
 women have access through the courts to redress any grievance
 causqd by violent acts against them, but many cases of domestic
 abuse are not pursued because of the social stigma attached to
 legal proceedings in such cases.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The 1973 Constitution provides for the right to form trade
 unions. Although the General Federation of Trade Unions (GFTU)
 is purportedly an independent popular organization, in practice
 the Government uses it as a framework for controlling nearly
 all aspects of union activity. Effectively, workers are not
 free to form labor unions independent of the
 government-prescribed structure. While unions are used
 primarily to'transmit instructions and information to the labor
 force from the Syrian leadership, elected union leaders also
 act as a conduit through which workers' dissatisfaction is
 transmitted to the leadership. While strikes are not
 prohibited (except in the agricultural sector), in practice
 they are effectively discouraged. There were no reported
 strikes in 1991, as there were none in 1990.
 The GFTU is charged with providing opinions on legislation,
 devising rules for workers, and organizing labor. 'The elected
 president of the GFTU is a senior member of the ruling Ba'ath
 Party and a member of the Regional Command. With his deputy,
 he participates in all cabinet sessions.  According to GFTU
 officials, the secretaries general of the eight professional
 unions, some of whom are not Ba'ath Party members, are also
 each elected by the respective union's membership. The GFTU is
 affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions and is a member of the Communist-dominated World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 In its 1991 report the International Labor Organization's
 Committee of Experts also referred to a number of observations
 dealing with the single trade union requirement; restrictions
 on the right of foreign workers to join or form trade unions of
 their own choosing; government supervision of trade union
 finances; the requirement that workers spend at least 6 months
 in a given occupation before becoming eligible for trade union
 office; and the prohibition of strikes in the agricultural
 sector.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 In the public sector, unions do not normally bargain
 collectively on wage issues, but union representatives
 participate with the representatives of the employer and the
 respective ministry to establish sectoral minimum wages,
 according to legally prescribed cost-of-living levels. Workers
 
 
 1613
 SYRIA
 make up the majority of each board of directors in public
 enterprises, and union representation is always included on the
 boards. They also-monitor and enforce compliance with the
 labor law. In the private sector, unions are active in
 monitoring compliance with the laws and ensuring workers'
 health and safety. Under the law, the unions may undertake
 negotiations for collective contracts with employers.
 Generally, wages in the private sector are set through annual
 consultations among government, business and labor
 representatives.
 Unions have the right to litigate contracts with employers and
 the right to litigate in defense of their own interests or
 those of their members (individually or collectively) in cases
 involving labor relations. Union organizations may also claim
 a right to arbitration.
 Workers are protected by law from antiunion discrimination, and
 there are no reports of it being practiced (see also Section
 6.e.).
 No information is available on labor practices in Syrian free
 trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no Syrian law banning forced or compulsory labor, but
 such practices may be imposed as punishment, usually in
 connection with prison sentences for criminal offenses, under
 the economic penal code, the penal code, the agricultural labor
 code, and the Press Act. Resignations of public employees from
 their jobs are not automatically accepted but require an
 administrative and occasionally even a judicial process.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age in the predominant public sector is
 14, though it is higher in certain industries. The minimum age
 varies more widely in the private sector; the absolute minimum
 is 12, with parental permissioh required for children under age
 16 to work. Children are forbidden to work at night. The
 Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor is responsible for
 enforcing minimum age requirements, but the number of labor
 investigators is small. Violation of the law is believed to be
 extensive, particularly in the agricultural sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government legislatively establishes minimum and maximum
 wage limits in the public sector and sets limits on maximum
 allowable overtime for public sector employees. The minimum
 wage provides a worker and his family only a very minimal
 standard of living, and, as a result, many workers take
 additional jobs or rely on extended families for support.
 There is no single minimum wage in the private sector for
 permanent employees. According to the 1959 Labor Law, minimum
 wage levels in the private sector are set by sector and are
 fixed by the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor.
 Recommendations are put to him by a committee, including
 representatives of the Ministries of Industry and Economy, as
 well as representatives of the employers' association and the
 employees' unions. In practice, private sector monthly
 minimums are not less than that in the public sector. In both
 the public and private sectors, the Ministry of Social Affairs
 and Labor is responsible for enforcing minimum wage levels.
 
 
 1614
 SYRIA
 Syrian labor law extensively regulates conditions of work.
 There are rules and regulations that severely limit the ability
 of an employer to fire an employee without due cause, an issue
 that the employer may take to a'labor committee. Labor
 committees are composed of representatives of the municipality,
 the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor, and the union, as
 well as a judge and the employer. In the majority of cases,
 such labor committees have decided in favor of the employee.,
 Workers, once hired, cannot easily be fired. One exception in
 the heavily regulated labor field relates to day laborers.
 They are not subject to minimum wage regulations and receive
 compensation only for job-related injuries. Small private
 firms and businesses commonly employ day laborers in order to
 avoid the costs of permanent employees who are well protected,
 even'against firing.
 The statutory workweek consists of 6 6-hour days, although in
 certain fields in which workers are not continuously busy, a
 9-hour day is permitted. Labor laws also mandate a full
 24-hour rest day per week. Public laws mandate safety
 standards in all sectors, and managers are expected to
 implement them fully. A special department of the Social
 Security establishment works, through its regional branches,
 with inspectors at the Ministries of Health and Labor to ensure
 compliance with safety standards. In addition, workers may
 file suit against their employers if dangerous conditions on
 their jobs threaten their health. Guest workers theoretically
 receive the same benefits but are often reluctant to press
 claims because workers' permits may be withdrawn at any time.
 Moreover, many work illegally and are not covered by the
 government system.
 
 
 1615
