 SYRIA
 Despite the existence of some institutions of democratic government, Syria's politi-
 cal system places virtually absolute authority in the hands of the President,  afiz
 Al-Asad. Key decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, internal politics,
 and the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from his ministers, high
 ranking members of the ruling Ba'th Party, and a relatively small circle of security
 advisers. Although the Parliament is elected every 4 years, the Ba'th Party is guar-
 anteed a majority. The Parliament does not initiate laws, but only passes judgment
 on and sometimes modifies those proposed by the executive branch. The judiciary
 is constitutionally independent, but this is not the case in the exceptional (state of
 
 
 1376
 emergency) security courts, which are subject to political influence. The regular
 courts display independence, although political connections and bribery can influ-
 ence verdicts. In general, all three branches of Government are guided by the views
 of the leadership of the Ba'th Party, whose primacy in state institutions is man-
 dated by the Constitution.
 The powerful role of the security services in government, which extends beyond
 strictly security matters, stems in part from the state of emergency that has been
 in place almost continuously sine 1963. The Government justifies martial law be-
 cause of the state of war with Israel and past threats from terrorist groups. Syrian
 Military Intelligence and Air Force Intelligence are military agencies, while General
 Security, State Security, and Political Security come under the purview of the Min-
 istry of Interior. The branches of the security services operate independently of each
 other and outside the legal system. Their members often ignore the rights of sus-
 pects and detainees and commit serious human rights violations.
 The economy is based on commerce, agriculture, and oil production. It consists of
 a generally inefficient public sector, a private sector, and a mixed public/private sec-
 tor. A complex bureaucracy and endemic corruption hamper economic growth. The
 Government has sought to promote the private sector through incentives and de-
 regulation. Real economic growth is about 3.6 percent, although real per capita
 growth is less than 1 percent. Annual per capita gross domestic product is about
 $900, and inflation about 15 percent per year. Wage increases in the public sector
 have not kept pace with cost of living increases, and the gap between rich and poor
 has widened.
 The human rights situation remained poor, and the Government continues to re-
 strict or deny fundamental rights. Serious abuses include the widespread use of tor-
 ture in detention; generally poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrest and prolonged
 detention without trial; fundamentally unfair trials in the security courts; an ineffi-
 cient judiciary that suffers from corruption and, at times, political influence; in-
 fringement on citizens' privacy rights; limits on the freedom of movement; and, de-
 spite a slight loosening of censorship restrictions, the denial of the freedoms of
 speech, press, assembly, and association. Because the Ba'th Party's domination of
 the political system is guaranteed by the Constitution, citizens do not have the right
 to change the government. The Government uses its vast powers so effectively that
 there is no organized political opposition and there have been very few antiregime
 manifestations. There is some societal discrimination and violence against women
 and discrimination against the Kurdish minority. The Government suppresses work-
 er rights. Reportedly about 100 political activists were arrested in March. In May
 up to 800 members of the ethnic Turkoman minority were arrested, and perhaps
 100 remain in detention without charge. As many as 3,000 political prisoners were
 released in late 1995, but there were no additional releases in 1996.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings and no confirmed reports of deaths in detention, although such deaths have
 occurred in previous years. There was an unconfirmed report of the death in deten-
 tion of a Syrian schoolteacher, who allegedly was arrested for belonging to an
 Islamist group. The victim's body allegedly showed signs of torture, while security
 authorities reported that the detainee died in prison of a heart attack. Previous
 deaths in detention have not been investigated by the Government, and the number
 and identities of prisoners who died in prisons since the 1980's remains unknown.
 On December 31, a bomb exploded on a private transport bus in central Damascus,
 killing at least 11 persons and wounding 47 others. The perpetrators and motiva-
 tions for this bomb attack were unknown at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. Despite inquiries by international human rights organizations and for-
 eign governments, the Government offered little new information on the welfare and
 whereabouts of persons who have been held incommunicado for years or about
 whom no more is known other than the approximate date of their detention (see
 Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the existence of constitutional provisions and several Penal Code penalties
 for abusers, there was credible evidence that security forces continue to use torture.
 Former prisoners and detainees have reported that torture methods include elec-
 trical shocks; pulling out fingernails; the forced insertion of objects into the rectum;
 beatings, sometimes, while the victim is suspended from the ceiling, hyperextension
 of the spine; and the use of a chair that bends backwards to asphyxiate the victim
 
 
 1377
 
 or fracture the spine. Although torture may occur in prisons, torture is most likely
 while detainees are being held at one of the many detention centers run by the var-
 ious security services throughout the country, and particularly while the authorities
 are trying to extract a confession or information about an alleged crime or alleged
 accomplices.
 The Government continues to deny the use of torture, and claims that it would
 prosecute anyone believed guilty of using excessive force or physical abuse. There
 was no news of any prosecutions of security officials during the year, although past
 victims of tortuie have identified the officials who beat them, up to the level of brig-
 adier general. In allegations of excessive force or physical abuse made in court, the
 plaintiff is required to initiate his own suit against the alleged abuser in civil pro-
 ceedings.
 Prison conditions vary and generally are poor and do not meet minimum inter-
 national health and sanitation standars. Facilities for political or national security
 prisoners are generally worse than those that house comnmn criminals. The prison
 at Tadmur in-Palmyra, where many political and national security prisoners have
 been kept, is widely considered to have the worst conditions. At some prisons, au-
 thorities allow visitation rights, but in other cases security officials demand bribes
 from family members wishing to visit incarcerated relatives. Overcrowding and sub-
 standard or insufficient food exist at several prisons. Some former detainees have
 reported that the Goverment prohibits reading materials, even the Koran, for politi-
 cal prisor, ers.
 The Government does not permit independent monitoring of prison or detention
 center conditions.
 In instances in which foreign nationals are arrested, the authorities sometimes
 delay or deny prison visits by foreign diplomats. The authorities consider Syrian na-
 tionals who hold dual nationality only as Syrians, and thus do not necessarily recog-
 nize or grant requests by foreign diplomats to visit or otherwise assist such persons.
 Even in some of those cases where the Government granted foreign diplomats access
 to dual nationals, the diplomats had to wait for over a month to gain access. The
 Government did not grant access in all cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Emergency Law, which authorizes
 the Government to conduct preventive arrests, overrides the Penal Code provisions
 against arbitrary arrest and detention, including the need to obtain warrants. Offi-
 cials contend that the Emergency Law is applied only in narrowly defined cases.
 Nonetheless, in cases involving political or national security offenses, arrests are
 generally carried out in secret, and suspects may be detained incommunicado for
 prolonged periods without charge or trial and are denied the right to a judicial de-
 termination for the pretrial detention. Some of these practices are prohibited by the
 state of emergeny, but the authorities are not held to these strictures.
 The Government apparently has continued to detain the relatives of detainees or
 of fugitives in order to obtain confessions or the fugitive's surrender (see Section
 l.f.).
 Defendants in civil and criminal trials have the right to bail hesrings and the pos-
 sible release from detention on their own recognizance. There is no bail option for
 those accused of national security offenses. Unlike defendants in regular criminal
 and civil cases, security detainees do not have access to lawyers prior to or during
 questioning.
 Detainees have no legal redress for false arrest. Security forces often do not pro-
 vide detainees' families with information on their welfare or location while in deten-
 tion. Consequently, many people who have disappeared in past years are believed
 to be in long-term detention without charge, or possibly to have died in such deten-
 tion. The number of those who disappeared in this way probably has declined over
 the past few years, although this may be due to the Government's success in deter-
 ring political activity rather than a loosening of criteria for detention. The Govern-
 ment brought to trial many detainees who have been held incommunicado for years.
 However, those trials have been unfair (see Section i.e.).
 Pretrial detention may be lengthy even in cases not involving political or national
 security offenses. The criminal justice system is backlogged, many criminal suspects
 are held in pretrial detention for months, and may have their trials extended for
 additional months. Lengthy pretrial detentions and drawn-out court proceedings are
 caused by a shortage of available courts and the absence of legal provisions for a
 speedy trial or plea bargaining. According to local lawyers, the new civilian courts
 announced in 1995 have not come into existence, and the criminal justice system
 remains backlogged.
 There were two reports of large-scale politically motivated arrests. There were
 local reports that the Government arrested up to 100 political activists in Dayr Al-
 Zur in March. No further information has become available on the whereabouts of
 
 
 1378
 these alleged political detainees. In May the Government detained without charge
 up to 800 members of the Turkoman minority, including community leaders, in con-
 nection with a series of small explosions in 4 cities. Most of the Turkomans were
 reprtedly released in July, but as many as 100 still remain in detention.
 We last significant releases of _political detainees were in late November and De-
 cember 1995 (see Section I.e.). While most of the doctors, lawyers, and engineers
 arrested in a mass crackdown in 1980 have been released, some apparently remain
 in prolonged detention without charge. Many Palestinian, Jordanian, and Lebanese
 citizens had been detained without charge by Syrian security services in both Leb-
 anon and Syria, without any public accounting by the Government.
 The number of remaining political detainees is likely in the hundreds or more.
 The number of political detainees is difficult to estimate since the Government does
 not verify publicly the number of detentions without charge, the release of detain-
 ees, or whether detainees are subsequently sentenced to prison (see Section i.e.).
 The Government has exiled citizens in the past, althouh the practice is prohib-
 ited by the Constitution. There were no known instances of forced exile in 1996.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the two exceptional courts dealing with alleged security cases are not
 independent of executive branch control. The regular court system displays inde-
 pendence, although political connections and bribery sometimes influence verdicts.
 The judicial system is composed of the civil and criminal courts; the religious
 courts, which adjudicate matters of personal status such as divorce and inheritance;
 military courts; and the security courts. The Supreme Constitutional Court is em-
 powered to rule only on the constitutionality of laws and decrees. It does not hear
 app al.
 Ciil and criminal courts are organized under the Ministry of Justice. Defendants
 before these courts are entitled to the legal representation of their choice; the courts
 appnt lawyers for indigents; defendants are presumed innocent, are allowed to
 present evidence, and allowed to confront their accusers; and trials are public, ex-
 cept for those involving juveniles or sex offenses. Defendants may appeal their ver-
 dicts to a provincial appeals court and, ultimately to the Court of Jassation, which
 is the highest court or appeal. However, such appeals are hampered because the
 courts do not provide verbatim transcripts of cases-only summaries prepared by
 the presiding judges. There are no juries.
 Military courts have the authority to try civilian as well as militarypersonne.
 The venue for a civilian defendant is decided by a military prosector. There were
 continuing reports that the Government operates military field courts, in locations
 outside of established courtrooms. Such courts reportedly observe fewer of the for-
 mal procedures of regular military courts.
 The two security courts are the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), which tries
 political and national security cases, and the Economic Security Court (ESC), which
 tries cases involving financial crimes. Both courts operate under the state of emer-
 gency, not ordinary law, and do not observe constitutional prvisions safeguarding
 defendants' rights.
 Charges against defendants in the SSSC are often vague. Many defendants ap-
 pear tohbe tri~ed for exercising normal political rights, such as free speech. For exam-
 ple, the Emergency Law authorizes the prosecution of anyone "opposing the goals
 of the revolution" or "shaking the confidence of the masses in the aims of the revolu-
 tion," or trying to "change the economic or social structure of the State." Nonethe-
 less, the Government contends that the SSSC tries only persons who have sought
 to use violence against the State.
 Under SSSC procedures, defendants are not present during the preliminary, or in-
 vestigative, phase of the trial, when evidence is presented by the prosecutor. Trials
 are usually closed to the public. Lawyers are not guaranteed access to their clients
 before the trial and are excluded from the court during their clienffs initial interro-
 gation by the prosecutor. Lawyers submit written defense pleas, rather than oral
 presentations. The State's case is often based on confessions, but defendants have
 not been allowed to arge in court that the confessions were coerced. There is no
 known instance in which the court ordered a medical examination for a defendant
 who claimed that he was tortured. The SSSC has reportedly aquitted some defend-
 ants, but the Government does not provide any statistics on the conviction rate. De-
 � fendants do not have the right to a ppeal verdicts, but sentences are reviewed by the
 Minister of Interior, who may ratify, nullify, or alter sentences. The President may
 also intervene in the review process.
 Many-perhaps .hundreds--of cases passed through the 5550 in 1996. Most in-
 volved charges relating to membership in various banned political groups, including
 the Communist Party, the Party for Communist Action, and the pro- Iraqi wing of
 the Ba'th Party. In the recent past, sentences have ranged up to 15 years.
 
 
 1379
 The Economic Security Court (ESC) tries persons for alleged violations of foreign-
 exchange laws and other economic crimes. Prosecution of economic crimes is not ap-
 plied uniformly, as some government officials or business people with close connec-
 tions to the Government have likely violated Syria's strict economic laws without
 prosecution. Like the SSSC, the ESC does not guarantee defendants due process.
 Deendants may not have adequate access to lawyers to prepare their defenses, and
 the State's case is usually based on confessions. Verdicts are likely influenced by
 high-ranking government officials. Those convicted of the most serious economic
 crimes do not have the right of appeal, but those convicted of lesser crimes may ap-
 peal to the Court of Cassation.
 The last significant releases of political prisoners and detainees were in late No-
 vember and December 1995. Originally the Government claimed to have released
 some 1,650 political prisoners in November but local estimates now place the num-
 ber released between 2,200 and 3,000. M~any of those released apparently were
 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who had not been involved in acts of violence.
 The release also may have included some persons from banned Communist parties,
 pro-Iraqi Ba'athists, and Nasserites. Some former prisoners reported having to sign
 admissions of guilt or loyalty oaths as a condition of their release. Other prisoners
 released in November 1995 apparently were in poor health as a result of their incar-
 ceration; they had been incarcerated without charge or have been detained in prison
 beyond the expiration of their original prison sentences, sometimes for years.
 A Presidential amnesty issued in December 1995 provided for the release of some
 6,000 to 7,000 prisoners who had comitted common crimes. Among those released
 under this amnesty were 500 to 700 persons convicted by the extraconstitutional
 Economic Security Court. Consistent with past practice, the Government did not an-
 nounce the number of prisoners released, nor has it responded to requests from
 international human rights groups and foreign governments for their names. In
 1995 the Government also released four former Ba'th party officials imprisoned
 since 1970. The Government has released virtually all of those arrested at the time
 President Asad took power in 1970. At least three persons arrested during that pe-
 riod remain in prison, even though the sentences of two of them expired in 1985.
 The third apparently was never tried.
 The Government denies that it holds political prisoners, arguing that, although
 the aims of some prisoners may be political, their activities, including subversion,
 were criminal. However, the Emergency Law and the Penal Code are so vague, and
 the Government's power so broad, that many persons were convicted andare in
 prison for the mere expression of political opposition to the Government. The cur-
 rent population of political prisoners may range from several hundred to over 2,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-AI-
 though laws provide for freedom from arbitrary interference, the Emergency Law
 authorizes the security services to enter homes and conduct searches with warrants
 if security matters-very broadly defined-are involved. The security services selec-
 tively monitor telephone conversations and facsimile transmissions and interfere
 with the mail. The Government opens mail destined for both citizens and foreign
 residents. It also prevents the delivery of human rights materials.
 The Government apparently has continued its practice of threatening or detaining
 the relatives of detainees or of fugitives in order to obtain confessions or the fugi-
 tive's surrender.
 The incidence of security checkpoints has diminished. There are fewer police
 checkpoints on roads and in cities and towns than in previous years. Generally, the
 security services set up checkpoints to search for smuggled goods, weapons, narcot-
 ics, and subversive literature. The searches take place without warrants. The Gov-
 ernment and the Ba'th Party have monitored and tried to restrict some citizens' vis-
 its to foreign embassies and cultural centers.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides citizens with the
 right to express their opinions freely in speech and in writing, but the Government
 restricts these rights significantly. The Government strictly controls dissemination
 of information and permits no written criticism of the President, the President's
 family, the Ba'th Party, the military, or the legitimacy of the regime. The Emer-
 gency Law allows the Government broad discretion in determining illegal expres-
 sion. It prohibits the publishing of "false information," which opposes "the goals of
 the revolution" (see Section 1.e.. In the past, the Government has imprisoned jour-
 nalists for failing to observe press restrictions. There is no information on whether
 these journalists are still imprisoned, nor were there any known arrests of journal-
 ists during the year. There were, however, reports that the state security services
 threatened local journalists for articles printed outside Syria.
 
 
 1380
 
 The Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Culture and National Guidance
 censor the domestic and foreign press. They usually prevent publication or distribu-
 tion of any material deemed threatening or embarrassing to the Government. Cen-
 sorship is usually stricter for materials in Arabic. Commonly censored subjects in-
 clude: the Government's human rights record; Islamic fundamentalism; allegations
 of official involvement in drug trafficking; aspects of the Government's role n Leb-
 anon: graphic descriptions ofsx; material unfavorable to the Arab cause in the
 Middle East conflict; and material that is offensive to any of Syria's religious
 ups, or is partial to sectarianism. In addition, most journalists and writers in
 Syria practice self-censorship, in order to avoid provoking a negative government re-
 action.
 The Ministry of Culture and National Guidance censors fiction and nonfiction
 works, including films. It also determines which films may not be shown at the cul-
 tural centers operated by foreign embassies.
 There continued to be a modest relaxation of censorship during the year. The
 media demonstrated somewhat wider latitude in reporting on regional develop-
 ments, including the Middle East peace process. The media covered some peace
 process events factually, but other events were reported selectively to buttress offi-
 cial views. The Government newspapers continued to publish reports on government
 malfeasance and low-level corruption. Stories on high-level government corruption
 were printed in non-Syrian Arabic newspapers available for purchase in Syria, but
 these cases were portrayed as positive examples of the Government's anticorruption
 campaign.
 The Government or the Ba'th Party owns and operates the radio and television
 companies and the newspaper publishing houses. There are no privately owned
 newspapers. The Ministry of Information scripts the radio and television news pro-
 grams to ensure that they follow the government line. The Government does not
 interfere with broadcasts from Israel. In late 1994, the Government announced that
 it would confiscate satellite receiving dishes and replace them with a gvernment-
 controlled cable distribution system. However, no dishes were confiscated. It appears
 that the Government has informally sanctioned private ownership of satellite
 dishes, which continue to proliferate.
 The Government restricts academic freedom. Public school teachers are not per-
 mitted to express ideas contrary to government policy, although authorities allow
 somewhat greater freedom of expression at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly does not
 exist. Citizens may not hold meetings unless they obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior. Most public demonstrations are organized by the Government or
 Ba'th Party. The Government applies the restrictions on public assembly in the Pal-
 estinian refugee camps, where controlled demonstrations have been allowed.
 The Government restricts freedom of association. Private associations must be
 registered with the Government in order to be considered legal. Some groups have
 not been able to register presumably because the Government viewed them as politi-
 cal, even though the groups considered themselves strictly cultural or professional.
 Unregistered groups may not hold meetings, and the authorities do not allow the
 estabhisment of independent poitical parties. The Government usually grants reg-
 istration to groups not engaged in political or other activities deemed sensitive.
 In 1980 the Government dissolved, then reconstituted under its control, the execu-
 tive bards of professional associations after some members staged a national strike
 and advocated an end to the state of emergency. The associations have not been
 independent since that time and are generally led by members of the Ba'th Party,
 although independents are allowed on their executive boards.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. The only advantage given to
 a particular religion by the Constitution is that which requires the President to be
 a Muslim. All religions and sects must register with the Government, which mon-
 itors fundraising and requires permits for all meetings by religious groups, except
 for worship. Although no law prohibits non-Muslims from proselytizing Muslims, the
 Government discourages such activity. The few remaining Jews are generally barred
 from government employment and do not have military service obligations. They are
 the only minority group whose passports and identity cards note their religion.
 There is mandatory religious instruction in schools, with government-approved
 teachers and curriculum. The religion courses are divided into separate classes for
 Muslim and Christian students, respectively. Syrian Jews have a separate primary
 school for Jews only, which includes religious instruction (see Section 5).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts travel near the Golan Heights and occasion-
 ally near Iraq. Travel to Israel is illegal. Citizens require government permission
 
 
 1381
 to travel abroad. Some have been denied such permission on political grounds, al-
 though government officials deny that the practice occurs. The authorities may pros-
 ecute any person found attempting to emigrate or travel abroad without official per-
 mission, or who is suspected of having visited Israel. On the other hand, there is
 no evidence that the Government persecuted upon their return those who applied
 for, but were denied, asylum abroad.
 Women over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the permission
 of male relatives. In practice, either the husband or the wife may fie a request with
 the Ministry of Interior to prohibit the spouse's departure from Syria. A father may
 request that the Ministry prohibit travel abroad by unmarried daughters, even if
 they are over 18 years of age.
 The United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNUWA) reported that as of June
 1996 there were 347,391 registered Palestiian refugees in Syria. Palestinian refu-
 essometimes encounter difficulties in obtaining travel documents and reentering
 yria after traveling abroad. The Government restricts entry by Palestinians who
 are not resident in Syria. The Government does not allow the Palestinian residents
 of Gaza to visit Syria.
 The Government cooperates on a case-by-case basis with the office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organi-
 zations in assisting refugees. The Government provides first asylum; approximately
 1,735 persons sought asylum through the UNHCR in 1996.    though the Govern-
 ment denied any forced repatriation of those who may have had a valid claim to
 refugee status, it apparently forcibly repatriated some Iraqi refugees, as well as
 some Sudanese, Iranian, Somali, and Libyan asylum seekers. At year's end there
 were an estimated 37,000 non-Palestinian refugees in Syria, of which approximately
 3,500 were receiving assistance from the UNHCR, including 2,000 refugees of Iraqi
 origin at the El Hol camp and other locations.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Although citizens ostensibly vote for the President and members of Parliament,
 they do not have the right to change their government. The President has run for
 election unopposed since taking power in 1970, and political opposition to his rule
 is not tolerated. The President and his senior aides, particularly those in the mili-
 tary and security services, ultimately make all basic decisions on political and eco-
 nomic life with no element of public accountability.
 Moreover, the Constitution mandates that the Ba'th party is the ruling party in
 Syria and is guaranteed a majority in all government and popular associations, such
 as workers' and women's groups. Six smaller political parties are also permitted
 and, along with the Ba'th party, make up the National Progressive Front (NPF), a
 grouping of parties which represents the sole framework of legal political participa-
 tion for citizens. While created ostensibly to give the appearance of a multiparty sys-
 tem, the NPF is dominated by the Ba'th party and does not change the essentially
 one-party character of the political system. The non-Ba'th party members of the
 NPF exist as political parties largely in name only and hew closely to Bath party
 and government policies.
 The Ba'th party dominates the Parliament, or "People's Council." Although par-
 liamentarians may criticize policies and modify draft laws, the executive branch re-
 tains ultimate control over the legislative process. Since 1990 the Government has
 allowed independent non-NPF candidates to run for a limited number of seats in
 the 250-member People's Council. The current number of independent deputies is
 80, guaranteeing a permanent absolute majority for the Ba'th party-dominated NPF.
 Persons who have been convicted by the State Security Court may be deprived
 of their political rights after they are released from prison. These restrictions in-
 clude a prohibition against engaging in any political activity, the denial of a pass-
 port, an a bar on accepting a government job and some other forms of employment.
 The duration of such restrictions may last from 10 years to the remainder of the
 ex-prisoner's life. The Government contends that this practice is mandated by the
 Penal Code and has been law since 1949.
 Women and minorities, with the exception of the Jewish population and the state-
 less Syrian Kurds, participate in the political system without restriction. There are
 2 female cabinet ministers and 24 female members of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestgation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not allow the existence of local human rights groups. One
 or two human rights groups once operated legally but were banned by the Govern-
 ment.
 
 
 1382
 In March 1995, the Government took the unprecedented step of allowing the
 international human rights group, Human Rights Watch (HRW), to conduct a 48-
 day fact-finding mission to Syria, with a follow-up visit in July 1995. The HRW dele-
 gation met with several government ministers and was allowed to travel around the
 country, meet with lawyers and families of detainees and prisoners, and attend Su-
 preme State Security Court trials, where its members talked to defendants, lawyers,
 and the judges in ongoing trials.
 The Government did not grant the group's request to visit prisons and detention
 centers holding political and national-security detainees, although it said the group
 could visit civilian prisons. When the group returned for a follow-up visit in July,
 it was told the SSSC was not in session, although the Court may indeed have been
 conducting proceedings. HRW produced a report sharply critical of the procedures
 of the SSSC and the absence of legal outlets for political opposition. The Govern-
 ment contended that the criticisms contained in the HRW report were unwarranted
 and inaccurate but later indicated its desire to continue a dialog with the group.
 Since the 1995 HRW visit, no international human rights groups have conducted
 fact-finding missions to Syria.
 As a matter of policy, the Government denies to international groups, including
 the United Nations Human Rights Commission, that it commits human rights
 abuses. It does not permit representatives of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross (ICRC) to visit prisons. The Government says that it now responds in
 writing to all inquiries from  nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) regarding
 human rights issues, including those regarding individual detainees and prisoners,
 through an interagency governmental committee established expressly for that pur-
 pose. Human Rights Watch reported in April that the Government has not re-
 sponded to its request to account publicly for the possibly thousands of citizens who
 were executed at Tadmur Prison in the 1980's. In 1996 the Government had little
 new information to offer human rights oranizations and foreign embassies on spe-
 cific political prisoner inquiries. The usual government response is that information
 is lacking and that the prisoner in question has violated national security laws.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for all citizens.
 In practice, membership in the Bath Party or close familial relations with a promi-
 nent party member or government official can be important for prospering. Party
 or government connections can pave the way for entrance into better elementary
 and secondary schools, access to lucrative employment, and greater power within
 the Government, the military, and the security services. Certain prominent posi-
 tions, such as that of provincial governor, are reserved solely for Ba'th Party mem-
 bers. Apart from some discrimination against Kurds, there are no apparent patterns
 of systematic government discrimination based on race, sex, religion, disability, lan-
 guage or social status.
 Women.-Violence against women is known to occur. However, there are no reli-
 able statistics for domestic violence or sexual assault in Syria. This is because the
 vast majority of cases go unreported, and victims generally are reluctant to seek as-
 sistance from nonfamily members. There are no laws against spousal rape. One pre-
 liminary academic study suggested that domestic violence is the largest single rea-
 son for divorces, and that such abuse is more prevalent among the less-educated.
 It appears to occur more in rural than in urban areas. Battered women have the
 legal right to seek redress in court, but few do so because of the social stigma at-
 tached to such action. The Syrian Women's Federation offers services to battered
 wives to remedy individual family problems. The Syrian Family Planning Associa-
 tion also seeks to deal with this problem. Some private groups, including the Family
 Planning Association, have organized seminars on vioIence against women, which
 were reported by the government press. There are no specifically designated shelters
 or safe-havens for battered women seeking to flee their husbands. There was a uni-
 versity seminar on violence against women in 1996.
 The Government has sought to overcome traditional discriminatory attitudes to-
 ward women, and encourages women's education. However, the Parliament has not
 yet changed retirement and social security laws that discriminate against women.
 Shari'a or Islamic law on divorce discriminates against women. For example, hus-
 bands may claim adultery as grounds for divorce, but wives face more difficulty in
 presenting the same argument. In addition, if a woman requests a divorce from her
 husband, she is not entitled to child support, even if she keeps the children.
 Inheritance for Muslims is based on Shari'a. Accordingly, women are granted a
 smaller share of inheritance than male heirs. On the other hand, male heirs are
 mandated by Shari'a to provide financial support to the female relatives who inherit
 
 
 1383
 less; for example, a brother who inherits an unmarried sister's share from their par-
 ent's inheritance is obligated to provide for the sister's well-being. If there is a prob-
 lem, she has the right to sue, but such cases are not common.
 Shari'a law applies to Muslims only. Christians are subject to their church canon
 law on marriage and divorce, making divorces difficult to obtain in most cases.
 Christians are subject to civil laws on inheritance.
 Polygyny is legal and practiced by a minority of Muslim men. Under Shari'a, a
 husband has the right to take up to four wives without asking the consent of his
 other wife/wives. The first wife and later wives have the right to seek a divorce if
 the husband takes an additional wife; however, in doing so, the wife loses the right
 to alimony or child support.
 A father may request that the Government prohibit travel abroad by his 'married
 daughter (see Section 2.d.).
 Women are not impeded from owning or managing land or other real property.
 Women constitute 6 percent of judges, 10 percent of lawyers, 57 percent of teachers
 below university level, and 20 percent of university professors.
 Children.-There is no legal discrimination between boys and girls in school or
 in health care. Education is compulsory for all children, male or female, between
 the ages of 6 and 12. According to the Syrian Women's Union, about 46 percent of
 the total number of students through the secondary level are female.
 Nevertheless, societal pressure for early marriage and childbearing interfere with
 girls' educational progress, particularly in rural areas, where dropout rates for fe-
 male students remain high.
 As for career aspirations, these are as much a function of social class as societal
 pressure. Some girls may aspire to marry, have children early, and be supported by
 a husband; other women are able to pursue education and career aspirations in ad-
 dition to marrying and having children.
 The law stresses the need to protect children, and the Government has organized
 seminars on the subject of child welfare. Although there are cases of child abuse,
 there is no societal pattern of abuse against children. The law provides for severe
 penalties for those found guilty of the most serious abuses against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled
 and seeks to integrate them into the public sector work force. However, implementa-
 tion is lax. Regulations reserving 2 percent of government and public sector jobs for
 the disabled are not rigorously implemented. The disabled do not have recourse to
 the courts regarding discrimination. There are no laws mandating access to public
 buildings for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Although there is a significant amount of religious toler-
 ance, religion or ethnic affiliation can be a contributing factor in determining career
 opportunities. For example, members of the President's Alawi sect hold a predomi-
 nant position in the security services and military, which is out of proportion to
 their percentage of the population. Nevertheless, government policy officially dis-
 avows sectarianism.
 There is little evidence of societal discrimination or violence against religious mi-
 norities, including Jews. Government-run schools offer separate religious instruction
 for Christians and Muslims. Jews have a separate primary school which offers reli-
 gious instruction on Judaism, in addition to traditional subjects. Although Arabic
 is the official language in public schools, the Government allows the teaching of Ar-
 menian, Hebrew, and Chaldean in some schools on the basis that these are "litur-
 gical languages. Technically, all schools are government-run and nonsectarian, al-
 though some schools are run in practice by Christian and Jewish minorities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although the Government contends that
 there is no discrimination against the Kurdish population, it has placed limits on
 the use and teaching of the Kurdish language, Kurdish cultural expression, and, at
 times, the celebration of Kurdish festivals. Some members of the Kurdish commu-
 nity have been tried by the Supreme State Security Court for expressing support
 for greater Kurdish autonomy or independence. Although the Asad Government
 stopped the practice of stripping Syrian Kurds of their Syrian nationality (some
 120,000 lost their nationality under this program in the 1960's), it never restored
 this nationality. As a result, they and those who had their nationality taken away
 and their children have been unable to obtain Syrian nationality and passports, or
 even identification cards and birth certificates. Without Syrian nationality, these
 stateless Kurd are unable to own land, cannot be employed by the Government,
 and have no right to vote. They encounter difficulties in enrolling their children in
 school. Stateless Kurdish men may not legally marry Syrian citizens.
 
 
 1384
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the Constitution provides for this right,
 workers are not free to establish unions independently of the Government's bureau-
 cratic structure. All unions must belong to the General Federation of Trade Unions
 (GFTU) which is dominated by the Ba'th Party and is actually a part of the State's
 bureaucratic structure. The GFTU is an information channel between political
 decisionmakers and workers. The GFTU transmits instructions downward to the
 unions and workers but also conveys information to decisionmakers about worker
 conditions and needs. The GFTU provides the Government with opinions on legisla-
 tion, organizes workers, and formulates rules for various member unions. The
 GFTU president is a senior member of the Ba'th Party. He and his deputy may at-
 tend cabinet meetings on economic affairs. The GFTU controls nearly all aspects of
 union activity.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, except in the agricultural sector, nevertheless,
 workers are inhibited from striking because of previous government crackdowns on
 strikers. In 1980 the security forces arrested many union and professional associa-
 tion officials who planned a national strike. Some of those remain in detention or
 have been tried by the State Security Court (see Section 2.b.).
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 In 1992 Syria's eligibility for tariff preferences under the U.S. Generalized System
 of Preferences was suspended because the Government failed to take steps to afford
 internationally recognized worker rights to Syrian workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right does not exist in
 any meaningful sense. Government representatives are part of the bargaining proc-
 ess in the public sector. In state-owned companies, union representatives negotiate
 hours, wages, and conditions of employment with representatives of the employers
 and supervising ministry. Workers serve on the boards of directors of public enter-
 prises.
 The law provides for collective bargaining in the private sector, but any such
 agreement between labor and management must be ratified by the Minister of
 Labor and Social Affairs, who effectively has the power of veto. The Committee of
 Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has long noted the Govern-
 ment's resistance to abolish the Minister's power over collective contracts.
 Unions have the right to litigate disputes over work contracts and other workers'
 interests with employers and may ask for binding arbitration. In practice, labor offi-
 cials and management settle most disputes without resort to legal remedies or arbi-
 tration. Management has the right to request arbitration, but this is seldom exer-
 cised. Arbitration usually occurs when a worker initiates a dispute over wages or
 severance pay.
 Since the unions are absorbed into the Government's bureaucratic structure, they
 are protected by law from antiunion discrimination. There were no reports of
 antiunion discrimination.
 There are no unions in the seven free trade zones. Firms in the zones are exempt
 from the laws and regulations governing hiring and firing, although they must ob-
 serve some provisions on health, safety, hours, and sick and annual leave.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law prohibiting forced
 or compulsory labor. There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor involving
 children or foreign or domestic workers. Forced labor has been imposed as a punish-
 ment for some convicts.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children-The minimum age for employment
 is 14 in the public sector and 12 in the private sector. In all cases, parental permis-
 sion is required for children under the age of 16. The law prohibits children from
 working at night. However, all these laws apply only to children working for a sal-
 ary. Thus, those working in family businesses and who are not technically paid a
 saary-a common phenomenon-do not fall under the law. The Government claims
 that the expansion of the private sector has led to more young children working.
 The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is responsible for enforcing child labor laws
 but does not have enough inspectors to ensure compliance with the laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minister of Labor and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing mimmum wage levels in the public and private sectors. The
 minimum wage, which the Government had raised in 1994 (accompanying a cut in
 subsidies on basic food items), remained unchanged in 1996 at $50 (550 Syrian
 pounds) per month in the public sector and $44 (484 Syrian pounds) per month in
 the private sector. A committee of labor, management, and government representa-
 tives submits recommended changes in the minimum wage to the Minister. The
 minimum wage does not provide an adequate standard of living for a worker and
 
 
 1385
 
 family. As a result, many workers take additional jobs or are supported by their ex-
 tended families.
 The statutory workweek is 6 days of 6 hours each, but in some cases a 9-hour
 workday is permitted. The laws mandate one 24-hour rest day per week. Rules and
 regulations severely limit the ability of an employer to dismiss employees without
 cause. Even if a person is absent from work without notice for a long period, the
 employer must follow a lengthy procedure of trying to find the person and notify
 him, including through newspaper notices, before he is able to take any action
 against the employee. Dismissed employees have the right to appeal before a com-
 mittee of representatives from the union, management, the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Affairs, and the appropriate municipality. Such committees usually fird in
 favor of the employee. Theaw does not protect temporary workers who are not sub-
 ject to regulations on minimum wages. Small private firms and businesses employ
 such workers to avoid the costs associated with hiring permanent employees.
 The law mandates safety in all sectors, and managers are expected to implement
 them fully. In practice, there is little enforcement without worker complaints, which
 occur infrequently despite government efforts to post notices on safety rights and
 regulations. Large companies, such as oil field contractors, also employ safety engi-
 neers.
 The ILO has noted that a provision in the Labor Code allowing employers to keep
 workers at the workplace for as many as 11 hours a day might lead to abuse. How-
 ever, there have been no reports of such abuses. Officials from the Ministries of
 Health and Labor inspect work sites for compliance with health and safety stand-
 ards. Such inspections appear to be haphazard, a part from those conducted in hotels
 and other facilities that cater to foreigners. Rural enforcement of labor laws is also
 more lax than that in urban areas, where inspectors are concentrated. Workers may
 lodge complaints about health and safety conditions with special committees estab-
 lished to adjudicate such cases. Workers have the right to remove themselves from
 hazardous conditions without risking loss of employment.
