 SYRIA
 Despite the existence of some institutions of democratic overnment, Syria's politi-
 cal system places virtually absolute authority in the hangs of the President, Hafiz
 Al-Asad. Key decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, internal politics,
 and the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from his ministers, high
 ranking members of the ruling Ba'th Party, and from a relatively small circle of se-
 curity advisers. Although the Parliamnt is elected every 4 years, the Batch Party
 is guaranteed a majority. The Parliament does not initiate laws; it votes on and
 sometimes modifies those proposed by the executive branch. The judiciary is con-
 stitutionally independent, but this is not the case in the exceptional security courts.
 
 
 1259
 Depending on the nature of the case and those involved, regular courts are not gen-
 eral subject to political influence but the exceptional (state of emergency) courts
 are. In general, all three branches of government are guided by the views of the
 leadership of the Ba'th Party, whose primacy in state institutions is mandated by
 the Constitution.
 The powerful role of the security services in government, which extends beyond
 strictly security matters, stems in part from the state of emergency which has een
 in place almost continuously since 1963. The Government justifies martial law be-
 cause of the state of war with Israel and alleged threats from terrorist groups. Syr-
 ian Military Intelligence and Air Force Intelligence are mili  a gncies, while
 General Security, State Security, and Political Security come under the purview of
 the Ministry of Interior. The branches of the security services operate independently
 of each other and outside the legal system. Their members often ignore the rights
 of suspects and detainees, and commit serious human rights violations.
 The economy is based on commerce, agriculture, and oil production. It consists of
 a generally inefficient public sector, a private sector, and mixed publicdprivate com-
 panies. A complex bureaucracy and endemic corruption hamper economic growth.
 The Government has sought to promote the private sector through incentives and
 deregulation. Real economic growth is about 4 percent, although real per capita
 growth is less than 1 percent. Annual per capita gross domestic product is about
 $900, and inflation about 16 percent per year. Wage increases in the public sector
 have not kept pace with cost of living increases, and the gap between rich and poor
 has widened.
 Despite some improvements, the Government continues to restrict or deny fun-
 damental rights. Serious abuses include the widespread use of torture in detention;
 arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention without trial; fundamentally unfair trials
 in the security courts; the suppression of workers rights; and, despite a slight loos-
 ening of restrictions, the denial of the freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and asso-
 ciation. Because the Ba'th Party's domination of the political system is guaranteed
 by the Constitution, the people do not have the right to change the Government.
 The Government uses its vast powers so effectively that there is no organized politi-
 cal opposition and there have been very few antiregime manifestations. Prison con-
 ditions generally do not meet minimum international standards. There is some soci-
 etal discrimination and violence against women, and discrimination against the
 Kurdish minority.
 There were some positive developments during the year. The most notable was
 the unconfirmed release of 500 to 600 political prisoners in the spring and the re-
 lease announced by the Government of 1,650 political prisoners and detainees in No-
 vember. There appeared to be some modest relaxation in censorship, allowing slight-
 ly greater media criticism of certain government policies within strict limits. The
 Government also permitted an international human rights group to conduct a
 lengthy fact-finding mission, and reported acquittals issued by the security courts.
 The detention and prosecution of people appear to have become somewhat less arbi-
 trary, based less on personal disputes or complaints of fellow citizens.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings, and no reports of deaths in detention. The Government denied that Leba-
 nese citizen Dani Mansurati had died in detention in 1994, possibly as a result of
 beatings; it claimed that he had been tried, sentenced to death, and executed. The
 Government has not investigated the deaths of persons held in detention.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 during the year, although a United Nations Human Rights Commission (UN-RC)
 working group queried the Government on allegations of the earlier abductions of
 11eple. The Government denied that any such abductions had occurred.
 There continued to be little information on the welfare and whereabouts of per-
 sons who have been held incommunicado for years or about whom no more is known
 other than the approximate date of their detention (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the existence of constitutional provisions and several Penal Code penalties
 for abusers, there was credible evidence that security forces continue to use torture.
 Former detainees and prisoners have reported that torture methods include elec-
 trical shocks; the forced insertion of objects into the rectum; beatings, sometimes
 while the victim is suspended from the ceiling;, and the use of a chair that bends
 backwards to asphyxiate the victim or to fracture the spine. Although torture may
 occur in prisons, torture is most likely while detainees are being held at one of the
 
 
 1260
 
 myriad detention centers throughout the country run by the various security serv-
 ices, and particularly while the authorities are trying to exact a confession or infor-
 mation about the alleged crime or alleged accompices.
 Several detainees told a Human Rights Watch (HRW) delegation which visited
 during March to May that they had been tortured during their pre-1995) detention,
 by means of electrical shock, extension of the spine, beatings, suspension from a
 tire, etc. Some victims were able to identify the officials who beat them, including
 officers up to the level of brigadier general. In early 1995, a special rapporteur o~f
 the UNHRC cited 11 cases of allegedtrture. In response to all the allegations, the
 Government generally denied the use of torture, and claimed that it would prosecute
 any of those believedguilty of using excessive force or physical abuse. By the end
 of the year, the Government was not known to have undertaken any prosecutions
 of security officials.
 The Government prosecuted some 40 local police officials in 1994, mostly for the
 use of excessive force during arrest or for causing wrongful deaths. The victims were
 criminals, not those accusedof political or national security crimes. The Government
 did not prosecute any security official charged with enfocng the state of emer-
 gency; nor did the State Security Court initiate any investigation of torture allega-
 tions made in court. In such cases, the plaintiff is required to initiate his own suit
 against the alleged abuser in civil proceedings.
 Facilities housing political pirisoners are worse than those for common criminals,
 even though conditions in the latter do not meet generally accepted health and sani-
 tation standards. The piison at Tadmur in Palmyra, where many political prisoners
 are incarcerated, is widely considered to have the worst conditions. Some prison au-
 thorities allow visitation rights, but in other cases security officials demand bribes
 from family members wishing to visit incarcerated relatives. Overcrowding and sub-
 standard and insufficient food exist at several prisons. There is no independent
 monitoring of prison or detention center conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Emergeny Law, which authorizes
 the Government to conduct preventive arrests, overrides the Penal Code provisions
 against arbitrary arrest and detention, including the need to obtain warrants. Syr-
 ian officials contend that the Emergency Law is applied only in narrowly defined
 cases. Nonetheless, in cases involving political or national security offenses, arrests
 are generally carried out in secret, and suspects may be detained incommunicado
 for prolonged periods without charge or trial and are denied the right to a judicial
 determination for the pretrial detention. Some of these practices are prohibited by
 the state of emergency, but the authorities are not held to these strictures.
 The Government has continued the practice of detaining the relatives of detainees
 or of fugitives in order to obtain confessions or the fugitive a surrender.
 Defendants in civil and criminal trials have the right to bail hearings and the pos-
 sible release from detention on their own recognizance. There is no ball option for
 those accused of national security offenses. Unike the defendants in criminal and
 civil cases, detainees arrested for security offenses do not have access to lawyers
 prior to or during questioning.
 Detainees have no legal redress for false arrest. Security forces often d not pro-
 vide detainees' families with information  their welfare or location of detention.
 Consequently, many people who have disappeared are believed to be in long-term
 detention without charge or explanation. The number of those who have dis-
 apeared in this way proably has probably declined in the past few years, although
 thos may be due to the Government's success in deterring political activity rather
 than stricter procedures for detention.
 The Government brought to trial many detainees who have been held incommuni-
 cad for years. However, those trials have been unfair (see Section i.e.).
 Pretrial detention may be lengthy even in cases not involving political or national
 security offenses. The justice stem is backlogged. Many criminal suspects are held
 in pretrial detention or months, and may have their trials extended for additional
 months. The waiting period for trials, and the length of trials, are caused by the
 lack of adequate courts, a system of plea bargaining, and legal provisions for a
 speedy trial. The Government announced the establismlent of a number of new ci-
 vilian courts to help deal with the problem.
 The Government carried out at east two significant releases of political prisoners
 during the year. There were unconfrmed reports that the Government released 500
 to 600 detainees in March and April, and the Government claimed to have released
 another 1,650 people in late November. It is not known under what conditions the
 releases took plce. There was no public announcement, law, or decree authorizing
 them. Most of the released were apparently members of the Muslim Brotherhood,
 but others were from some banned Communist parties, as well as pro-Iraqi Ba'thists
 and Nasserites. Those who remain political prisoners represent all these  rups as
 
 
 1261
 
 well as Kurds accused of either membership in the Kurdish Workers' Party or who
 advocated autonomy for Syrian Kurds.
 A presidential amnesty issued in December provided for the release of some 6,000
 to 7,000 prisoners who had committed common crimes. Among those released under
 this'amnesty were 00 to 700 persons convicted by the extraconstitutional Economic
 Security Court. Consistent with past practice, the Government did not announce the
 number of persons released, nor has it responded to requests from international
 human rights groups and foreign governments for their names.
 The Government has probably released most of the doctors, lawy'ers, and engi-
 neers arrested in a mass crackdown in 1980. Many Palestimans an  Lebanese citi-
 zens have been detained without charge in both Lebanon and Syria, although most
 have subsequently been released.
 In Januar-y the Government released four former Ba'th party officials imprisoned
 sine 1970. 'The Government has released virtually all of those arrested at the time
 President Asad took power in 1970. At least three persons arrested during that pe-
 riod remain in prison, even though the sentences of two of them expired in 1985.
 The third apparently was never tried.
 The Government has exiled citizens in the past, although the practice is prohib-
 ited by the Constitution. There were no known instances of involuntary exile in
 1995.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the two exceptional courts that try national security and economic secu-
 rity cases are not independent of executive branch control. The regular court system
 displays independence, although political onnections and bribery sometimes influ-
 ence the verdicts.
 The judicial system is composed of the civil and criminal courts; the religious
 courts, which adjudicate matters of personal status such as divorce and inheritance;
 military courts; and the security courts. The Supreme Constitutional Court is em-
 powered to rule only on the constitutionality of laws and decrees. It does not har
 Tha ti apprntwsnee.tid
 Theland criminal courts are organized under the Ministry of Justice. Defendants
 are entitled to the legal repreesentation of their choice; the ourts appoint lawyers
 for indigents; defendants are presumed innocent and are allowed to present evi-
 dence and confront their accusers; and trials are public, except for those involving
 juveniles or sex offenses. Defendants may appeal their verdicts to a provincial ap-
 peals court and, ultimately, to the Court of Cassation, which is the highest court
 of appeal. However, such appeals are hampered because the courts do not provide
 verbatim transcripts of cases-ponly summaries prepared by the presiding judges.
 There are no juries.
 The military courts have the authority to try civilians as well as military person-
 nel. The venue for a civilian defendant is decided by a military prosecutor. There
 were continuing reports that the Government operates military "field courts" which
 do not have established courtrooms. Such courts reportedly observe fewer formal
 procedures than the regular military courts.
 The two security courts are called the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC),
 which tries political and national security cases, and the Economic Security Court,
 which tries cases involving financial crimes. Both courts operate under the state of
 emergency, not ordinary law, and do not observe constitutional garanes.
 Charges against defendants in the SSSC are often vague,  any defendants ap-
 pear tobe tried for exercising normal political rights, such as free speech. For exam-
 ple, the Emergency Law authorizes te prosecution of anyone "opposing the goals
 of the revolution" or "shaking the confidence of the masses in the aims of the revolu-
 tion" or trying to "change the economic or social structure of the State." Nonethe-
 less, the Government contends that the SSSC tries only persons who have sought
 to use violence against the State.
 Under SSSC procedures, defendants are not presen during the preliminary, or in-
 vestigative, phase of the trial, when evidence is presented by the prosecutor. Trials
 are usually closed to the public. Lawyers are not guaranteed adequate access to
 their clients, and are excluded from the court during their clients' initial interroga-
 tion by the prosecutor. Lawyers submit written defense pleas, rather than oral pres-
 entations. The State's case is often based on confessions, but defendants have not
 been allowed to argue that their confessions were coerced. There is no known in-
 stance in which the Court ordered a medical examination for a defendant who
 claimed that he was tortured. The SSS has reportedly acquitted some defendants,
 but the Government does not provide any statistics on the conviction rate. Defend-
 ants do not have the right to appeal SSSC verdicts, but sentences are reviewed by
 the Minister of Interior, who may ratify, nullify, or alter sentences. The President
 may also intervene in the review process.
 
 
 1262
 Many-perhaps hundreds-of cases passed through the SSSC in 1995. Most in-
 valved charges related to membership in various banned political groups, including
 the Communist Party, the Par    for Communist Action, and the pro-raqi wing of
 the Ba'th party. Several Syrian Kurds were also put on trial. The Government per-
 mitted representatives from Human Rights Watch (HRW) to observe sessions of the
 SSSC during the group's visit to Syria from March to May. An HRW representative
 was allowed to speak with several defendants, some of whom complained that they
 had not been informed of the identities of their state-appointed lawyers, nor allowed
 to consult with them to prepare their defense. Some of the defendants denied any
 involvement with violence, claiming that they were on trial for expressing alter-
 native political ideas.
 The Economic Security Court (ESC) tries persons for alleged violations of the for-
 eign-exchange laws and other economic crimes. Like the SSSC, this Court does not
 guarantee defendants due process. The defendants may not have adequate access
 to lawyers to prepare their defenses, and the state's case is usually based on confes-
 sions. Verdicts are likely influenced by high-ranking government officials. Those
 convicted of the most serious economic crimes do not have the right of appeal, but
 those convicted of lesser crimes may appeal to the Court of Cassation.
 The Government denies that it detains political prisoners, arguing that, although
 the aims of some prisoners may be political, their activities, including subversion
 were criminal. However, the Emergency Law and the Penal Code are so vague, and
 the Government's power so broad, that many convicts are in prison for expressing
 their opposition to the Government. The current population of political prisoners
 may range from several hundred to 2,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though laws provide for freedom from arbitrary interference, the Emergency Law
 authorizes the security services to enter homes and conduct searches with warrants
 if security matters--very broadly defined-are involved. The security services selec-
 tively monitor telephone conversations and facsimile transmissions and interfere
 with the mail. The Government opens mail destined for both citizens and foreign
 residents. It also prevents the delivery of human rights materials.
 There are fewer police checkpoints on rads and in cities and towns than in pre-
 vios years. Generally, the security services set up such checkpoints to search for
 smuggled goods, weapons, narcotics, and subversive literature. The searches take
 place without warrants. The Government and the Ba'th Party have also tried to re-
 strict some citizens from visiting cultural centers operated by foreign embassies.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Priss.-The Constitution provides citizens with the
 right to express their opinions freely in speech and in writing, but the Government
 restricts these rights significantly. It permits no written criticism of the President
 or the legitimacy of the regime, and strictly controls the dissemination of informa-
 tion. The Emergency Law allows the Government broad discretion in determining
 illegal expression. It prohibits the publishing of "false information" opposed to "the
 goals of the revolution" (see Section .e.). In the past, the Government has impris-
 oned journalists for failing to observe press restrictions. There is no information on
 whether these journalists are still imprisoned, nor were there any known arrests of
 journalists during the year.
 The Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Culture and National Guidance
 censor the domestic and foreign press. They usually prevent publication or distribu-
 tion of any material regarded as threatening or embarrassing to the Government.
 Censorship is usually stricter for materials written in Arabic. Commonly censored
 subjects include the following: the Government's human rights record; Islamic fun-
 damentalism; allegations of official involvement in drug trafficking; aspects of the
 Government's role in Lebanon; graphic descriptions of sex;, material unfavorable to
 the Arab cause in the Middle East conflict; and material that is offensive to any
 of Syria's religious groups, or is partial to sectarianism
 The Ministry of Culture and National Guidance censors fiction and nonfiction
 works, including films. It also determines which fims may not be shown at the cul-
 tural centers operated by foreign embassies.
 Nonetheless, there appearedto be some relaxation in censorship during the year.
 The media was granted somewhat wider latitude in reporting on regional develop-
 ments, including the peace process. The media coveredsome peace process events
 factually, but other events were reported selectively to buttress official views. More-
 over, several newspapers published reports on government malfeasance and low-
 level, but not high-level, corruption. The Government also allowed the publication
 of a newspaper column which complained that citizens read only the Government's
 version of the news in government-owned newspapers. In August the Government
 
 
 1263
 did not interfere with the distribution of the French newspaper "Le Monde," which
 contained a critical report on the Government's human rights practices, and it al-
 lowed entry into the market of another foreign newspaper which had been banned
 in 1994 for publishing an article on Syria's role in Lebanon. The Government also
 permitted a public seminar on the judiciary, and several previously banned books
 were made available for purchase at the Government's annual international book
 fair. Moreover, there were reports that the Government ended its interference of
 some television broadcasts from neighboring countries, but there still appears to be
 some jamming.
 The Government or the Ba'th party owns and operates the radio and television
 companies and the newspaper publishing houses. There are no privately owned
 newspapers. The Ministry of Information censors the televised news programs to en-
 sure that they follow the government line. The Government does not interfere with
 television and radio broadcasts from Israel. In late 1994, the Government an-
 nounced that it would once again confiscate satellite receiving dishes and replace
 them with a government-controlled cable system. However, no dishes were con-
 fiscated. It appears that the Government has informally approved the private own-
 ership of satellite dishes, which continue to proliferate.
 Public school teachers are not permitted to express ideas contrary to government
 policy, although authorities allow somewhat greater freedom of expression at the
 university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-This freedom does not exist.
 Citizens may not hold meetings unless they obtain permission from the Ministry of
 Interior. Most public demonstrations are organized by the Government or the Ba'th
 Party. The Government applies the restrictions on public assembly in Palestinian
 refugee camps, where controlled demonstrations have been allowed. There is no law
 that permits the establishment of plitical parties.
 Private associations must be registered with the Government in order to be con-
 sidered legal. Groups have not been able to register presumably because the Govern-
 ment viewed them as political, even though the groups considered themselves strict-
 ly cultural or professional. Unregistered groups may not hold meetings, and the au-
 thorities do not allow the establishment of independent political parties. The Gov-
 ernment usually grants registration to groups not engaged in political or other ac-
 tivities deemed sensitive.
 In 1980 the Government dissolved, then reconstituted under its control, the execu-
 tive boards of professional associations after some members staged a national strike
 and advocated an end to the state of emergency. The associations have not been
 independent since that time, and are generally led by members of the Ba'th Party,
 although "independents" are allowed on the executive boards.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and the
 Government respects this right in practice. The only advantage given to a particular
 religion by the Constitution is that which requires the President to be a Muslim.
 All religions and sects must register with the Government, which monitors fundrais-
 ing and requires permits for all meetings by religious groups, except for worship.
 Although no law prohibits non-Muslims from proselytizing Muslims, the Govern-
 ment discourages such activity. The few remaining Jews are generally barred from
 Government employment and do not have military service obligations. They are the
 only minority group whose passports and identity cards note their religion.
 d. Freedom of Miovenent Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 pafriation.-The Government restricts travel near the Golan Heights and occasion-
 ally near Iraq. Travel to Israel is illegal. Citizens require government permission
 to travel abroad. Some have been demed such permission on political grounds, al-
 though government officials deny that the practice occurs. The authorities may pros-
 ecute any person found attempting to emigrate or travel abroad without official per-
 mission, or suspeted of having visited Israel. On the other hand, there is no evi-
 dence that the Government persecuted upon their return to Syria those who applied
 for, but were denied, asylum abroad.
 Women over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the permission
 of male relatives. In practice, either the husband or the wife may file a request with
 the Ministry of Interior to prohibit a spouse's departure from Syria. In addition, a
 father may request that the Ministry prohibit travel abroad by unmarried daugh-
 ters, even if they are over 18 yearm of age.
 Palestinian refugees sometimes encounter difficulties in obtaining travel docu-
 ments and re-entering Syria after traveling abroad. The Government restricts entry
 by Palestinians who are not resident in Syria. The Government does not allow the
 Palestinian residents of Gaza to visit Syria.
 The Government generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. Al-
 
 
 1264
 though it denied any forced repatriation of those who claimed refugee status, it ap-
 parently involuntarily repatriated some Iranians, Somalis, Libyans, and perhaps
 others.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Although citizens ostensibly vote for the President and Members of Parliament,
 they do not have the right to change their government. The President and his senior
 aides, particularly those responsible for security, ultimately make all the basic deci-
 sions on political and economic life. Moreover, the Constitution provides that the
 Ba'th Party is guaranteed a majority in all government and "popular" associations,
 such as workers' and women's groups.
 The Party dominates the parliament, or People's Council. Although parliamentar-
 ians may criticize policies and modify draft laws, the executive branch dominates
 the legislative process. The Government permits only those parties which are part
 of the Ba'th-dominated National Progressive Front. These parties hew closely to
 Ba'th Party and government policies.
 Persons who have been convicted by the State Security Court may be deprived
 of their political rights after they are released from prison. These restrictions in-
 clude a prohibition on engaging in any type of political activity, the denial of a pass-
 port, and a bar on accepting a government job or some other forms of employment.
 The duration of such restrictions may last for 10 years or the remainder of the ex-
 prisoner's life. The Government contends that this practice is mandated by the
 Penal Code, and has been law since 1949.
 Women and minorities participate in the political system without restriction.
 There are 2 female cabinet ministers and 24 members of Parliament, or about 10
 percent of that body, are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government took the unprecedented step of allowing the international human
 rights group, Human Rights Watch (HRW), to conduct a fact-finding mission of
 some 45 days beginning in March. The HRW delegation met with several govern-
 ment ministers, and was allowed to travel around the country. It also met with the
 lawyers and families of detainees and prisoners, attended sessions at the Supreme
 State Security Court, and spoke with defendants, lawyers, and judges in ongoing
 trials.
 The Government did not grant the HRW delegation permission to visit prisons
 holding political and national security detainees. As a result of the delegation s visit,
 HR11W published a report sharply critical of the procedures of the SSSC and the ab-
 sence of legal outlets for political opposition. The Government contended that
 HRW's criticism was unwarranted and inaccurate, but later indicated its desire to
 continue a dialogue with the group.
 The Government does not allow the establishment of local human rights groups.
 One or two human rights groups once operated legally, but have been banned.
 The Government denies to international groups, including the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission, that it commits human rights abuses. It does not per-
 mit representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit prisons.
 The Government claims that it responds in witing to all iniries from inter-
 national human rights groups. However, Amnesty International reported in June
 that it had not received information on the status of some 1,000 prisoners, even
 though it made the request in October 1994.
 In instances in which foreign nationals are arrested, the authorities sometime
 delay or deny prison visits by embassy officials. The Government does not recognize
 duanationality, and thus it does not always grant requests by foreign embassies
 to visit or assist detainees who have another nationality.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for all citizens.
 In practice, membership in the Bath Party or close familial relations with a promi-
 nent party member or government official can be important for prospering. Party
 or government connections can pave the way for entrance into better elementary
 and secondary schools, access to lucrative employment, and greater power within
 the Government, the military, and the security services. Certain prominent posi-
 tions, such as that of provincial governor, are reserved solely for Ba'th Party mem-
 bers.
 Women.-Violence against women is not common but exists, and appears to occur
 more in rural than in urban areas. There are no official statistics on the incidence
 
 
 1265
 of such violence. However, one preliminary study suggested that domestic violence
 is the largest single reason for divorces, and that such abuse is more prevalent
 among the less educated. Battered women have the legal right to seek redress in
 court, but few do so because of the social stigma attached to such action. The Syrian
 Women's Federation offers services to battered wives to remedy individual family
 problems. The Syrian Family Planning Association also seeks to deal with this prob-
 lem. Some private groups including the Association, organized a seminar on vio-
 lence against women, which was reported by the government press.
 The Government has sought to overcome traditional discriminatory attitudes to-
 ward women. Tha Government encourages women's education and has expressed its
 intention to align its laws more closely with international conventions on equal op-
 portunity for women. Still, the Government has yet to act on proposed changes to
 retirement and social security laws which discrhminate against women.
 The divorce laws discriminate against women. For example, husbands may claim
 adultery as grounds for divorce, but wives face more difficulty in presenting the
 same argument. Inheritance is based on Shari'a, or Islamic law. Accordingly, women
 are granted a smaller share of inheritance than male heirs. On the other hand,
 Shan'a courts mandate child support from husbands in cases where the wife is
 awarded custody.
 Women are not impeded from owning or managing land or other real property.
 In addition to cabinet ministers and parliamentarians, women constitute 6 percent
 of judges, 10 percent of lawyers, 57 percent of teachers below university level, and
 20 percent of university professors.
 Children.-The law stresses the need to protect children, and the Government
 ave some publicity to the issue by organizing seminars on the subject of child wel-
 a   Although there are cases of child abuse, there is no overall pattern of societal
 abuse. The law provides for severe penalties for those found guilty of the most seri-
 ous abuses against children.
 There is no legal discrimination between boys and girls in school or in health care.
 The percentage of girls in the schools, about 40 percent of all girls, has risen stead-
 ily, but it has not yet reached parity with boys.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled
 and seeks to integrate them into the public sector work force. However, implementa-
 tion is lax. Regulations reserving 2 percent of government and public sector jobs for
 the disabled are not rigorously implemented. The disabled do not have recourse to
 the courts regarding discrimination. There are no laws mandating access to public
 buildings for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Although there is a significant amount of religious toler-
 ance, religion or ethnic affiliation is occasionally a factor in determining career op-
 portunities. For example, members of the President's religious sect, the Alawis, hold
 many high-level security and military positions. However, there is also a desire to
 avoid sectarianism.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Mincrities.-Although the Government contends that
 there is no discrimination against the Syrian Kurdish population, it has placed lim-
 its on the use and teaching of the Kurdish language, Kurdish cultural expression
 and, at times, the celebration of Kurdish festivals. Some members of Syria's Kurdish
 community have been tried by the Supreme State Security Court for expressing sup-
 port for greater Kurdish autonomy or independence.
 Although the Government stopped the practice of stripping Syrian Kurds of their
 Syrian nationality (some 120,000 lost their nationality under this program in the
 1960's), it has never restored this nationality. As a result, the offspring of those who
 had lost their citizenship have been unable to obtain passports or identification
 cards.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the Constitution provides for this right,
 workers are not free to establish unions independent of the Government's bureau-
 cratic structure. All unions must belong tq the General Federation of Trade Unions
 (GFTU) which is dominated by the Ba'th Party and is actually a part of the bu-
 reaucracy. The GFTU is an information transmission belt between political leaders
 and workers. The GFTU transmits instructions downward to the unions and work-
 ers, but also conveys information to leaders about worker conditions and needs. The
 GFTU provides the Government with opinions on legislation, organizes workers, and
 formulates rules for various member unions. The GFTU president is a senior mem-
 ber of the Ba'th Party. He and his deputy may attend Cabinet meetings on economic
 affairs. The GFTU controls nearly all aspects of union activity.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, but workers are inhibited from striking because
 of previous government crackdowns on strikers. In 1980 the security forces arrested
 
 
 1266
 many union and professional association officials who planned a national strike.
 Some of those remain in detention or have been tried by the State Security Court.
 The GFT is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 In 1992 the US. Government suspended Syria's eligibility for tariff preferences
 under the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences because the Government failed
 to take steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights to Syrian workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right does not exist in
 any meaningful sense. Government representatives are part of the bargaining proc-
 ess in the public sector. In state-owned companies, union representatives negotiate
 hours, wages, and conditions of employment with representatives of the employers
 and supervising ministry. Workers serve on the boards of directors of public enter-
 prises.
 The law provides for collective bargaining in the private sector, but any such
 agreement between labor and management must be ratified by the Minister of
 Labor and Social Affairs, who effectively has the power of veto. The Committee of
 Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has long noted the Govern-
 ment's resistance to abolishing the Minister's power over collective contracts.
 Unions have the right to litigate disputes over work contracts and other workcrs'
 interests with employers and may ask for binding arbitration. In practice, labor offi-
 cials and management settle most disputes without resort to legal remedies or arbi-
 tration. Management has the right to request arbitration, but this is seldom exer-
 cised. Arbitration usually occurs when a worker initiates a dispute over wages or
 severance pay.
 Since the unions are absorbed into the Government's bureaucratic structure, they
 are protected by law from antiunion discrimination. There were no reports of
 antiunion discrimination.
 There are no unions in the seven free trade zones. Firms in the zones are exempt
 from the laws and regulations governing hiring and firing, although they must ob-
 serve some provisions on health and safety, hours, and sick and annual leave.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law prohibiting forced
 or compulsory labor. There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor involving
 children or foreign or domestic workers. Forced labor has been imposed as a punish-
 ment for some convicts.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 14 years in the public sector and 12 years in the private sector. In all cases, pa-
 rental permission is required for children under the age of 16. The law prohibits
 children from working at night. However all these laws apply only to children work-
 ing for a salary. Those working in family businesses who are not technically paid
 a salary-a common phenomenon-do not fall under the law. Child labor is common,
 and the Government claims that the expansion of the private sector has led to more
 young children working. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws, but does not have enough inspectors to ensure compli-
 ance with the laws. Rural enforcement of labor laws is aso more lax than that in
 urban areas, where inspectors are concentrated.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minister of Labor and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing minimum wage levels in the public and private sectors. The
 minimum wage, which the Government had raised in 1994 (accompanyinga cut in
 subsidies on basic food items), remained unchanged at $50 per month in the public
 sector and $44 per month in the private sector (550 and 484 Syrian pounds at the
 official rate, respectively). A committee of labor, management, and government rep-
 resentatives submits recommended changes in the minimum wage to the Minister.
 The minimum wage does not provide an adequate standard of living for a worker
 and family. As a result, many workers take additional jobs or are supported by their
 extended families.
 The statutory workweek is 6 days of 6 hours each, but in some cases a 9-hour
 workday is permitted. The laws mandate one 24-hour rest day per week.
 Rules and regulations severely limit the ability of an employer to dismiss employ-
 ees without due cause. Even if a person is abseit from work without notice for a
 long period, the employer must follow a lengthy procedure of trying to find the per-
 son and notify him, including through newspaper notices, before he is able to take
 any action against the employee. Dismissed employees have the right to appeal be-
 fore a committee of representatives from the union, management, the Ministry of
 Labor and Social Affairs, and the appropriate municipality, such committees usually
 find in favor of the employee.
 The law does not protect temporary workers who are not subject to regulations
 on minimum wages. Small private finms and businesses employ such workers to
 avoid the costs associated with hiring permanent employees.
 
 
 1267
 
 The law mandates safety in all sectors, and managers are expected to implement
 them fully. In practice, there is little enforcement without worker complaints, which
 occur infrequently despite government efforts to post notices on safety rights and
 regulations. Large companies, such as oil field contractors, also employ safety engi-
 neers.
 The ILO has noted that a provision in the Labor Code allowing employers to keep
 workers at the workplace for as many as 11 hours a day might lead to abuse. How-
 ever, there have been no reports of such abuses.
 Officials from the Ministries of Health and Labor inspect work sites for compli-
 ance with health and safety standards. Such inspections appear to be haphazard,
 apart from those conducted in hotels and other facilities which cater to foreigners.
 WoMrers may lodge complaints about health and safety conditions with special com-
 mittees established to adjudicate such cases. Workers have the right to remove
 themselves from hazardous conditions without risking loss of employment.
