Syria
There was no significant change in Syrian human rights policy and practice in
2010. Authorities continued to broadly violate the civil and political rights of citizens,
arresting political and human rights activists, censoring websites, detaining
bloggers, and imposing travel bans.
Emergency rule, imposed in 1963, remains in effect and Syria’s multiple security
agencies continue to detain people without arrest warrants, holding them incommunicado
for lengthy periods. The Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), an
exceptional court with almost no procedural guarantees, regularly sentences
Kurdish activists and Islamists to long prison terms.
A positive development in 2010 was the adoption in January of a new comprehensive
anti-trafficking law.
Arrest and Trial of Political Activists
Twelve leaders of the Damascus Declaration, a prominent gathering of opposition
groups, finished serving 30-month prison terms imposed in October 2008 for
“weakening national sentiment.” All were released except writer Ali al-`Abdallah,
who is facing new charges of “spreading false information” and “spoil[ing] Syria’s
relations with another country” because of articles he wrote while in prison. His
trial is still pending at this writing.
In February border police detained Ragheda Sa`id Hasan, a former political prisoner
who was a member of the Communist Action Party. Three days later unidentified
individuals confiscated a copy of a manuscript she wrote about her past
detention from her apartment, as well as other political publications. She remains
in detention.
The SSSC sentenced dozens of Kurdish political activists to prison in 2010,
including many members of the PYD political party, which is affiliated with the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). In April the SSSC sentenced four members of the
Kurdish Yekiti Party—Yasha Wader, Dilghesh Mamo, Ahmad Darwish, and Nazmi
Mohammad—to five years in prison on the charge of undertaking acts “to cut off part of Syrian land.” Three other prominent Yekiti members—Hassan Saleh,
Muhammad Mustapha, and Ma`ruf Mulla Ahmad—face the same charges in their
ongoing trial before the SSSC.
In June a military judge sentenced Mahmud Safo, a member of the Kurdish Left
Party, to one year in prison for “inciting sectarian strife” and membership in an
unlicensed organization.
Dr. Kamal al-Labwani, a physician and founder of the Democratic Liberal
Gathering, who is serving a 15-year sentence for advocating peaceful reform,
remains in prison.
Freedom of Expression and Civil Society Activism
Syria’s press law provides the government with sweeping control over publications.
The government has extended this control to online outlets. Internet censorship
of political websites is pervasive and includes popular websites such as
Blogger (Google’s blogging engine), Facebook, and YouTube.
In December 2009 State Security detained Tal al-Mallohi, a 19-year-old student
blogger, reportedly for a critical poem she wrote. At this writing the security services
are holding her incommunicado and have not referred her to the judiciary.
In January blogger Karim `Arbaji was released by presidential pardon. The SSSC
had sentenced him in 2009 to three years in prison for moderating a popular
online youth forum, akhawia.net, which contained criticisms of the government.
In January security forces detained a journalist, Ali Taha, and a photographer, Ali
Ahmad, who work for the satellite TV station Rotana, which mainly focuses on
social life topics. They were released in February, without charge. In February
security forces also released Ma`en `Akel, a journalist at the official newspaper
Thawra, whom they had detained in November 2009 while he was investigating
government corruption.
In March Military Intelligence in Aleppo detained `Abdel Hafez `Abdel Rahman, a
board member of the unlicensed Kurdish human rights group MAF (“Right” in
Kurdish), and along with another MAF board member, Nadera `Abdo. The security services released `Abdo and referred `Abdel Rahman to trial on charges of
“undertaking acts to cut off part of Syrian land.”A military judge released him on
bail on September 1. His trial is ongoing at this writing.
In April authorities released on bail Ahmad Mustafa Ben Mohammad (known as
Pir Rostom), a Kurdish political activist and writer, whom they detained in
November 2009 for articles he wrote online.
In June a criminal court sentenced Muhannad al-Hasani, a human rights lawyer
and president of the Syrian Human Rights Organization (Swasiah), to three years
in prison for “weakening national sentiment” and “spreading false or exaggerated
information” in connection with his monitoring of the SSSC. In May al-Hasani won
the prestigious Martin Ennals Award for his work as a human rights defender.
In July a military tribunal sentenced Haytham al-Maleh, an 80-year-old prominent
human rights lawyer and former judge, to three years in prison for “weakening
national sentiment” and “spreading false information that weakens the nation’s
morale” after an opposition television station aired a phone interview with him in
which he criticized Syrian authorities.
In June border security guards detained Kamal Sheikho, a member of Committees
for the Defense of Democracy Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF). On
August 23, security forces detained another CDF member, Isma`il `Abdi, a dual
Syrian-German citizen who has lived in Germany since 1997 but was vacationing
in Syria. A judge interrogated him in October on charges of “weakening national
sentiment” and “membership in a prohibited group.”
The government continues to prevent activists from traveling abroad, including
Radeef Mustapha, head of the Kurdish Human Rights Committee.
All Syrian human rights groups remain unlicensed, as officials consistently deny
their requests for registration.
Arbitrary Detention, “Disappearances,” and Torture
Syria’s multiple security services continue to detain people without arrest warrants
and frequently refuse to disclose their whereabouts for weeks and sometimes months, in effect forcibly disappearing them. The fate of Nabil Khlioui,
detained in 2008 from the region of Deir al-Zawr because of suspected ties to
Islamists, remains unknown. The authorities have also kept silent about the fate
of at least 20 Kurds detained since 2008 on suspicion of ties to a separatist
Kurdish movement.
Human Rights Watch received numerous reports of ill-treatment and torture by
security agencies. The United Nations Committee against Torture said in May that
it was “deeply concerned about numerous, ongoing, and consistent allegations
concerning the routine use of torture by law enforcement and investigative officials.”
At least five detainees died in custody in 2010, with no serious investigations into
the deaths by the authorities. In June security services returned the body of
Muhammad Ali Rahman to his family. According to Syrian human rights activists,
his corpse showed signs of torture. Syrian law provides Syrian security services
with extensive immunity for acts of torture.
As in previous years, the government failed to acknowledge security force involvement
in the “disappearance” of an estimated 17,000 persons, mostly Muslim
Brotherhood members and other Syrian activists detained by the government in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, as well as hundreds of Lebanese and Palestinians
detained in Syria or abducted from Lebanon.
More than two years after security forces opened fire on rioting inmates in
Sednaya prison, killing at least nine, the government has not released any information
about the casualties. The authorities have not released Nizar Rastanawi, a
prominent human rights activist who completed his four-year sentence in
Sednaya on April 18, 2009, and there is no information about his well-being.
Discrimination and Repression against Kurds
Kurds, Syria’s largest non-Arab ethnic minority, remain subject to systematic discrimination,
including arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 300,000
Syria-born Kurds. Authorities suppress expressions of Kurdish identity and prohibit
the teaching of Kurdish in schools.
In March 2010, security forces shot at Kurds celebrating the Kurdish New Year in
the northern town of Raqqa to disperse them, killing at least one. In July a military
court sentenced nine Kurds alleged to have participated in the celebrations in
Raqqa to four months for “inciting sectarian strife.”
Women and Girls’ Rights
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life, but personal status laws as well as the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women and girls. The nationality law of 1969 denies
Syrian women married to foreign spouses the right to pass on their citizenship to
their children or spouses.
In January the government issued a comprehensive anti-trafficking law,
Legislative Decree No. 3, which provides new grounds for prosecuting trafficking
and protecting victims, and outlines a minimum punishment of seven years.
Syria amended its penal code in 2009 to require a minimum two-year sentence
for so-called “honor” crimes; at least 10 honor crimes were documented by Syrian
women’s rights groups in 2010.
Migrant domestic workers, whose numbers have increased in Syria, reportedly
face exploitation and abuse by employers. The government enacted two decrees
regulating the work of recruiting agencies to better protect the workers, but
enforcement mechanisms are still lacking.
Situation of Refugees Fleeing Iraq
Syria hosts more Iraqi refugees than any other country, with 210,000 registered
with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at the beginning of 2010;
the actual numbers are likely much higher. Syria gives Iraqi refugees, registered
or not, access to public hospitals and schools, but prohibits them from working.
In February UNHCR closed the al-Tanf refugee camp—which is situated in the no
man’s land between Iraq and Syria and has hosted Palestinians from Iraq for
nearly four years—and relocated the last of the refugees to the al-Hol camp inside Syria. However, a more permanent solution is still needed for the more than 600
Palestinians in al-Hol camp.
Key International Actors
The international community’s interactions with Syria have focused almost exclusively
on its regional role. Key European Union and US officials have condemned
the arrest and trials of prominent activists, but their interventions have had no
impact on Syria’s actions. In July both US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
the EU High Representative Catherine Ashton publicly criticized Syria’s detention
and trial of Haytham al-Maleh, Muhanad al-Hasani, and Ali al-Abdallah. In
September the European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning Syria’s
crackdown on human rights activists.