 SYRIA
 Since achieving independence in 1946, Syria has exper-
 ienced frequent changes of government in what has been
 a restless country. The Arab Socialist Resurrection, or
 Baath, Party gained control in Syria in 1963 committed
 to achieving "unity, freedom and socialism." The present
 Baath leadership, with a preponderance of military
 officers led by President Assad, assumed office in 1970
 and, having withstood challenges to its power, has given
 the country a period of stability and sustained growth
 unparalleled in the country's modern history. The Assad
 government has markedly improved human rights standards,
 particularly those relating to the treatment of minorities.
 Syria has been faced over the past few years with genuine
 internal security threats, stemming principally from
 ideological competition with the rival Baathist regime in
 Iraq.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been reports that persons suspected of
 espionage or other subversive activities have been
 threatened with torture or actually tortured. Allega-
 tions of mistreatment in security-related and narcotics
 trafficking cases are frequently heard and widely believed
 in Syria. In its 1977 report, Anmesty International
 expressed strong concern over numerous allegations of
 routine torture in interrogations, some reportedly leading
 to deaths. We have not yet been able to acquire information
 to substantiate these allegations. Our own knowledge of
 some recent interrogations, including interrogations of
 foreigners, indicates that rough treatment or threats some-
 times occurred but torture was not used.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The death penalty is used in Syria, but almost exclusively
 in recent years in the case of those judged guilty of
 assassination, terrorism, treason, and sabotage. A few
 of these executions have been public and have followed
 closed trials (e.g., those caught in the act of attacking
 one of Damascus's principal hotels). Available evidence
 
 (410)
 
 
 suggests that prisoners, once sentenced, are not subjected
 to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment, and prison
 conditions are tolerable in terms of health care, food,
 and family access. Exile is a fairly conmon punishment
 for some so-called political crimes.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Syrians enjoy constitutionally-guaranteed rights to life,
 liberty, and security of person. In practice, however,
 Syrian security authorities have considerable latitude
 in their treatment of persons detained for political or
 security reasons, and constitutional rights have been
 suspended or ignored in some cases. There have been
 occasional detentions of foreigners, including one U.S.
 citizen, for short periods without-trial. Amnesty
 International's 1977 report estimated that the total
 number of political prisoners was between 1000 and 1500,
 compared to an estimated 286 in its 1976 report. The
 Department's understanding as to these figures is that the
 largely Syrian peace-keeping forces in Lebanon have
 detained substantial numbers of people, mostly Palestinians,
 who have either opposed the efforts of this force to
 re-establish security and stability, or tried to under-
 mine the authority of the legitimate Lebanese government.
 Syrian actions were sanctioned by the Lebanese government.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Syrian judicial system generally provides fair and
 open trials. The rights of some persons charged with
 political and security offenses, however, are sometimes
 violated by detention without trial, closed trials, or
 trials without adequate due process.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides formal safeguards in
 this area, supplementing extremely strong cultural taboos
 as regards the sanctity of home and family. In political
 and security cases, it is likely that security authorities
 would be less than scrupulous in their respect for the
 inviolability of the home.
 
 
 412
 
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Syria, in recent years, has experienced noteworthy advances
 in economic and social conditions. Although the pace of
 Syria's ambitious economic development efforts has lately
 been retarded by its costly involvement in Lebanon, and
 by its maintenance of a significant military capability
 vis-a-vis both Israel and Iraq, the government wants to
 achieve the higher standards of living increasingly
 demanded by the population, and has scored impressive
 progress, particularly in the rural sector. The govern-
 ment maintains subsidies on basic food commodities to
 retard the effects of inflation. Education is free up
 through the university level and almost all of Syria's
 school-age children are in educational institutions.
 An impressive program of low-cost, pre-fabricated
 housing is underway. A major thrust of the government's
 policy is to expand and upgrade the health care delivery
 system.
 There is a substantial degree of corruption in Syria
 allegedly involving some high-ranking government officials.
 The issue has become a matter of popular discussion and
 the government has launched a widely-publicized campaign
 against this abuse. Some prominent Syrian businessmen
 and civil servants have been arrested. President Assad
 has pushed the issue further than many would have antici-
 pated. President Assad himself has set an example by
 turning over some of his private properties to the State.
 It is impossible to calculate the loss to Syrian society
 through corruption, which has grown in part because of
 the general easing of economic controls and the encourage-
 ment of the private sector. The ultimate test will be the
 resolve of the government to curb what is widely regarded
 among the Syrian people to be a serious abuse of political
 and economic power.
 
 
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Although Syria is predominantly Sunni Muslim, its
 Christian, Druze, Bahai, Jewish, and Shi'a Muslim
 minorities practice their faiths freely. The govern-
 ment's concern to preserve internal security and provide
 for national defense leads to some restrictions of
 freedom of speech and assembly. The government owns and
 closely supervises all media.
 Labor organizations exist, usually in nationalized
 industries, but are instrumentalities of the ruling
 Baath Party. Strikes are not specifically prohibited,
 but occur rarely.
 Syria's Jewish community, today numbering some 5,300
 persons, was subjected to discriminatory governmental
 restrictions and occasional harassment throughout the
 1950's and 60's. Their religious affiliation was pro-
 minently inscribed on their Syrian identity documents,
 they could seldom gain admittance to Syrian universities,
 their businesses were not granted export-import licenses,
 their right to sell or otherwise transfer property was
 circumscribed, and they were generally denied opportunities
 for governmental employment.
 Since 1974 the U.S. has made its concern known to the
 Syrian Government directly. From 1974 through 1976,
 some of the more onerous restrictions were relaxed. In a
 significant, positive step, the government issued a series
 of decrees in late 1976 and early 1977 intended to
 eliminate virtually all officially-sponsored forms of
 discrimination against Syria's Jewish community except
 the prohibition against emigrating freely. It will be
 necessary to observe the implementation of these recent
 relaxations over a period of time before a final judgment
 can be made as to their effectiveness.
 
 
 414
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Internal travel within Syria is generally unrestricted
 with the exception of security zones. Syrian citizens
 wishing to travel abroad must obtain passports which are
 sometimes difficult to secure. Any Syrian can be
 required to post a bond which would be forfeited in case
 of non-return. Emigration is discouraged, but a formal
 ban on emigration exists only in the case of certain
 categories of citizens, such as members of the Jewish
 community, persons eligible for military service, and
 doctors, scientists, and engineers trained at government
 expense who have not practiced their profession in Syria
 for a ten-year period. The prohibition against Jewish
 emigration has been lifted in a so-far limited number of
 cases, primarily involving unmarried women and family
 reunions. We believe further easings of this rule will
 occur on a case-by-case basis.
 Previous restrictions on the movement of the Jewish
 community within the country have been ended.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There is universal suffrage, and women can vote. The
 candidates for the parliament are chosen by the ruling
 Baath Party, and a few other parties sanctioned by the
 regime, from among their membership. In the most recent
 election for the People's Assembly, only ten percent of
 the registered voters cast their ballots in the initial
 period, a matter of serious concern to the authorities.
 The President is elected by universal suffrage. President
 Assad will stand for a second seven-year term in 1978.
 Municipal and other local elections are frequently hotly.
 contested and provide opportunity for individual exercise
 of the franchise on matters of local concern.
 In common with many Arab societies, the private citizen
 has considerable access to government officials to express
 views and interests and to seek redress of grievances.
 Religious communities and professional guilds and associa-
 tions exert important influences.
 
 
 415
 Women are not officially discriminated against, but
 many have yet to take full advantage of the opportunities
 available to them. There is, however, a woman member of
 the cabinet, and women are in influential policy-making
 roles in parts of the central bureaucracy.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Syrian government is sensitive to criticism of its
 human rights record and has often reacted by rejecting
 allegations summarily or ignoring them entirely. In 1977,
 however, Syrian officials answered some Amnesty Inter-
 national questions and the Amnesty International Secretary
 General met with Syrian officials in Damascus. Such
 communication is continuing. Syria has proven receptive
 to visits by members of the American Jewish community and
 has allowed them to establish and maintain contacts with
 the Jewish community in Syria.
 
 
