 SYRIA
 Despite the existence of some institutions of democratic government, Syria's politi-
 cal system places virtually absolute authority in the hands of President Haft Al-
 Asad and a small circle of security advisers. Key decisions regarding foreign policy,
 
 
 1174
 national security, and the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from
 his ministers and principal advisers. Although the Parliament is elected every 4
 years, the Ba'th Party is guaranteed a majority. The Parliament generally does not
 initiate laws but only passes judgment on those proposed by the executive branch.
 All three branches of government are guided by the views of the Ba'th Party, whose
 primacy in state institutions is mandated by the Constitution.
 Syria has been under a state of emergency almost continuously since 1963. The
 Government justifies martial law because of the state of war with Israel and alleged
 threats from terrorist groups (Islamic fundamentalists, Iraqi, and others.) It uses its
 vast powers so effectively that there have been few antiregime manifestations. Al-
 though the Constitution provides for the protection of fundamental rights, the state
 of emergency allows the security services to override these rights in their treatment
 of suspects, detainees, and prisoners. The branches of the security services operate
 independently of each other and outside the legal system. They continue to be re-
 sponsible for severe human rights violations.
 The economy is based on commerce, agriculture, and some oil production. It is
 dominated by an inefficient public sector and hobbled by a complex bureaucracy and
 endemic corruption. The regime has sought to promote the private sector through
 legislated incentives and deregulation. Real economic growth is about 4 percent, an-
 nual per capita Gross Domestic Product is about $900, and inflation about 16 per-
 cent a year.
 Despite some ma     Ial improvements, the Government continues to restrict or
 deny fundamental right. Serious abuses include the widespread use of torture; arbi-
 trary arrest and prolonged detention without trial; continued imprisonment after
 prisoners have served their sentences; unfair trials in state security cases; the de-
 nial of the freedoms of speech, press, and association; abuses committed under the
 state of emergency, and suppression of workers' rights. Discrimination and violence
 against women also exists, but not as a result of government policy. Because the
 Ba'th Party dominates the political system and the public sector, the people do not
 have the right to change the Government.
 In positive developments, the Government completed issuance of travel permits to
 all Jews wishing them; exhibited somewhat greater responsiveness to international
 inquiries regarding political prisoners and detainees; and imprisoned some police of-
 ficials who physically abused prisoners or employed excessive folce against suspects.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings, although such killings have taken place in the past. There were reports of
 two deaths of persons in police custody in 1994. In April police beat Abd al-Hadi
 al-Mulhim to death at a police station during interrogation. The policemen who al-
 legedly participated in the beating were arrested, then released by an investigating
 judge, and later rearrested by order of an Appeals Court. Also in April, a 33-year-
 old Lebanese citizen, Dani Mansurati, reportedly died in custody at the head-
 quarters of the Air Force Intelligence in Damascus. Mansurati was reportedly ar-
 rested in May 1992 and detained by Air Force Intelligence officers.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances. There was little in-
 formation on the welfare and whereabouts of hundreds of persons who have been
 held incommunicado for years (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The police and security forces continue to use torture systematically, despite the ex-
 istence of constitutional prohibitions and severe Penal Code penalties or abusers.
 The authorities have used torture in both criminal and national security cases Tor-
 ture methods include the application of electric shocks on sensitive parts of the
 body; beatings, sometimes while the victim is suspended from the ceiling-, and the
 use of a device that bends backwards to asphyxiate the victim and, in some cases,
 to fracture the spine. The Government generally does not respond to allegations of
 torture and seldom punishes offending officials.
 For the first time in memory, the Government prosecuted security officers for
 abuse. It convicted more than 40 officers for physically abusing or using excessive
 force against detainees-including abuse that caused an undetermined number of
 deaths. The victims in all these cases were suspected criminal felons. However,
 there were no known cases in which the Government investigated or prosecuted se-
 curity officials for abusing detainees arrested for political or national security of-
 fenses. This failure has created a climate of impunity which encourages the continu-
 ation of the abuse.
 
 
 1175
 Prison conditions are poor. Prisons are old and overcrowded, and health services
 and sanitation facilities inadequate. Conditions for most national security prisoners
 are markedly worse than those for common criminals.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Penal Code provides for
 safeguards against arbitrary arrest and detention, the Emergency Law, which au-
 thorizes the Government to conduct "preventive" arrests, overrides these provisions.
 Under the Emergency Law, arrests are generaly carried out in secret, and suspects
 are detained incommunicado for prolonged periods without charge or trial and are
 denied the right to a judicial determination for the pretrial detention. The Emer-
 gency Law also authorizes the Government to arrest persons for economic crimes.
 Detainees have no legal redress for false arrest. Security forces usually do not pro-
 vide detainees' families with information on their welfare or location of detention.
 Consequently, manyh disappeared persons are believed to be in long-term incommu-
 nicado detention. The authorities often release detainees without charge or expla-
 nation.
 Since 1991 the Government has continued to release prisoners, many of whom
 were detainees held without charge. The exact number is not known because the
 Government does not make a public accounting of persons granted amnesty or oth-
 erwise released. The Government may have released as many as 300 detainees in
 1994.
 However, persons still in prolonged detention include members of the Ba'th Party,
 the Iraq Ba'th Party, the Party for Communist Action, the Syrian Communist Party,
 the Arab Socialist Union Party, the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization,
 various Kurdish groups, and the Muslim Brotherhood. Scores of doctors, health pro-
 fessionals, and engineers have been detained without trial since a mass arrest in
 1980, and hundreds of Palestinians and Lebanese citizens arrested in Lebanon and
 in Syria were detained without charge, although most were subsequently released.
 The Government has exiled citizens in the past but there were no known in-
 stances in 1994. The practice is not as extensive as it once was.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is composed of the civil and
 criminal courts; the religious courts, which adjudicate matters of personal status
 such as divorce and inheritance; military courts; and the State Security Court,
 which tries cases involving national security charges, and the Economic Security
 Court. Civil and criminal courts are organized under the Ministry of Justice.
 Defendants in civil and criminal courts are entitled to the legal representation of
 their choice; the courts appoint lawyers for indigents; defendants are allowed to
 present evidence and confront their accusers; and trials are public, except for those
 involving juveniles or sex offenses. Although defendants have the right to appeal,
 their appeal efforts are hampered because the courts do not provide verbatim tran-
 scripts of cases-only summaries prepared by the presiding judges. There are no ju-
 ries: verdicts are rendered by the tria jud
 A public prosecutor may order suspected felons held in prearraignment detention.
 At the arraignment, the judge may dismiss the charges or refer the case to a crimi-
 nal court. There is a system of bail.
 In noncontroversial cases, courts are normally free of governmental coercion, al-
 though high-ranking officials may exert influene at times. However, a government
 minister was apparently removed from his position for interfering in a case.
 The High Constitutional Court is empowered to rule only on the constitutionality
 of laws and decrees. It does not hear appeals from the civil or criminal courts. How-
 ever, "criinal and civil cases may be appealed, first, to a provincial appeals court
 and, ultimately, to the Court of Cassation.
 The criminal justice system is backloged many criminal suspects are held in pre-
 trial detention for months. The bribery of judges has become more prevalent in re-
 cent years.
 The Economic Security Court tries persons prosecuted for violating the foreign ex-
 change laws as well as for other financial crimes. Defendants in such trials are not
 accorded due process. The trials are widely believed to be subject to executive
 branch interference. Some lawyers have refused to defend clients in the Economic
 Security Court because they purportedly believe the verdicts have been predeter-
 mined.
 Defendants in the State Security Court are not granted due process. Most trials
 are closed; the judges appoint the defense lawyers who are not permitted sufficient
 opportunity to consult with their clients or examine witnesses; the courts do not
 order medical examinations in cases of alleged torture; court proceedings and sen-
 tences are not made public; and defendants do not have the right to appeal. All sen-
 tences are reviewed by the Minister of Interior in his capacity of Military Governor,
 who may ratify, nulli9y, or change sentences; however, the President may also inter-
 
 
 1176
 vene in the review process. Although the State Security Court has acquitted some
 defendants, the outcomes of most trials are determined by top political leaders.
 The Government tried hundreds of persons in State Security Courts in 1994,
 many of whom were imprisoned for more than 10 years. Most of the charges related
 to membership in banned political groups. Between 1992 and 1994, the State Secu-
 rity Court tried more than 275 defendants, sentencing 200 and acquitting 75. The
 Government reportedly has failed to release from detention some of those who were
 acquitted.
 The Government denies that it detains political prisoners. However, it has tried,
 convicted, and imprisoned many people for attempting to exercise such fundamental
 rights as the freedom of speech and association. The Government maintains that
 these people either engaged in subversive activities or were members of subversive
 organizations. Such prisoners were convicted in trials that fall far short of inter-
 nationally accepted standards of due process. According to a Western press report,
 the Government in January 1995 released three former Baath Party officials-
 Fawzi Rida, Muhammed Id Ashawi, and Abd A-Hamid Miqdad. The three had re-
 portedly been detained without charge or trial for nearly 25 years.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though laws provide for the freedom from arbitrary interference, the Emergency
 Law authorizes the police to enter homes or conduct searches without warrants in
 national security cases.
 The authorities arbitrarily set up security checkpoints on streets and roads. At
 these sites, security officials search persons and vehicles without warrants, looking
 for weapons, drugs, subversive literature, and smuggled goods.
 The security services selectively monitor telephone conversations and facsimile
 transmissions and interfere with the mail. In some cases, censors have prevented
 the delivery to private citizens of foreign human rights publications.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides citizens with the
 right to express their opinions freely in speech and in writing. However, the Govern-
 ment restricts this right significantly. It permits no spoken or printed criticism of
 the President or the legitimacy of the regime and strictly controls the dissemination
 of information. Persons violating these restrictions are subject to arrest. The Gov-
 ernment has imprisoned several journalists for years for failing to observe press re-
 strictions.
 The Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Culture and National Guidance
 censor the domestic and foreign press. They prevent publication or distribution of
 any material regarded as threatening or embarrassing to the Government. Com-
 monly censored subjects include the Government's human rights record, allegations
 of official involvement in the Lebanese drug trade, and aspects of the Government's
 political and security role in Lebanon. Censors remove from imported publications
 articles critical of the Government's role in Lebanon.
 The Ministry of Culture and National Guidance censors fiction and nonfiction
 works, including films. Censorship is stricter for materials in Arabic. Censors re-
 move material critical of the Government, offensive to any of Syria's religious
 groups, too graphic in its description of sex, unfavorable to the Arab cause in the
 Middle East conflict, or partial to sectarianism. Censorship also affects films avail-
 able at foreign cultural centers.
 The Government or the Ba'th Party owns and operates the radio and television
 companies and the newspaper publishing houses. There are no privately owned
 newspapers. The Ministry of Information censors the televised news programs to en-
 sure they follow the government line. The Government does interfere with radio or
 television broadcasts from neighboring countries.
 The law prohibits citizens from owning satellite receiving dishes. In early 1994,
 security forces began to confiscate satellite-dish components but later halted the
 practice. Although ownership remains illegal, citizens resumed installing satellite
 dishes without any apparant government action. However, in November the Govern-
 ment announced that it would fully implement the ban on private dishes and create
 a monopoly to distribute satellite programs to selected consumers.
 Nonetheless, there was greater openness in 1994 in the media's coverage of re-
 gional developments, including the peace process. The Government aired extensive
 coverage of the peace agreement reached between Arab parties and Israel, e.g., the
 signing of the peace treaty between Israel and Jordan. The Government also per-
 mitted more media criticism of government performance. Several newspaper articles
 highlighted government malfeasance and low-level, but not high-level, corruption.
 
 
 1177
 Public school teachers are not permitted to express ideas contrary to government
 policy, although authorities allow somewhat greater freedom of expression at the
 university leveL
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-This freedom does not exist.
 Citizens may not hold public meetings unless they obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior. The Government or Ba'th Party organizes most demonstrations.
 The Government applies the restriction on public assembly in the Palestinian refu-
 gee camps.
 The Government regards all private associations as illegal unless they are duly
 registered with the Government. Unregistered groups may not hold meetings, and
 the authorities do not allow the establishment of independent political parties. It
 usually grants registration to groups not engaged in political activity.
 In 1980 the Government dissolved several professional associations after some of
 their members staged a strike and called for an end to the state of emergency. Secu-
 rity forces arrested an undetermined number of strikers and sympathizers. Many
 of these people remain in detention without trial or are being tried in the State Se-
 curity Court. The associations have since been reconstituted, but the Government
 strictly controls their activities. Any association must notify the Ba'th Party of its
 scheduled meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Citizens enjoy a considerable degree of religious freedom.
 Although nearly two-thirds of the population is Sunni Muslim, there is no state reli-
 gion. However, the Constitution requires that the President be Muslim.
 Most religious groups, including the remaining 300-member Jewish community,
 are free to practice their faiths. All religions and sects must register with the Gov-
 ernment, which monitors fundraising and requires permits for all meetings by reli-
 gious groups, except for worship. The permits are routinely granted. Non-Muslims
 may operate schools and religious training facilities,and maintain links with coreli-
 Onists abroad. The Government prohibits the Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh-
 Day Adventists from organizing as churches and from owning church property. Fol-
 lowers practice their religion in private homes.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and practice. Although no law pro-
 hibits non-Muslims from proselytizing Muslims, the Government discourages such
 activity. The publication of religious material is subject to the same censorship as
 secular material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts travel near the Golan Heights and occasion-
 ally near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq. Travel to Israel is illegal.
 Citizens require government permission to travel abroad. The Government refuses
 permission to anyone thought likely to express views contrary to its policies. The
 authorities may prosecute any person found attempting to emigrate or travel abroad
 without official permission, or suspected of having visited Israel illegally.
 Women over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the permission
 of male relatives, but in practice the husband may file a request with the Ministry
 of Interior to prohibit his wife's departure from Syria. Similarly, a father may re-
 quest that the Ministry prohibit travel abroad by unmarried daughters, even if they
 are over 18 years of age.
 In 1994 the Government fulifiled its commitment to grant exit permits to Jews
 who sought one. In the past, the Government required Jews to post bond before
 traveling abroad. It has abolished that requirement.
 There are some 360,000 Palestinian refugees living in Syria, some of whom were
 born in the country. These refugees sometimes encounter difficulties in obtaining
 travel documents and re-entering Syria after traveling abroad. The Government
 closely monitors Palestinians who are not residents in Syria, including those with
 third-country passports. The authorities sometimes refuse such travelers entry into
 Syria.
 The number of non-Palestinian refugees assisted by the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) dropped to less than 4,600 from some 5,500
 in 1993. Some 3,500 of these are Iraqis, and over 900 are Somalis. The UNHCR esti-
 mated that another 34,000 non-Palestinian refugees--including 31,000 Iraqis and
 2,000 Somalis--were in Syria but did not receive UNHCR assistance.
 There were reports that security forces detained some persons seeking asylum
 and reportedly forced some-in particular Somali, Egyptian, and Libyan nationals--
 to return to their countries where they face possible abuse from their Governments.
 Such reports were unconfirmed. In general, the Government provides information
 on asylum seekers to the UNHCR.
 
 
 1178
 Section 3. Respect for Political Right&- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to chan their government legally and peacefully.
 The President and his senior aides, particularly those responsible for internal and
 external security, ultimately make all basic decisions on political and economic life.
 In recent years, the ruling Ba'th Party, which is dominated by the military, has
 served principally to legitimize President Asad's rule.
 Although the regime seeks to deemphasize ethnic and religious sectarianism,
 members of President Asad's own sect, the Alawis, hold most important military
 and security positions. President Asad's fourth 7-year term expires in March 1999.
 An election was held in August for the 250-seat Parliament, or People's Council.
 Members serve 4-year terms. The Parliament has the constitutional power to initi-
 ate laws but has not yet done so. To date, it merely approves or revises draft legisla-
 tion proposed by the executive branch.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights groups: the Government does not permit the es-
 tablishment of such organizations.
 In October the Government allowed representatives from Amnesty International
 (Al) to visit Damascus where they met various ministers and other officials. The AI
 delegation described its discussions as the "first ever substantive talks with Syrian
 authorities covering all its human rights concerns." The delegation met with the
 p resident of the State Security Court but was not able to observe State Security
 Court trials. During its visit, Al raised with the Government the cases of over 1,000
 victims of human rights violations over the past 25 years, including political pris-
 oners, detainees without trial, and people who have disappeared. Earlier in October,
 government ministers also received a representative from Human Rights Watch, the
 irst time that organization has visited Syria.
 As a matter of policy, the Government denies that it commits any human rights
 abuses and does not permit representatives from international humanitarian organi-
 zations to visit prisons. In instances in which foreigners are arrested, the authori-
 ties sometimes delay or deny prison visits by embassy officials.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for all citizens.
 In practice, membership in the Bath Party or close familial relations with a promi-
 nent Ba'th Party member is important for prospeing. Party connections can pave
 the way for entrance into better elementary and secondary schools, access to lucra-
 tive employment, and greater power in the Government and the military.
 Women.-Historically the Government has sought to overcome traditionally con-
 servative and religiously inspired discriminatory attitudes toward women. It encour-
 ages women's education and has expressed its intention to align its laws more close-
 ly with international conventions on equal opportunity for women.
 Women constitute some 10 percent of the Members of Parliament and the diplo-
 matic corps, 6 percent of judges, almost 10 percent of lawyers, 57 percent of teachers
 below university level, and 20 percent of university professors.
 Nonetheless, social attitudes and practices continue to discriminate against
 women. Matters of personal status, such as divorce and inheritance, are adjudicated
 by courts associated with the various religious denominations. Muslim women face
 discrimination in such cases under Islamic law which grants women a smaller share
 of inheritance than male heirs.
 Spousal abuse against women occurs, but conservative social mores discourage
 any public discussion of the issue. There is no evidence that spousal abuse is wide-
 spread, but there are no official statistics. Battered women have the legal right to
 seek redress in court, but few do so because of the social stigma attached to such
 an action. The Syrian Women's Federation offers services to battered wives to rem-
 edy individual family problems.
 Children.-The law stresses the need to protect children, and education is manda-
 tory up to the sixth grade, with tuition-free education provided at higher levels.
 However, mandatory education is not strictly enforced in rural areas where there
 are often not enough schools.
 The Government provides health care to children at a nominal fee, although the
 quality of the care varies in different regions. There is no pattern of societal or fa-
 milial violence against children, which is discouraged by tough legal penalties as
 well as social stigma.
 
 
 1179
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government has placed limits on the
 use and teaching of Kurdish language, Kurdish cultural expression and, at times,
 the celebration of Kurdish festivals. urd lost seats in the parliamentary election.
 There were claims that the Government manipulated the elections of some Kurdish
 candidates who allegedly support the terrorist Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) move-
 ment, which advocates creation of a Kurdish state located, in part, on Syrian terri-
 tory. The authorities reportedly detained some citizens for protesting the Govern-
 ment's policy towards the Kurds.
 There is a credible estimate that previous governments withdrew the nationality
 of 90,000 to 120,000 Kurds during the 19607s. The current Government apparently
 stopped this practice, but has not restored nationality to those who lost it.
 Relgious Minorities.-There is no state religion and a significant amount of reli-
 gious tolerance. Religion is occasionally a factor in determining the opportunities
 available to Syrian citizens. For example, members of the President's religious sect,
 the Alawis, generally enjoy preference for high-level security and military positions.
 The few remaining Jews are generally barred from government and military serv-
 ice. They are the only minority group whose passports and identity cards note their
 religion.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled
 and seeks to integrate them into the public sector work force. However, implementa-
 tion is lax. Regulations reserving 2 percent of government and public-sector jobs for
 the handicapped are not rigorously implemented. The disabled d not have recourse
 to the courts regarding job discrimination. There are no laws mandating access to
 public buildings for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the Constitution provides for this right,
 workers are not free to establish unions independently of the Government's bureau-
 cratic structure. All unions must belong to the General Federation of Trade Unions
 (GFTU) which is dominated by the Ba'th Party and is actually a part of the State's
 bureaucratic structure. The Government would not permit the establishment of an
 alternative trade union federation.
 The GFTU is an information transmission belt between political decisionmakers
 and the workers. The GFTU leadership transmits instructions downward to the
 unions and workers but also conveys information to decisionmakers about worker
 conditions and needs. The GFTU provides the Government with opinions on legisla-
 tion, organizes workers, and formulates rules for various unions. The GFTU presi-
 dent is a senior member of the Ba'th Party. He and his deputy attend Cabinet meet-
 ings on economic affairs. The GFTU controls nearly all aspects of union activity. At
 the end of 1994, legislation was pending before Parliament that would grant individ-
 ual unions more authority to adopt their own bylaws.
 There were no reported strikes. Although strikes are not legally prohibited, work-
 ers are inhibited from striking because of previous government repression. In 1980
 the security forces arrested many union and professional association officials who
 planned a national strike. Many of those arrested remain in detention without
 charge or are being tried in the State Security Court.
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 In 1992 the US. Government suspended Syria's eligibility for tariff preferences
 under the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences because the Government failed
 to take steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights to Syrian workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right does not exist in
 any meaningful sense. Government representatives are part of the bargaining proc-
 ess in the public sector. In state-owned companies, union representatives negotiate
 hours, wages, and conditions of employment with representatives of the employers
 and the supervising ministry. Workers serve on the beards of directors of public en-
 terprises.
 The law provides for collective bargaining in the private sector, but any such
 agreement between labor and management must be ratified by the Minister of
 Labor and Social Affairs,who effectively has the power of veto. The Committee of
 Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has long noted the Govern-
 ment's continuing resistance to abolish the Minister's power over collective con-
 tracts.
 Unions have the right to litigate disputes over work contracts and other workers'
 interests with employers and may ask for binding arbitration. In practice, labor offi-
 cials and management settle most disputes without resort to legal remedies or arbi-
 tration. Management has the right to request arbitration, but this is seldom exer-
 
 
 1180
 cised. Arbitration usually occurs when a worker initiates a dispute over wages or
 severance pay.
 Since the unions are absorbed into the Government's bureaucratic structure, they
 are protected by law from antiunion discrimination. There were no reports of
 antiunion discrimination.
 There are no unions in the seven free trade zones. Firms in the zones are exempt
 from the laws and regulations governing hiring and firing, although they must ob-
 serve some provisions on health and safety, hours, and sick and annual leave.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law prohibiting forced
 or compulsory labor. There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor involving
 children or foreign or domestic workers. Forced labor may be imposed as a punish-
 ment for some convicts.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 14 in the public sector and 12 in the private sector. In all cases parental permis-
 sion is required for children under age 16. The law prohibits children from working
 at night. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is responsible for enforcing the
 minimum age requirements but does not have enough labor investigators. Nonethe-
 less, child labor is common. The Ministry is not able to monitor compliance with the
 child labor laws in rural areas or in small family businesses which employ young
 children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minister Labor of and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing minimum wage levels in the public and private sectors. Fol-
 lowing reductions in subsidies for foodstuffs, the Government in April raised the
 minimum wage to $50 a month in the public sector and $44 a month in private see-
 tor. A committee of labor, management, and government representatives submits
 recommended changes in the minimum wage to the Minister. The minimum wage
 does not provide for an adequate standard of living for a worker and his family. As
 a result, many workers take additional jobs or are supported by their extended fami-
 lies.
 The statutory workweek is 6 days of 6 hours each, but in some cases a 9-hour
 workday is permitted. The laws mandate a 24-hour rest day per week.
 Rules and regulations severely limit the ability of an employer to dismiss employ-
 ees without due cause. Dismissed employees have the right to appeal before a com-
 mittee of representatives from the union, management, the    stry of Labor and
 Social Affairs, and the appropriate municipality. Such committees usually find in
 favor of the employee.
 The law does not protect temporaiy workers who are not subject to regulations
 on minimum wages. Small private firms and businesses employ such workers to
 avoid the costs associated with hiring permanent employees.
 The law mandates safety standards in all sectors, and managers are expected to
 implement them fully. In practice, there in little enforcement without worker com-
 plaints, which occur infrequently despite Government efforts to post notices on safe-
 ty rights and regulations. Large companies, such as oil field contractors, also employ
 safety engineers.
 The ILO has noted that a provision in the Labor Code allowing employers to keep
 workers at the workplace for as many as 11 hours a day might lead to abuse. How-
 ever, there have been no reports of such abuses.
 Officials from the Ministries of Health and Labor inspect work sites for compli-
 ance with health and safety standards. Such inspections appear to be haphazard,
 apart from those conducted in hotels and other facilities w ch cater to foreigners.
 Workers may lodge complaints about health and safety conditions with special com-
 mittees established to a udicate such cases.
