Syria
Syria’s poor human rights situation deteriorated further in 2009, as the authorities
arrested political and human rights activists, censored websites, detained
bloggers, and imposed travel bans. No political parties are licensed. Emergency
rule, imposed in 1963, remains in effect and Syria’s multiple security agencies
continue to detain people without arrest warrants. The Supreme State Security
Court (SSSC), an exceptional court with almost no procedural guarantees,
resumed trials in March 2009, following an eight-month suspension.
Syria’s repressive policies toward its Kurdish minority continue. Security agencies
prevented political and cultural gatherings, and regularly detain and try Kurdish
activists demanding increased political rights and recognition of Kurdish culture.
Arrest and Trial of Political Activists
The SSSC sentenced over 45 people in 2009 on various grounds, including membership
in the banned Muslim Brotherhood, Kurdish activism, membership in
unauthorized political groups, and independent criticism of the government. On
February 4, political security detained two members of the Communist Party for
collecting signatures opposing a government decree that imposes new restrictions
on real estate transactions in border areas. Three months later, on May 21,
political security detained five members of the Communist Work Party during a
gathering at a member’s house. At this writing, all remain in detention.
On March 15 a Damascus criminal court sentenced writer and political analyst
Habib Saleh to three years in jail for “spreading false information” and “weakening
national sentiment” for writing articles criticizing the government and defending
opposition figure Riad al-Turk.
Twelve leaders of the Damascus Declaration, a prominent gathering of opposition
groups, continue to serve 30-month prison terms imposed in October 2008 after
attending a political meeting. Among those detained is Riad Seif, 62, a former
member of parliament who is in poor health. A Damascus criminal court tried
Walid al-Bunni, another of the 12, for voicing criticism of the government while in
prison, but acquitted him of the new charge on June 17.
In March 2009 the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention deemed
arbitrary the imprisonment of Kamal al-Labwani, a physician and founder of the
Democratic Liberal Gathering, who is serving a 15-year sentence for advocating
peaceful reform.
Authorities released prominent writer Michel Kilo and political activist Mahmud
`Issa, in May and June respectively, after the two finished serving three-year sentences
for signing a petition calling for Syrian-Lebanese relations to be based on
mutual respect for sovereignty.
Freedom of Expression and Civil Society Activism
Syria has no independent press. The government has extended to online outlets
restrictions it imposes on other media. Internet censorship of political websites is
pervasive and extends to popular websites such as Blogger (Google’s blogging
engine), Facebook, and YouTube.
On September 13 the SSSC sentenced blogger Karim `Arbaji to three years in
prison on the charge of “spreading false information that can weaken national
sentiment” for moderating a popular online youth forum, akhawia.net, that contained
criticisms of the government.
Also on September 13, security forces shut down the office of Mazen Darwish,
president of the Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression (SCM), without
providing any explanation or legal order.
In April a military prosecutor charged human rights lawyer Khalil Ma`touk with
“insulting the president and public administrations” and “inciting sectarian conflict”
after Ma`touk called for prosecuting security officials suspected of killing his
nephew in October 2008 while reportedly pursuing smugglers. Ma`touk’s trial is
ongoing at this writing.
On July 28, 2009, State Security detained Muhannad al-Hasani, president of the
Syrian Human Rights Organization (Swasiah), and two days later an investigating
judge charged him with “weakening national sentiment” and “spreading false or
exaggerated information” in connection with his monitoring of the SSSC. His trial is ongoing. On November 10 the Syrian Bar Association issued a decision to permanently
disbar him.
On October 14, State Security detained Haytham al-Maleh, 78, a prominent
human rights lawyer, following his appearance on an opposition television station
in which he criticized the ongoing repression of freedom of expression in Syria.
On November 3 a military judge charged him with “spreading false or exaggerated
information that can weaken national sentiment.” His trial is ongoing.
The government continues to prevent activists from traveling abroad, and in some
cases, their families. Among the human rights activists whom security services
prevented from traveling in 2009 are Musa Shanani, a lawyer, Abdel Karim
Rehaoui, president of the Syrian Human Rights League, Abdel Rahim Ghamaza, a
lawyer with the National Organization for Human Rights, and Najib Dadam, board
member of the Human Rights Association of Syria. The SCM issued a report in
February listing 417 political and human rights activists banned from traveling.
All Syrian human rights groups remain unlicensed, as officials consistently deny
their requests for registration. The National Organization for Human Rights has
challenged before an administrative court the decision of the Ministry of Social
Affairs and Labor to deny its registration request. The ministry responded by calling
for the organization’s members to be prosecuted.
Arbitrary Detention, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
Syria’s multiple security services continue to detain people without arrest warrants
and frequently refuse to disclose their whereabouts for weeks and sometimes
months—in effect forcibly disappearing them. The fate of at least 10 men
detained in August 2008 from the region of Deir al-Zawr because of suspected
ties to Islamists remains unknown. The authorities have also kept silent about the
fate of at least eight Kurds detained since September 2008 on suspicion of ties to
a separatist Kurdish movement.
As in previous years, the government failed to acknowledge security force involvement
in the “disappearance” of an estimated 17,000 persons, mostly Muslim
Brotherhood members and other Syrian activists detained by the government in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, as well as hundreds of Lebanese and Palestinians detained in Syria or abducted from Lebanon. The vast majority remains unaccounted
for and many are believed to have been killed.
More than one year after security forces opened fire on rioting inmates in
Sednaya prison, killing at least nine, the government has not disclosed any information
about the casualties. The authorities have not released Nizar Rastanawi, a
prominent human rights activist who was scheduled to complete a four-year sentence
in Sednaya on April 18, 2009, and there is no information about his wellbeing
or whereabouts.
Human Rights Watch received numerous reports of ill-treatment and torture by
security agencies. On January 10, 2009, the security services returned the body of
Muhammad Amin al-Shawa, 43, who had been detained in August 2008, to his
family. According to Syrian human rights groups, he died under torture. Ten
Kurdish activists told Human Rights Watch that agents of security agencies tortured
them in 2009.
Discrimination and Repression against Kurds
Kurds, Syria’s largest non-Arab ethnic minority, remain subject to systematic discrimination,
including the arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 300,000
Syria-born Kurds. Authorities suppress expressions of Kurdish identity, and prohibit
the teaching of Kurdish in schools. On February 28, 2009, security forces
violently dispersed Kurds who had gathered to protest the decree restricting real
estate transactions in border areas, and subsequently detained 21 demonstrators.
In March police stopped a musical event organized by a Kurdish political
party in Qamishli, and security forces broke up gatherings celebrating the Kurdish
New Year in Qamishli and Derbassiyeh.
Security forces detained at least nine prominent Kurdish political leaders in 2009,
including, on January 10, Mustapha Jum`a, acting general secretary of the Azadi
Party. On April 14 a military court sentenced two Yekiti party leaders, Fuad `Aliko
and Hasan Saleh, to 8 and 13 months in prison respectively for membership in an
unlicensed political organization. On May 11 a criminal court sentenced Mesh`al
Tammo, spokesperson for the Kurdish Future Movement in Syria, to three-and-ahalf
years in prison for “weakening national sentiments” and “broadcasting false information.” On October 20 a criminal court sentenced Ibrahim Berro, a Yekiti
party leader, to eight months in prison for membership in an unlicensed political
organization.
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life, but personal status laws as well as the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women and girls. On June 5 the Syrian media revealed
that the Ministry of Justice had submitted a new draft personal status law that
still kept discriminatory clauses against women intact, such as denying women
married to non-Syrians the right to pass on their nationality to their husbands and
children, and requiring women to receive male permission to travel abroad and to
work outside the home. After numerous protests from Syrian women’s rights
groups, President Bashar al-Asad cancelled the draft law in July.
On July 1 President al-Asad amended the Penal Code to require a minimum twoyear
sentence for so-called “honor” crimes. While the number of honor crimes is
unknown, the Syrian Women’s Observatory, an unlicensed group, documented at
least 12 in 2009, including the killing in August of an 18-year-old by her father
because a neighbor had tried to rape her.
Situation of Refugees Fleeing Iraq
Syria hosts more Iraqi refugees than any other country. Resurgent violence in Iraq
caused Iraqis to continue to arrive in Syria: During the first six months of 2009
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees officially registered 19,000
new Iraqi refugees, bringing the total number of registered Iraqi refugees to
210,000. This represents only a portion of the Iraqis in Syria, the actual number
being an estimated 1–1.5 million. Syria gives Iraqi refugees, registered or not,
access to public hospitals and schools, but prohibits them from working. While
Syria has generally maintained its doors open to Iraqi refugees, it has implemented
since 2007 more restrictive entry requirements. Syria has forcibly returned to
Iraq some Iraqi refugees whom Syria accused of committing criminal acts or working
illegally.
Syria continues to refuse entry to Palestinians fleeing Iraq. At this writing, at least
2,700 remain at makeshift camps in the no-man’s-land between Iraqi and Syrian
border checkpoints. Chile and Sweden have accepted to resettle some of these
refugees.
Key International Actors
Syria’s diplomatic isolation eroded further in 2009, with at least nine high-level
foreign officials visiting Damascus, including German foreign minister Frank-
Walter Steinmeier and United States envoy George Mitchell. The renewed ties
have had little impact on Syria’s human rights record, however. During 2009 the
European Parliament issued public statements expressing concern over the
human rights situation in Syria, but this did not impede progress toward signing
an Association Agreement, a process that had been frozen following the assassination
of Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in February 2005.