 SYRIA
 Syria has a centralized government dominated by the Ba'ath
 Party leadership, which seized power in 1963. The head of
 state, Hafez al-Assad, came to power in 1970 through a coup
 d'etat and has given Syria, a country marked by political
 instability, the longest period of uninterrupted rule since
 it attained independence in 1946. Members of the Alawite
 minority dominate the armed and security forces.
 Since the Ba'ath Party's accession to power, all Syrian
 governments have kept in force the state of emergency de-
 clared in 1963, which they have used to justify activities
 which violate Syrians' constitutionally guaranteed rights.
 The existence of the state of emergency and the subsequent
 establishment of a martial law court (1965) and State
 Security court (1968) had, until 1980, been vigorously
 challenged by the Syrian Lawyers' Association. In March
 1980, the Assad government proposed a few cosmetic measures
 to placate the dissenting professionals; but in April 1980,
 the government dissolved the executive council of the law-
 yers' association and arrested its members, thereby ending
 its public opposition to the state of emergency. In 1981
 the regime continued to limit the exercise of political and
 civil rights; it pursued dissident elements, carried out
 cordon-and-search operations, and raided suspect apartments.
 Despite Assad's eleven years in power, Syria has experienced
 considerable internal strife, which culminated in serious
 domestic violence during 1979-80. The government's reaction
 to this disorder was harsh, and there have been reports of
 massacres and other widespread violations of basic human
 rights and civil liberties in 1980 and 1981, especially in
 the cities of Aleppo, Hama and Homs.
 The government's policy was effective, however, in
 quelling the violence and regaining control over the
 internal security situation. The most serious outbreak
 of civil disorder in 1981 is reported to have occurred
 in Hama in April and which took the government several
 days to quell,, culminating in a reported massacre of at
 least 150 persons.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 There have been numerous credible reports of torture
 being used on a wide scale, primarily during the arrest
 and interrogation periods. Article 391 of the Syrian
 penal code prohibits the use of torture and establishes
 stiff penalties for those employing such practice%   There
 are no reports of punishment of security or poai'e offi-
 cials for acts of torture. A special report on Syria,
 issued by Amnesty International in October 1979, states
 that "torture is commonly employed in detention centers
 
 (1104)
 
 
 1105
 and military prisons, where it is used during interroga-
 tion in order to obtain confessions by detainees."
 Amnesty International has alleged that Riad al-Turk,
 head of the Syrian Communist Party Political Bureau, has
 been severely tortured.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In 1980 terrorist attacks against the Syrian regime for
 the most part targeted specific government individuals or
 vehicles, but rarely caused serious injury to innocent
 passersby. Since August 1981, however, this trend has
 changed. Four recent terrorist-inspired bombings incidents
 in Damascus have resulted in over two hundred deaths and
 several hundred injuries. The targets were military or
 police installations but many of the victims were either
 innocent passersby or government employees. During 1981
 Syrian security forces continued to carry out house-to-
 house searches and raids, looking for suspected terrorists,
 especially in Damascus, Hama and Homs. From all available
 reports these forces maintained their heavy-handed tactics,
 but did not engage in indiscriminate brutality and degrada-
 tion affecting large numbers of innocent citizens on the
 same scale as the previous year. There are numerous
 reports, however, that during the April events in Hama,
 the government carried out large-scale reprisals against
 the mainly Sunni population in that town, and, in one
 late-night action, rounded up and summarily executed at
 least 150 unarmed teenagers and men. Membership in the
 outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, the leading opposition group
 to Assad, is punishable by death.
 In February 1981, Jordanian television broadcast what is
 considered to be a creditable eye-witness account of the
 massacre which took place in Syria's Palmyra security
 prison during the summer of 1980. According to a group
 of Syrian security officers arrested and then interviewed
 on TV by the Jordanians, Syrian forces massacred approxi-
 mately 700 detainees in Palmyra prison in reprisal for
 the July 26, 1980 assassination attempt against President
 Assad. The Syrian government was reportedly involved in
 1981 in assassinations overseas of anti-government Syrians,
 including an exiled Muslim Brotherhood member in Spain and
 the wife of the Muslim Brotherhood leader in Germany.
 Little detailed information is available about Syrian
 prison conditions. No international organizations, such
 as the International Committee of the Red Cross, are
 allowed access to detention facilities. Persons charged
 or convicted for criminal offenses are held separately
 from those charged with political and security offenses.
 Health care, food and access by family members for persons
 held in ordinary prisons generally are adequate. Condi-
 tions at prisons where political and security prisoners
 are held are reported to be more severe. Visits by family
 
 
 1106
 
 members, for example, are not allowed, but health care and
 food are believed to be reasonably adequate.
 c. Disappearances
 During operations carried out by the security forces in
 1981, many suspected members or sympathizers of the Moslem
 Brotherhood were arrested by Syrian military and internal
 security elements. Families generally are not notified of
 such arrests, nor are detainees allowed to notify their
 next-of-kin. Although many of those detained in this
 fashion were released after several days of interrogation,
 an unknown number are believed still to be under detention.
 The government justified these arrests as necessary to
 maintain internal security.
 During intervention by the Syrian army in Lebanon, which
 began in 1976, an estimated several hundred Lebanese and
 Palestinians were seized by Syrian security forces and
 detained in Syria without trial. In the intervening years,
 some detainees were released, including approximately 25
 in the summer of 1980. About 50-75 individuals reportedly
 are still under detention.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Life, liberty and personal security are purportedly
 guaranteed by the Syrian constitution. The civilian legal
 code, modeled after French law, provides for due process
 for the accused, although detainees have been held for in-
 definite periods during the investigative process. Under
 the state of emergency currently in force, an individual
 loses these safeguards and may be held indefinitely. One
 example of such arbitrary arrest occurred April 9, 1980,
 when the Syrian government dissolved the executive councils
 of Syria's professional associations of lawyers, doctors
 and engineers. Professionals were arrested and many still
 remain in prison, without having been formally charged or
 brought to trial.
 Approximately 20 Ba'ath party officials and government
 members of the previous regime have been under detention
 since 1970. In August 1980, the former president of
 Syria, Dr. Nur al-Din Atassi, was temporarily released
 from prison, but he subsequently was reincarcerated. None
 of these imprisoned officials have been brought to trial.
 Additional supporters of this group were reportedly
 arrested in early 1981. Outside estimates vary (whether
 from foreign government sources or from private organi-
 zations) on the number of detainees being held by the
 Syrian government. The number of those under detention,
 however, may be significant. One private legal organi-
 zation estimates that there are approximately 5,000 such
 detainees.
 
 
 1107
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall
 under the jurisdiction of military courts or the state
 security court. Under this system, the accused has no
 recourse to habeas corpus and may not choose his lawyer;
 counsel is appointed by the court. All court sessions
 are closed. Reliable information on the number of in-
 dividuals tried by these courts or the verdicts rendered
 is not available. Defendants in civil courts are entitled
 to legal representation of their choice; if they cannot
 afford an attorney, the court appoints and pays for a
 lawyer. The court imposes no restrictions on the lawyer
 in representing his client and allows the right of appeal.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides formal safeguards,
 including the requirement to obtain arrest and search
 warrants, before police are allowed to enter private
 homes. These procedures are generally followed in cases
 relating to ordinary crimes. Regulations under the state
 of emergency which are currently in effect suspend these
 safeguards in security-related cases. During security
 operations in Syria in 1981, especially in the cities of
 Damascus, Aleppo and Hama, there were periodic house-to-
 house searches by security personnel who entered private
 residences with no warrants. This has been the practice
 rather than the exception during the past two years.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, press and assembly are purportedly
 guaranteed by the Syrian constitution. In practice,
 exercise of these rights is severely restricted. The
 government's repressive actions during the spring and
 summer of 1980 had the effect of intimidating citizens
 in the exercise of freedom of assembly, as well as
 freedom of speech.
 In August 1981, the government promulgated laws 'reorgan-
 izing" the professional associations (lawyers, doctors,
 and engineers). This was the Syrian regime's first attempt
 since the ad hoc measures taken in 1980 to legitimize the
 state's authority over the formerly independent associations.
 The laws formally committed professionals to conform to the
 principles of the Arab Ba'ath Socialist Party, and author-
 ized greater control over the associations' members by
 their bureaucracies. There are some labor organizations
 in nationalized industries, but they are instrumentalities
 of the ruling Ba'ath Party. Strikes are illegal in Syria.
 
 
 1108
 The Syrian press speaks solely for the regime. Limited
 criticism of non-controversial internal matters is
 tolerated. On foreign issues and matters dealing with
 internal security or opposition to the government, the
 media follow the government line. The press adheres to
 editorial guidance from the government on main issues and
 practices self-censorship elsewhere. The same is true
 of the broadcast media and the wire service, which also
 function as the official voice of the government. Foreign
 language publications generally are not censored; however,
 some foreign literature, usually fiction and non-fiction
 about the Middle East, is banned if considered critical
 of Syria or the Arabs. Arabic language newspapers and
 magazines published outside Syria and considered by the
 government to present viewpoints contrary to government
 policy are banned in Syria. Some foreign films are also
 banned, either for political content or for reasons
 relating to the anti-Israel boycott of certain entertain-
 ment personalities or organizations.
 The Syrian government is dominated by members of the
 Alawite sect, a minority (10 percent) of the population,
 which is predominantly Sunni Muslim. There were instances
 in 1981 of Baathi-inspired harassment of persons adhering
 to traditional customs, such as the wearing of veils;
 according to unconfirmed reports, some of these incidents
 led to violence and deaths. The Shi'a Muslim, Christian,
 Druze and Jewish minorities continue to practice their
 faiths without government interference and to participate
 in the economic, business, and governmental life of the
 country. Seventh Day Adventists, however, have for some
 years been forbidden to practice their religion.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Travel within Syria is unrestricted except in security
 zones. All Syrian citizens wishing to travel abroad
 must obtain passports and exit visas. These documents
 are sometimes difficult to obtain. Any Syrian can be
 required to post a bond which would be forfeited in case
 of non-return. This requirement applies particularly to
 Syrian Jews, who must often post larger bonds to obtain
 exit visas. Nevertheless, it is relatively easy for
 Syrians to travel abroad.
 Emigration is discouraged. A formal ban on emigration
 exists in the case of certain categories of citizen, e.g.,
 persons liable for military service, doctors, scientists,
 and engineers trained at public expense who have not yet
 practiced their professions in Syria for a ten-year period,
 and members of the Jewish community. In recent years,
 exceptions to the ban on Jewish emigration have been made
 in the case of some unmarried women. Those persons who
 attempt to emigrate from Syria illegally are subject to
 
 
 1109
 fines and detention. There are no restrictions on repa-
 -triation although political opponents of the Syrian
 government might be subject to arrest if they returned
 to Syria.
 There is a large Palestinian community, estimated at
 200,000. They are predominantly refugees from the 1949
 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars. Many still live in refugee
 camps maintained by the United Nations Relief and Works
 Agency. Palestinians participate fully in the Syrian
 economy and experience little discrimination by virtue
 of their refugee status. They continue to maintain their
 identity as Palestinians.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Syria's political system is highly centralized, with the
 president holding wide powers. The constitution stipulates
 that the Ba'ath party is the leading political organization
 within Syria. Several other political parties are permitted,
 but they exercise little actual political power and are
 subordinate to the Ba'ath Party. There is no legal polit-
 ical party which is in active opposition to the government.
 All legal political parties participate in the Progressive
 National Front, a mechanism which in theory is the highest
 political organization in the country. Two political
 groupings are currently illegal: the Syrian Socialist
 Party, which was banned in the 1950s after carrying out
 a series of assassinations against government officials,
 and the Muslim Brotherhood, some elements of which have
 carried out assassinations and other acts of political
 violence.
 Candidates for parliament are selected by the ruling
 Ba'ath Party and four other parties which comprise the
 Progressive National Front. Opposition lists of indepen-
 dents are offered, but do not enjoy the organizational
 support of the Progressive National Front and rarely
 prevail.
 The Syrian constitution guarantees women rights equal to
 those of men and stipulates that the state shall remove all
 impediments hindering their development and participation
 in Syrian society. In practice, opportunities for women
 are limited by custom and tradition. The Women's Union
 works to expand the participation of women in all sectors
 of society, utilizing the media and a network of chapters
 throughout Syria to convey its message.
 3.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Syrian government reacts negatively to charges of human
 rights violations and usually has turned them aside, either
 by charging that they are an intrusion in Syrian internal
 
 
 1110
 affairs or by ignoring such charges altogether. The
 government has received inquiries from Amnesty Inter-
 national during the past year, but reportedly has
 declined to respond. The last visit to Syria by
 Amnesty International delegates occurred in March
 1978.
 The delegation of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross in Damascus continued in 1981 to request the
 Syrian authorities for permission to visit Lebanese
 nationals arrested by the Arab Deterrent Force and de-
 tained in Syria, but as of the end of June no progress
 was made.
 The sole internal group which involved itself with moni-
 toring human rights affairs was the Syrian League for
 the Defense of Human Rights. Some officers of the league
 were arrested in April 1980 (after petitioning the
 government to end the state of emergency) and have not
 been released. This action intimidated the league which,
 for all practical purposes, ceased to exist. The Syrian
 government regularly participates in United Nations con-
 ferences on human rights but has not taken part in
 regional meetings on this subject.
 4.   Economic and Social Circumstances
 Syria, with a per capita GNP of more than U.S. $1,000, is
 a relatively well-off developing country. It has also made
 substantial strides in recent years in such areas as im-
 provement of literacy and the provision of adequate water
 supplies. To its traditional strengths as an agricultural
 country (wheat, cotton, barley, and tobacco), Syria has
 added over the years a substantial base in small-scale
 industry (textiles, food processing, light manufacturing).
 Although the government is the sole purchaser of many
 agricultural commodities, most agricultural land is still
 privately owned and smaller-scale industries mentioned
 above, despite widespread nationalization in the 1960's,
 remain in private hands. More recently, Syria has under-
 taken some large-scale industrial projects, all government
 owned, including cement plants, a steel rolling mill,
 fertilizer and chemical complexes and oil refineries.
 Petroleum extraction (9.1 million tons in 1980) has been
 a primary source of foreign exchange in recent years,
 with Syria netting several hundred million dollars in
 annual export revenues.
 Although primary school enrollment is at a lower level
 for females than males, equality of the sexes is a stated
 objective of the present Syrian government and one which
 it is pursuing (too vigorously, in the minds of its
 opponents) in every field.
 Life expectancy for Syrians at birth rose from 50 to
 65 years from 1960 to 1979, while the annual population
 growth rate was 3.6 percent for the decade of the 1970s.
 About 75 percent of the population was estimated to have
 access to safe drinking water in 1975. The adult literacy
 rate stood at only 58 percent in 1976, but with primary
 school enrollments averaging about 90 percent in recent
 years, literacy should be expected to rise in the years
 to come.
 
 
 1111
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND 6RANTS- ObLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (Uo.S-615CAL Yt:AKb - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 1979     1980      1981
 I.ECON. ASSST.-TO7AL..         110.8       1.1      1.9
 LOANS....................... 93.1   0.0       0.0
 GRANTS........o..        . 17.7      1.1      1.9
 A.AID ....................     90.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       7.0       0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ................    . 15.0    0.0       0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASIST   . 0        9u.0      0.0      oO
 B.FOOO FOR PEACL.......         20.8       1.1      1.9
 LOANS......e........ o... 1.1       0.0       0.0
 GkANTS ............. o2.7              1.1      1.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL.......           16.1       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS..o.          16.1       0.0      00
 PAY. IN I-OR. CuReR.o0. 0.0               0.0      0.0
 TITLE I1-TUTAL ........          2.7       1.1      1.9
 E.RELIEFoEC.OEV & WFP.          2.7       1.1      1.9
 VOL.RELIEf- AGENCY.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECUN. A53IST              0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......... .    .....  0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS............. .       0.0       0.0      0.0
 PtACI COKPb ...           0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ......           0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER.............. 0.0             0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TUTAL...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS........ ......  .    .0.0     (J.u      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CKEOIT SALEb--MS ...0                   0.0      0.0
 C.INTL NIL. .TKNGo.           0.0       0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCtSS STUCK...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHEk GkANTS.......0 QeU                0.0      0.0
 III.IOTAL ECON. & NIL...        110.b       1.1      1.9
 LOANS .............. .   .9.1         0.0      0.0
 GRANT ........     ........ 171      1.1      1.9
 0T14Ek US LUANS  .......         0.0       0.0      o.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS ....           0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..o...........          U.0       U.0      0.0
 A 5 bTANCt FkOM INr:RNA1I/NAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980      1981     1946-81
 TOTAL.......      57.b     21.6      15.9    570.7
 IBRD              51.0      0.O     15.6     456.8
 IFC                 0o      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDA                 0.0      0.0      0.0      47.3
 108                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 ADB                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0       ).u      0.0
 UNDP                4.-l     D.6      0.3      44.2
 OTHER-UN            1.9      0.3      0.0       6.7
 EEC                 0.0     15.7      0.0      15.7
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 71
 
 
