 SYRIA
 Syria, historically one of the nore unstable nations
 in the Middle East, has enjoyed unprecedented political
 stability since the present Baath leadership assumed
 power in 1970. In March, 1978, President Hafez al-Assad
 was re-elected for a second teim. Under President
 Assad, significant improvements in human rights prac-
 tices, particularly in the treatment of minorities,
 have occurred. There is growing official recognition
 of the need to make further improvements. Security
 concerns, reflecting sporadic internal violence of a
 terrorist nature, have continued to impede trends
 toward liberalization. Within the last year, there
 have been a dozen assassinations of officials and
 regime supporters, as well as periodic security-
 related incidents, such as bombings.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Charges of torture have been frequent; documentation is
 limited. A recent independent investigation of these
 accusations has added little concrete information.
 Where credible data are available, a mixed picture
 emerges. On the one hand, in some recent interroga-
 tions in security-related cases, rough treatment or
 threats sometimes occurred, but torture was not used.
 On the other hand, there is good reason to believe that
 in several recent cases physical coercion, even to the
 point of serious injury, was employed. Senior officials
 of the security services could hardly remain unaware of
 some of these abuses. However, in what appears to be
 a promising new departure, the June 1978 issue of the
 Syrian Police Journal, published by the Ministry of
 Interior, acknowledged that some police use
 physical abuse to obtain confessions in their investi-
 gations. The article, "Crime of Torturing the Accused
 to Coerce Him into Confession," stresses the illegality
 
 (632)
 
 
 633
 of such measures. Article 391 of the Syrian penal
 code establishes stiff prison sentences for those
 guilty of using torture; since prosecution under this
 statute takes place within the security courts, infor-
 mation on their frequency is unavailable. In several
 recent cases, however, corrective action has been
 taken by the authorities and apologies tendered to
 those mistreated.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The death penalty is reserved almost exclusively for
 those convicted of terrorism or homicide involving
 sexual assault. In the last year, public hangings
 have been carried out in pre-dawn hours and bodies
 removed immediately.
 Prisoners, once incarcerated, are not generally sub-
 jected to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment.
 Health care, food and family access in prisons are
 generally adequate. Mandatory exile is constitution-
 ally prohibited but political prisoners detained for
 long periods have sometimes reportedly been offered
 the choice of voluntary exile.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Constitutional guarantees of life, liberty and personal
 security are sometimes ignored by the security services,
 especially in cases involving internal security. The
 civilian legal code, based on the French model, pro-
 vides for unlimited investigative detention with
 certain safeguards against abuse through powers assigned
 to the Prosecutor General. However, under martial law
 currently in force, the role of the Prosecutor General
 in these matters is eliminated. President Assad recog-
 nized in his inaugural address in March that abuses of
 detention powers under martial law provisions had
 occurred and ordered that these powers be restricted
 to cases demonstrably involving state security. Syrian
 newspapers at that time reported several specific cases
 of the misuse of martial law.
 
 
 634
 -On March 9, 1979 individuals wrongly detained were
 freed. The Department of State is not aware of any
 published instructions regarding the liberalization
 of martial law practices, but there is general agree-
 ment within the Syrian legal profession that abuses
 have been greatly curtailed since last March. There
 are an estimated 200-300 persons detained (down from
 about 700 a year ago) who were arrested in connection
 with Syrian peacekeeping activities in Lebanon. Of
 this number, all but approximately 65 were combatants
 with Palestinian and Lebanese leftist militias engaged
 in perpetuating the Lebanese civil war. At any given
 time, there are from 100 to 300 persons under investi-
 gative detention, most of whom will generally be
 charged or released within several days to several
 months. Up to 50 persons are under arrest as long-
 term political detainees, a few for up to seven years.
 Some of these political detainees have reportedly been
 offered the alternative of voluntary exile in exchange
 for a pledge not to engage in hostile activities. In
 the past year, several prominent Baathist opponents
 of the present Government, including Salah Bitar, have
 been pardoned and permitted to return to Syria from
 voluntary exile abroad.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The independent Syrian judicial system generally pro-
 vides fair and open trials. The rights of individuals
 charged with security offenses are sometimes abridged
 through detention without trial or closed trials. The
 Department of State has no reliable information regard-
 ing the frequency of such violations. Syrian courts
 often act in practice as a check on confessions
 obtained under duress, either rejecting confessions
 where coercion is suspected or refusing to accept a
 confession not made before the judge in court.  Military
 Courts and the State Security Court hold sessions in
 camera. Some defendants in the State Security Court
 have been accuitted and, as far as is known, once a
 case gets into court, whether military, security or
 civil, the administration of justice is generally fair
 and equitable. The judicial system benefits in
 addition from the scrutiny of the independent Lawyers'
 Syndicate which is concerned with safeguarding the
 
 
 635
 integrity of trial procedures. For more than a year,
 the Jurists' Association and the Leaaue for the Defense
 of Human Rights in Syria have exhibited new vitality in
 the field of human rights, particularly in cases of pro-
 longed detention or with regard to trial procedures.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides formal safeguards in
 this area, supplementing strong cultural taboos regard-
 ing the sanctity of the home and family. Martial law
 regulations, however, suspend this legal protection in
 security-related cases. These special powers have been
 abused in the past. According to a credible report,
 however, during the investigation following an assass-
 ination in August, the authorities refrained from
 exercising martial law powers and obtained instead a
 judicial warrant to search the premises entered.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Syria has achieved in recent years important advances in
 social and economic conditions. The pace of Syria's
 ambitious economic development program has slowed con-
 siderably as a result of several factors, including its
 costly involvement in the Arab League force in Lebanon,
 the maintenance of a significant military capability
 vis-a-vis both Israel and Iraq and the uncertainty of
 external assistance. However, Government policy is
 dedicated to achieving the higher standards of living
 increasingly demanded by the population. Military
 expenditures account for about 24 percent of total
 planned expenditures, whereas development spending
 accounts for 61 percent. The Government's developmental
 policies concentrate on poor and rural populations and
 have helped to provide laborers and agricultural workers
 a more equitable share of the country's resources
 through the provision of potable water, electrification,
 access to markets and other services.
 There is no starvation in Syria and the Government main-
 tains subsidies on basic foodstuffs to offset the high
 
 
 636
 inflation rate. The Government, army and labor unions
 are engaged in major efforts to provide housing to
 relieve a chronic shortage exacerbated by the high rate
 of population growth, estimated at about three percent
 annually. Population growth has, however, been sur-
 passed over the last five years by economic growth;
 the annual increase in real Gross Domestic Product has
 averaged nine percent. Basic health care is available
 free to all, and the Government's program calls for the
 expenditure of $267.6 million in the 1976-80 period to
 expand and upgrade health facilities throughout the
 country.
 Education is free up to the university level. Most of
 the country's school-age children are enrolled in
 educational institutions; however, school-buildings and
 teachers are not sufficient to accommodate all potential
 enrollees. In an effort to reduce illiteracy, army
 conscripts are not discharged until they have met
 minimum standards.
 President Assad has highlighted the continuing problem
 of corruption by a campaign which he initiated in 1977.
 While the anti-corruption campaign was pursued further
 than many skeptics originally anticipated, its major
 effects were felt in the middle and lower levels of the
 bureaucracy and business community. Critics have
 charged that the campaign wound down without dealing
 with alleged abuses by some high-ranking government
 officials. Indictments of officials on charges of
 corruption or bribery are still occasionally announced,
 as in a recent case involving the purchase of aircraft.
 A new phenomenon has been the increasing willingness
 of the press to identify and censure officials guilty
 of corrupt practices or malfeasance. The distorting
 effect of corruption and waste on the economy is diffi-
 cult to gauge, but it appears likely that over the
 years millions have been expended on the purchase of
 shoddy equipment and on projects that were either un-
 economical or never completed.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 
 
 637
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Although Syria is predominantly Sunni Muslim, its
 Christian Druze, Bahai, Jewish, and Shi'a Muslim
 minorities practice their faiths freely. A very small
 group of Seventh Day Adventists has been prohibited
 from openly practicing their religion and church
 property has been held in trust for many years,
 reportedly because previous governments suspected a
 connection between some members of the sect and foreign
 intelligence services. This problem has not been re-
 solved but representatives of the Seventh Day Adventists
 visited Syria in early 1978 and were received by high-
 ranking Syrian officials to discuss the matter.
 There are some restraints on freedom of speech and
 assembly which the Government justifies for national
 security reasons. The legal institutions of the state--
 the five political parties, the legislature, the trade
 unions, and the special and professional interest
 associations--provide fora where individuals enjoy con-
 siderable freedom of speech and assembly. Debates in
 these bodies are frequently uninhibited and critical
 viewpoints on foreign and domestic topics are commonly
 expressed. Organized criticism and opportunities for
 lawful assembly are restricted to these sanctioned fora.
 The Government and the Baath Party control all media.
 Newspapers enjoy considerable latitude to criticize
 domestic programs or the Government. The failings of the
 officials in the Ministry of Health last year to act
 promptly to suppress an outbreak of cholera, for example,
 was severely criticized by the press. By contrast, the
 broadcast media and wire services function as spokesmen
 for the Government.
 Labor organizations exist, usually in nationalized
 industries, but are instrumentalities of the ruling
 Baath Party. The union leadership represents the
 interests of the membership in official councils.
 Unions have access to litigation in all courts and other
 judicial hearings to represent the individual and
 collective interests of their members and are also
 
 
 638
 formally represented at all governmental planning and
 decision-making levels.
 Syria's Jewish community, today numbering some 5,000
 persons, was subjected to discriminatory governmental
 restrictions and occasional harrassment throughout the
 1950s and 1960s. Jews could seldom gain admittance to
 Syrian universities, their businesses were not granted
 export-import licenses, their right to sell or other-
 wise transfer property was circumscribed and they were
 generally denied opportunities for government employment.
 From 1974 to 1976 some of the more onerous restrictions
 were relaxed and, in a significant step in late 1976
 and early 1977, the Government issued a series of
 decrees eliminating virtually all officially-sponsored
 forms of discrimination against Syria's Jewish com-
 munity, except the prohibition against emigrating
 freely.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Internal travel within Syria is unrestricted except in
 security zones. Syrian citizens wishing to travel abroad
 must obtain passports which are sometimes difficult to
 secure. Any Syrian can be required to post a bond
 which would be forfeited in case of non-return.
 Emigration is discouraged. A formal ban on emigration
 exists in the case of certain categories of citizens,
 such as persons liable for military service, doctors,
 scientists and engineers trained at public expense who
 have not practiced their profession in Syria for a ten-
 year period, and members of the Jewish community. The
 prohibition against Jewish emigration has been lifted in
 a limited number of cases, primdrily involving unmarried
 women and family reunion.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There is universal suffrage in Syria. Low voter parti-
 cipation in the most recent elections., i.e., those for
 the People's Council (parliament) in August 1977 and for
 the re-election of President Assad in February 1978, has
 
 
 639
 been a matter of serious concern to the Syrian author-
 ities. Candidates for Parliament are chosen by the
 ruling Baath Party and the four other parties from among
 their members and independents. Opposition lists of
 independents are offered but do not enjoy the organi-
 zational support of the Progressive National Front and
 only rarely prevail.
 In an apparent effort to increase popular participation
 in government, elections for the councils of the
 Governorates (provinces) are now being supplemented by
 local elections for town and village council, where
 local issues of direct concern to the electorate. are
 more demonstrably at stake. Additionally, the role of
 the People's Council is being highlighted by the pub-
 lication of its critique of Government policy on such
 issues as subsidies on basic commodities and by the
 new vigor of the legislature in veto'ing or amending
 legislation. Another result has been a marked increase
 in the questions formally submitted to the Government by
 members of the People's Council.
 Women are not officially discriminated against, but
 many have yet to take advantage of the opportunities
 available to them. They are, for example, encouraged
 to vote but generally do not exercise this right for
 cultural reasons. Women have served at Cabinet level,
 occupy influential policy-making positions in the
 bureaucracy and enjoy full access to educational oppor-
 tunities through the university level. The Women's
 Union works to expand the participation of women in all
 aspects of society, utilizing the media and a network
 of chapters to convey its message. Women were admitted
 in 1978 into police ranks for the first time.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Syrian Government is sensitive to criticism of its
 human rights record and has often reacted by rejecting
 allegations outright or ignoring them. The Syrian
 authorities have responded inthe last year to some
 
 
 60
 queries from Amnesty International and received officials
 of that organization in Damascus in 1977 and 1978. This
 communication is continuing. Syria has also proven
 receptive to visits by members of the American Jewish
 community and has allowed them to establish and maintain
 contacts with the Jewish Community in Syria.
 
 
