Syria
Syria’s human rights situation is poor, and showed little or no improvement
in 2005. Emergency rule, imposed in 1963, remains in effect, despite public
calls by Syrian reformers for its repeal. In June, a state security court acquitted
Aktham Na`issa, president of the Committees for the Defence of
Democratic Liberties and Human Rights in Syria, of charges that he opposed
“the objectives of the revolution” and disseminated “false information” aimed
at “weakening the State,” but the authorities continue to harass and imprison
other human rights defenders and non-violent critics of government policies.
The government strictly limits freedom of expression, association, and
assembly. Thousands of political prisoners, many of them members of the
banned Muslim Brotherhood and the Communist Party, remained in detention.
Syrian Kurds, the country’s largest ethnic minority, continued to protest
their treatment as second-class citizens. Women face legal as well as societal
discrimination, and have little means for redress when they are victims of
sexual abuse or domestic violence.
The February 2005 assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri sharply intensified international pressure on the Syrian government.
Bowing to this as well as Lebanese popular pressure, Syria withdrew its
troops from Lebanon on April 26.
Arbitrary Detention, Torture, and “Disappearances”
In March 2005, the government released 312 political prisoners. They
included Muhannad al-Dibs and Muhammad `Arab, Damascus University
students, whom the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC) had just sentenced
to three years in jail for organizing a protest against the suspension of two
Aleppo University students; they were convicted of “resistance” and “support
of goals contrary to the revolution.” On November 2, the government freed
a further 190 political prisoners as part of its “overall reforms.” Among those
released in the second group were `Ali Abdullah, a member of the Atasi political
discussion forum, and Muhammad Ra`dun, president of the Arab
Organization for Human Rights (AOHR), as well as members of “Islamist organizations.” Security forces had arrested Abdullah on May 16 for his suspected
ties to the Muslim Brotherhood and Ra`dun on May 22 for his affiliation
with the AOHR and for allegedly publishing false information.
Dr. `Arif Dalila, a prominent economics professor and a proponent of political
liberalization, continues to serve a ten-year prison term imposed in July
2002 for his non-violent criticism of government policies. Ma’mun al-Humsi,
a democracy activist and former member of parliament, is serving a five-year
jail term for “attempting to change the constitution.” The London-based
Syrian Human Rights Committee (SHRC) estimates that about four thousand
political prisoners remain in detention in Syria. The authorities refuse
to divulge information regarding numbers or names of people in detention
on political or security-related charges. Moreover, 2005 passed without any
government acknowledgement that its security forces had “disappeared” an
estimated seventeen thousand persons—Lebanese citizens and stateless
Palestinians— in Lebanon in the early 1990s. Many of these people are
known or believed to be imprisoned in Syria.
In recent years, dozens of people suspected of being connected to the
Muslim Brotherhood have been arrested upon their voluntary or forced
return home from exile. Syrian authorities arrested `Abd al-Sitar Qattan, for
example, on November 23, 2004, upon his return from Saudi Arabia, and
reportedly prosecuted him before the SSSC under Law 49 (1980), which
states, in part, that affiliation with the Muslim Brotherhood is punishable by
death.
The government also targeted students whom it suspected of having ties with
Islamist groups. In March 2005, the government arrested over forty students
of Tishrin University, in Latakia, for being affiliated with an Islamist movement
called Sunna` al-Hayat (Makers of Life). At least some of the detained
students were reportedly tortured, according to the Damascus-based Human
Rights Association in Syria.
An unprecedented coalition of political reform activists, on October 16, publicly
issued the “Damascus Declaration for Democratic and National
Change,” which calls for establishing a democratic system that respects citizens’ rights, ensures freedom of speech and association, and ends discrimination
based on religious or political beliefs. As of November the government’s
reaction was unknown.
New Arrests of Human Rights Activists
Human rights activists continue to be frequent targets of government harassment
and arrest. Among those arrested in the past year and still in detention
are Salim al-Salim, an activist from Homs in the Society of Human Rights in
Syria, arrested on February 24; Nizar Rastawani, from Hama, arrested on
April 18; the writer and activist `Ali al-Abdullah, arrested on May 15 for having
publicly read a letter written by `Ali Sadr al-Din al-Bayanuni, Londonbased
leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, about the group’s agenda; and
Habib Salih, arrested on May 29 in response to his writings and his appearance
on satellite television channels. In the case of Rastawani, security agents
refused to admit he was in their custody until his missing car was spotted at
one of their security branches ten days after they arrested him.
The government prevented many human rights activists from traveling.
According to the SHRC, the authorities are presently preventing over 190
activists from traveling outside the country.
Discrimination and Violence Against Kurds
Kurds are the largest non-Arab ethnic minority in Syria, comprising about 10
percent of the population of 18.5 million. Activists have long called for an
end to systematic discrimination, including the arbitrary denial of citizenship
to an estimated 120,000 Syria-born Kurds.
Since the March 2004 clashes between Kurdish demonstrators and security
forces in Qamishli that left more than thirty dead and four hundred injured,
tensions in that city and surrounding areas have remained high. A prominent
Kurdish cleric, Muhammad Ma`shuq al-Khaznawi, disappeared during a visit
to Damascus in May 2005; the Interior Ministry denied having al-Khaznawi
in its custody, and authorities found his body in eastern Syria three weeks
after his disappearance. His sons and Kurdish activists blamed state security for the abduction and murder, stating that there were signs of torture on his
body. After the announcement of al-Khaznawi’s death, more than five thousand
protesters gathered in Qamishli to condemn the killing. The protest
escalated when looters, allegedly local Arabs, pillaged more than eighty
Kurdish shops.
In September 2005, police beat a Syrian Kurdish woman to death when she
attempted to stop the demolition of illegally built homes outside Damascus.
According to defense lawyer and human rights activist Anwar Bunni, residents
were primarily poor Kurdish workers.
On November 2, Syrian authorities freed seven Kurds, including three
women, who had been arrested earlier in the year for belonging to a “secret
organization aiming to annex part of Syrian territory to a foreign country.”
Discrimination against Women
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active
in public life, but personal status laws as well as the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women. The penal code allows a judge to suspend
punishment for a rapist if the rapist chooses to marry his victim, and
provides leniency for so-called “honor” crimes, such as assault or killing of
women by male relatives for alleged sexual misconduct. Wives require the
permission of their husbands to travel abroad, and divorce laws remain discriminatory.
Key International Actors
The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1559 on September
2, 2004, calling for the complete withdrawal of all foreign—i.e. Syrian—
troops from Lebanon, and reiterating support for Lebanon’s sovereignty and
independence. The Security Council on April 7, 2005, adopted Resolution
1595, launching an investigation into the February 14 assassination, in
Beirut, of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. Lebanese authorities
arrested four senior pro-Syrian Lebanese intelligence and security officers
in August on suspicion of involvement in the Hariri assassination, but the preliminary report of chief U.N. investigator Detlev Mehlis, submitted to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan on October 20, implicated senior Syrian security
officials as well. On October 31, the Security Council unanimously
adopted Resolution 1636 threatening “further action” against Syria if it did
not fully cooperate with the investigation.
France, the United Kingdom, and the United States were among states
which pressed Syria to implement Resolution 1559 and fully withdraw its
forces from Lebanon. The European Commission and Syria initialed an
Association Agreement in October 2004, but U.K. Foreign Secretary Jack
Straw said on July 12, 2005, that the signing would likely not take place in
2005. The text stipulates that Syria must implement all international nonproliferation
accords, and that “respect for human rights and democratic
principles” constitutes “an essential element of the agreement.”