 SYRIA
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime which does not
 hesitate to use force when it is threatened. The President
 wields almost absolute authority. Key decisions regarding
 foreign policy, national security, and the economy are made by
 the President and his key advisers, and are often ratified by
 the Parliament. There are regular elections to the
 Parliament, but it wields no independent authority. All three
 branches of government are highly influenced by the views of
 the Ba'ath Party, whose primacy in the State is assured by the
 Constitution. Independent, nonsanctioned political opposition
 is forcibly repressed. However, a certain amount of regional
 autonomy is exercised by local administrative councils.
 The ruling Ba'ath Party, which emphasizes socialism and
 secular Arabism, gained ascendancy in 1963. It has become
 dominated by the military, which consumes a large share of
 Syria's scarce economic resources. In recent years, the party
 has served principally to legitimize President Asad's rule.
 Although Ba'ath Party doctrine seeks to overcome sectarian and
 class consciousness by building a sense of national rather
 than ethnic identity, ethnic, religious, and regional
 allegiances remain important. Members of President Asad's own
 sect, the Alawis, hold most of the important military and
 security positions.
 Except for a hiatus in 1973-74, S~'ria has been under emergency
 powers since 1963. The Government has justified martial law
 by the state of war with Israel and continuing  threats posed
 by terrorist groups (Islamic fundamentalist, Iraqi, and
 Lebanese). The Muslim Brotherhood was until 1982 the greatest
 internal threat to the regime. This group of Sunni Muslim
 fundamentalists openly challenged the secular Ba'athist
 Alawi-dominated regime from the late 1970's until its brutal
 suppression in 1982. The League for Communist Action is
 another clandestine opposition group. Public manifestation of
 antiregime activity, however, remains very limited, and there
 were no reports of large-scale arrests in 1989.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. The several main branches of the security services
 operate independently of each other and outside the normal
 legal system; each is suspected of human rights violations.
 The regime justifies the activities of the security services
 because of the continuing state of emergency declared on the
 basis of the state of war with Israel.
 Syria has a state socialist economy and has nationalized most
 major enterprises. The regime has followed economic policies
 designed to correct previous regional and class disparities.
 There is a small but vigorous private sector which is
 expanding, and most agricultural land is privately owned.
 The economy is plagued by stagnation, and real growth
 essentially has been flat, with 1988 gross domestic product
 roughly equivalent to that in 1982.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation
 in 1989. However, Syria did respond for the first time to a
 United Nations inquiry about its human rights practices, and
 the Syrian press reported that a visiting Amnesty
 International (AI) delegation met with Vice President Khaddam
 in June. The Government also responded positively to specific
 requests from the U.S. Government about the status of Syrian
 Jews. However, Syria remains effectively under the rule of an
 .authoritarian regime, and there were no signs of progress
 
 
 1580
 SYRIA
 towards a freer political system or a greater respect for
 individual human rights. Human rights abuses, including
 tort ie, denial of the freedoms of speech, press, association,
 and the right of citizens to change their government continued
 to characterize the regime's record in 1989.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Executions for political beliefs in Syria are typically a
 readtion to perceived subversion or direct and violent threats
 to the regifme. There were no reports of executions for
 political belilefs in 1989, but at least two deaths due to
 mistreatment while in custody were reported by Al in 1988.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been credible reports in the past that some Syrians
 arrested for security reasons have disappeared. There were,
 however, no such reports in 1989.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the penal code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe 'penalties for it, there continue to be numerous reports
 of tortur , primarily dulring arrest and interrogation in
 political or security-related cases.
 In its'1989 Report, covering the year 1988, Amnesty -
 International (AI) noted that the torture and ill-treatment of
 prisoners, including minors, continued to be widely reported
 and 'appeared to be routine. It cited cases in which prisoners
 were reportedly beaten--resulting in some cases in serious
 injury--and, in one case, subjected to electric shock. The
 report noted that 3 of the 10 members of the Jewish community
 attested since 1987 on charges of illegal travel reportedly
 were tortured while in detention. Security forces often will
 arrest family'members of a fugitive and detain or torture them
 until the fugitive surrenders to authorities. There was at
 least one report in 1989 of the arraignment of officials who
 engaged in such practices in 1989, but no evidence of a
 concerted government attempt to end such practices.
 No-international groups are allowed access to security
 detention facilities. Families are usually not allowed to
 visit security prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 While the civil law code, modeled after French law, generally
 providei for due process, it is almost totally lacking in
 provisions covering security or political offenses. Under the
 state of emergency law, normal safeguards can be suspended,
 especially in security and political cases, and a person may
 be held indefinitely without charge or trial; arrested
 secretly, with no legal restraint&; and denied the right to a
 judicial determination of the basis for pretrial detention.
 The accused has no redress for false arrest and cannot be
 contacted by family or friends, who most often do not know
 where the accused is being held.- Many "disappeared" persons
 
 
 1581
 are believed to be alive and held by the security forces.
 Frequently, the detained individual is released without ever
 being charged. There are no reliable estimates of the number
 of persons detained without trial. Exile, sometimes
 voluntary, is occasionally used to rid the regime of troubling
 elements.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Syrian court system, based upon French law, is comprised
 of separate civil courts (rents, contracts, etc); penal or
 criminal courts, whose jurisdiction includes economic crimes;
 religious courts; military courts; security courts; and
 constitutional courts.
 Civil and penal cases are under the jurisdiction of the
 Minister of Justice. The defendant in a criminal case is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public
 prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The
 judge may either free the defendant on the basis of
 insufficient evidence or refer the case to a criminal court.
 Defendants are entitled to legal representation of their
 choice; if they cannot afford a lawyer, one will be appointed
 by the court. Civil and penal courts impose no restrictions
 on lawyers in representing their clients, and allow the right
 of appeal. They also provide for a bond guarantee of a
 usually moderate sum. In noncontroversial criminal cases,
 civil courts are usually free of governmental coercion,
 although the Government can bring pressure to bear if it
 wishes to do so. The slow and cumbersome legal system can
 leave suspects languishing in prison for months.
 Defendants in criminal cases are presumed innocent until
 proven guilty. Defendants are allowed to present evidence and
 confront their accusers. Trials are public except for cases
 involving juveniles and crimes which may impact negatively on
 moral sensitivity, such as rape. Cases are tried before a
 judge; there is no jury system.
 There were fewer reports of arrests for "economic" crimes in
 1989. Rather, a number of those arrested earlier for currency
 violations were released from jail, and economic
 liberalization measures have made it easier for private
 businessmen to operate without resort to illegal currency
 markets, although it is still technically illegal for a
 private Syrian to hold foreign exchange, unless generated by
 private exports.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the State Security Court. Such persons
 have no say in the selection of a lawyer, who is chosen by the
 court. All court sessions are closed, and there are no
 official channels for obtaining information on the trial or
 sentencing, although relatives with influence in the
 Government ultimately may succeed in obtaining information and
 even effecting the release of the accused.
 There is also a Higher Court, under the authority of the Prime
 Minister, which reviews issues related to the legality of
 government contracts and other government-private sector
 issues.
 
 
 1582
 SYRIA
 The Government does not release information on the number of
 pqrsons detained for political or security offenses, but with
 detentions dating back to 1970, the number is probably
 significant. Between February-and May 1988, unconfirmed
 reports indicate that up to 1,200 citizens associated with the
 Muslim Brotherhood or the League of Communist Action may have
 been arrested. There were no reports of politically motivated
 arrests in 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home
 or Correspondence
 Domestic intelligence organizations maintain a network of
 guards to protect officials and important buildings, as well
 as to monitor the activity of people living in those
 neighborhoods. Some telephone conversations are almost
 certainly recorded. The presence of police and security
 officials is pervasive, especially in Damascus.
 The postal system censors the mail, including foreign
 publications, selectively. Although the legal system provides
 safeguards, including the requirement of an arrest or search
 warrant before police are allowed to enter private homes,
 regulations under the state of emergency suspend these
 protections in security-relat.ed cases.
 Security checkpoints can be set'up anywhere, and no warrant
 for search or arrest is required. Security forces are mostly
 conceried with suspected subversives, but also search for
 smuggled goods. There were few reports of checkpoints having
 been set up during'1989, except at the border with Lebanon.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a.: Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public.criticism of the President is not permitted, and
 criticism;.qf the Government and the Balath Party is. ,.
 effectively discouraged.' The Government or the Ba'ath Party
 wholly own and operate all broadcast media and publishing
 houses and strictly control the dissemination of all
 intormation.
 Censorship of foreign and domestic news is exercised through
 offices, in the Ministries of Information and of Culture and
 National Guidance. Any sulject deemed sensitive to Syrian
 gov rment interests will not ,appear in the press or in daily
 br6adcaists. In 1989 this censorship included certain
 decisions of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and
 ciyil unrest in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and China
 prior.r  .the release of such reports by the Soviet.press
 agency TWS..* However, rddio and television broadcasts from .
 neighboring countries, including Israel, are not. jammed, and
 reports not carried.in Syrian media are generally well known.
 Newspapers provide 'no medium for political opposition.
 Criticism of government-policies or their operations is
 limited to economic issues, minor administrative failings, and
 domestic corruption, and even this criticism is usually
 orchestrated from above. However, there is alm6st daily
 criticism of problems in'the economy. Officials above the
 middle rank are rarely criticized.
 Imported printed material and films are subject to
 censorship. Articles critical of Syria or Syria's role in
 
 
 1583
 SYRIA
 Lebanon are occasionally completely deleted from foreign
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. Fictional and
 nonfictional literature is censored by the Union of Arab
 Writers if it is considered overly critical of Syria,
 offensive to one of Syria's religious groups, or too
 graphically discusses sex. Films are often censored for a
 variety of reasons, such as unfavorable interpretation of the
 Middle East conflict, sectarianism, or the use of actors or
 production companies targeted by the Arab boycott. Control is
 much stricter on materials in Arabic.
 Schools at all levels are government operated. Private
 primary and secondary schools run by minority religious groups
 are required to follow the Ministry of Education curriculum
 and are subject to regular inspection. One hour of the school
 day is devoted to instruction on Syrian patriotism. Teachers
 are not permitted to express ideas contrary to government
 policy, although more freedom of expression is tolerated at
 the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations may be held
 only with official permission, and usually at the instigation
 of the Government or the Balath Party. Private societies,
 including religious groups, are allowed to meet if they have
 received governmental permission to organize. While usually
 granted, such permission authorizes only nonpolitical
 activities.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although nearly two-thirds of the Syrians are Sunni Muslim,
 the Constitution does not establish a state religion. As a
 concession to Islamic fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi
 secularism, the 1973 Constitution requires that the President
 be Muslim. Otherwise, there is no official preference given
 to one religion over another, and all major Christian and
 Muslim holidays are officially observed by the Government.
 Many key positions in the Government are controlled by members
 of the minority Alawi sect (at least 10-12 percent of the
 population), which is considered heretical by many Sunni
 Muslims.
 Ba'athi secular ideology and modernizing influences have had
 some impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and
 ethnicity, but individual Syrians continue to identify
 themselves by their communal associations.
 With few exceptions (noted below), all religious groups,
 Muslim and non-Muslim, including Syria's 3,800 Jews, have the
 freedom to practice their different religions. However,
 fund-raising, construction, and the holding of all meetings
 except for worship are tightly restricted and sometimes
 banned. Religious training is permitted within the curriculum
 for Jews and Christians in Jewish and Armenian schools, among
 others. Non-Muslim groups may maintain links with Muslim and
 coreligionists outside Syria.
 
 
 1584
 SYRIA
 One exception to the official policy of religious tolerance is
 the treatment of Jehovah's Witnesses and Seventh-Day
 Adventists, who are forbidden to practice their religion or
 own church property.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and practice.
 The publication of religious materials is subject to the same
 strict controls as secular material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is restricted only in the security zone of the
 Golan Heights and near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and
 Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must acquire
 passports and exit visas. In theory, Syrians can travel to
 other Arab countries, except Iraq, on their identification
 cards alone, although in practice this applies only to
 Lebanon. Syrian women over the age of 18 are free to travel
 without the permission of a male relative. However, a husband
 may file a request with the Ministry of Interior to prevent
 his wife's departure from Syria.
 In general, the Government prohibits foreign travel for
 persons liable for military service and for certain categories
 of professionals, such as pharmacists, architects, and
 engineers, trained at public expense, who have 'not fulfilled 5
 years of government service. Under exceptional circumstances,
 however, persons in these groups may obtain passports valid
 for 3 months and limited for travel to specific countries.
 Students traveling abroad for higher education must obtain
 permission from the Foreign Ministry and, like all Syrians,
 are subject to recall by the Government. Persons caught
 trying to travel illegally are subject to fines and detention.
 Palestinians living in Syria must also obtainan exit visa
 from Syrian authorities. Young Palestinians sometimes
 experience difficulties obta iing the requisite travel
 document .
 Jews, particularly those with significant holdings and
 financial t-rds in Syria, have found it somewhat easier to
 travdk 'abroad since the mid-1970's. With some exceptions, the
 Government continues its policy of not issuing passports and
 exit visas to all members of a Jewish family at the same
 time. In theory, any Syrian can be required to post a bond of
 between $300 and $1,000 which would be forfeited in the event
 of nonieturn. In reality, only Jews are'-routinely required to
 post such bonds. While Jewish emigration in general is
 frowned Upon, the Syrian Government has stated that it looks
 positively at cases of family reunification and of unmarried
 Jewish women unable to find suitable husbands in the small
 Syrian Jewish community. The number of unmarried Jewish women
 allowed to emigrate jumped dramatically in the middle of 1989
 following fJ.S.-Syrian discussions on this issue. Any Syrian
 citii n" caught trying to emigrate or travel abroad without
 permission, or suspected of having visited Israel illegally,
 may be arrested and be subject to criminal prosecution. In
 late 1987 and 1988, 10 Jews were arrested on travel violations
 and -sentenced to incarceration of up to 2 years. Three of
 these persons reportedly were tortured. Three remain in
 jail. -There were no new arrests in 1989.
 
 
 1585
 SYRIA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Syrians do not have the ability to change their government
 legally and peacefully. President Asad and his senior
 advisers maintain effective control over foreign policy,
 national security decisions, and key economic and social
 decisions. Although popular participation in presidential
 elections, held every 7 years, is provided for in the
 Constitution, Syrians have little say in the determination of
 their political leadership. Presidential decrees, issued when
 the Parliament is not in session, have the force of law and
 usually involve key domestic issues such as the raising of
 public sector wages and the prices of critical commodities.
 President Asad won the presidency for the third time in 1985
 when, according to official sources, 99 percent of the
 population voted and 99 percent of those who cast ballots
 voted for Asad, who ran unopposed. A certain degree of
 regional autonomy is permitted as long as it does not
 challenge the central Government's authority. Major city
 centers, for example, exercise local administrative control.
 Certain ethnic and social groups, such as the Bedouin and
 people living in small villages, have little contact with the
 central Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental. Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government denies charges of human rights violations,
 often ignoring them or calling them an intrusion into its
 internal affairs. However, the Government responded to a 1988
 U.N. Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) investigation of Syrian
 practices, based on a complaint by Al. The UNHRC eventually
 dismissed the case. AI officials visited Syria in June 1989
 to attend an Arab lawyers' convention during which they met
 privately with Vice President Khaddam. The International
 Committee of the Red Cross has had only limited access to
 prisoners. No.Syrian is willing publicly to criticize the
 Government for human rights actions.
 In its.Report covering 1988, AI noted that it had continued
 throughout the year to express concern to the Government about
 reports of arbitrary arrests, detention without trial of
 political suspects, torture and ill-treatment of detainees,
 and the imposition of the death penalty, but that the
 Government did not respond. It noted that the Goverment did
 react to an oral statement that AI made in February 1988,
 drawing the attention of the UNHRC to reports of the
 widespread and routine use of torture by the security forces
 and of deaths in custody of political detainees; the
 Government responded by expressing. ",regret" at the
 "exaggerated statement" and the "biased position" taken bl'
 AI. AI also noted that in April 1988 it had submitted
 information about its concerns to the U.N. and had sent a copy
 of its communications to the Syrian Government with an
 invitation to comment, but that no response had been received.
 The Government frequently criticizes other countries,
 including Israel, Iraq, and South Africa, on human rights
 grounds in the U.N. and in other international bodies.
 
 
 1586
 SYRIA
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party,'or being a close relative of a
 prominent Ba'ath Party member, is important to prospering in
 Syria. Party connections can pave the way for entrance into
 better elementary and secondary schools, access to more
 lucrative employment, and greater power in the Government.
 Religion is also a factor. Members of the Alawi sect often
 enjoy job preference. Jews are prohibited from joining the
 military.
 The official state of war with Israel continues to influence
 the status of Syrian Jews, although the community's situation
 has improved in recent years. Today, the Jewish community
 enjoys a relatively high standard of living, access to higher
 education, and entrance into the professions. Jews are
 subject to some foreign travel restrictions (See Section
 4.d.), however, and are the only minority whose passports and
 identity cards note their religion. Jews, like other citizens
 of Syria, are subject to the close purview of the intelligence
 services. As with all other Syrians, contact between Syrian
 Jews and Israelis is prohibited. Jews do not hold government
 jobs except for a few low-level positions as clerks and
 teachers.
 Syria's Palestinian community numbers approximately 250,000
 registered with the United Nations Relief Works Agency and
 consists predominantly of refugees from the 1948 and 1967
 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand Lebanese and Palestinians
 also fled to Syria in 1982 following the Israeli invasion of
 Lebanon. Palestinians are officially considered to be
 temporary residents pending the resolution of the Arab-Israeli
 conflict.
 Under Syrian law, resident Palestinians enjoy equal access to
 employment, social services, and education. In addition,
 Palestinian organizations sanctioned by the Government operate
 social institutions within their community. Palestinians may
 choose their place of residence and occupation, and the
 majority participate fully in the local economy. With
 government permission, they may own more than one building or
 plot of land.
 The GoVernment allows the operation of those Palestinian
 political groups that espouse the officially sanctioned
 position against Yasir Arafat's policies, although their
 activities are carefully circumscribed. Palestinians may not
 vote in Syrian elections or acquire Syrian citizenship except
 through marriage to a Syrian male citizen. Although they
 currently occupy several senior positions in the bureaucracy,
 Palestinians are unofficially barred from the highest echelons
 of the Government.
 The Constitution guarantees the equal rights of women and
 calls f6r the'edimination of all obstacles to women's
 development. Historically, Syrian women have benefited from
 government policies, including equal pay for work of equal
 value.
 Syrian women are active in both the public and private
 sector. According to official statistics, 43 percent of all
 women are literate, compared to a national average of 49
 percent. The Government encourages women's enrollment at all
 levels of education, and large numbers of women attend
 
 
 1587
 SYRIA
 universities. Government laws provide up to 3 1/2 months'
 paid maternity leave and ensure that a woman may return to her
 previous job. Moreover, all establishments of over 100
 employees must provide child-care facilities. The National
 Women's Union, founded in 1967, pursues many of the issues
 facing women and seeks to protect rights already won as well
 as to strengthen the position of women. It is currently
 considering a legislative proposal which would extend a
 mother's custody of children to the age of 15 or 16 in divorce
 cases (instead of the current age of 9 for boys and 11 for
 girls) and is actively seeking to eradicate illiteracy among
 adult women.
 Privately, traditional concepts of male guardianship of women
 continue to run against official policies. Particularly among
 Muslims, these concepts often limit a woman's rights in
 matters of marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and
 personal decisions.
 Wife beating and other physical abuse of women is known to
 occur, but conservative social mores in Syrian society
 discourage public discussion of the issue, and it is therefore
 difficult to estimate the extent of the problem. The
 Government is not known to produce -official statistics on
 domestic abuse. Under the Syrian legal system women have
 access through the courts to redress any grievance caused by
 violent acts against them, but many cases of domestic abuse
 are not pursued because of the social stigma that is attached
 to legal proceedings in such cases.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Government uses the Syrian General Federation of Trade
 Unions (GFTU) as its framework for controlling nearly all
 aspects of union activity. Workers are not free to form labor
 unions independent of the government-prescribed structure.
 While- unions are used t6 transmit instructions and information
 to the labor force from the Syrian leadership, there are
 indications that elected union leaders, as members of the
 Ba'ath Party, also act as a conduit through which workers'
 dissatisfaction is transmitted to the leadership. By law at
 least 51 percent of the elected members of Parliament must be
 workers or peasants. While strikes are not prohibited under
 Syrian law (except in the agricultural sector), in practice
 they are effectively discouraged. There were no reports of
 strikes in 1989.
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Arab Trade Unions and the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 The 1973 Constitution affirmed the right to form trade
 unions. Syrian labor unions are organized sectorally and at
 local, provincial, and national levels. Under Syrian labor
 law, any group of 50 or more workers in a particular
 profession or sector may form a guild committee. These local
 committees may join to form a provincial union. The
 provincial unions may join with others in the same profession
 to form a national syndicate or union. Officials at all
 levels are elected through secret ballot, and the provincial
 unions reportedly are financially independent of the national
 syndicate.
 
 
 1588
 SYRIA
 Howevdr, the Committee of Experts (COE) of the International
 Labor Organization (IMO) has observed that only one trade
 union can be set up for the same occupation within the same
 province, and that the unions in a province can only group
 themselves into one provincial federation of workers, and all
 can group themselves into the GFTU. The COE has also noted
 that the GFTU has the exclusive power to determine which
 unions may-be constituted and the right to dissolve the
 management committee of any trade union. Also, trade unions
 have a legal obligation to allocate a certain percentage of
 their income to the higher trade union bodies, and the
 Government enjoys wide powers of intervention in trade union
 finances.
 According to the Government, there are 198 national unions in
 Syria which are part of the GFTJ structure, and 9 professional
 unions., The Government maintains that while it is not illegal
 to set up competitive unions, the unions which belong to the
 GFTU chose voluntarily to do so because it most effectively
 advances workers' interests. GFTU officials also note that
 Syrian uniohs first developed during the 1920's and the GFTU
 was formed in the 1930's, long before the advent of the Arab
 Socialist'Ba'ath Party or the Asad Government, so that Syrian
 legislation recognizing a single trade union system merely
 codifies existihg practice which reflects the will of Syrian
 workers. The GFTU is charged with providing opinions on
 legislation, devising rules for workers and labor, and
 organizifig labor. The elected President of the GFTU is a
 senior member of the ruling Ba'ath Party and a member of the
 Regional Command and, along with his deputy, participates in
 all Cabinet sessions. The secretaries general of the nine
 nonaffiliated associations, some of whom are not Ba'ath Party
 members, are also elected officials.
 The COE in its 1987 and 1988 reports concluded that the GFTU
 structure amounted to a legally mandated system of trade union
 unity. Other observations of the COE had to do with
 restrictions on the right of foreign workers to join or form
 tTade'udions of their own choosing; the interference of public
 authorities in trade union administration; and the prohibition
 of strikes in the agricultural sector. In its 1989 report,
 the COE once again raised these issues, n6ting that the Syrian
 Government had established a working group including worker
 and employer representatives to examine the COE's comments.
 -b$ The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 In the public sector unions do not normally bargain
 collectively on wage issues, but there is some evidence that
 union representatives participate with the representatives of
 the respective employer and ministry in establishing sectoral
 minimum wages. The Government has cited 10 specific examples
 of such sectoral collective bargaining agreements.. In a
 country whose major industries are publicly held, workers make
 up the Majority of each board of directors and always include
 union rbpresentation on those boards. They also monitor and
 enforce compliance with the labor law. In the private'sector,
 unions are active in monitoring compliance with the laws and
 ensuring workers' health and safety. The unions, under the
 law, can undertake negotiations for collective contracts with
 employers, but there is no information available on whether
 such contracts envision that unions can also sue and be
 represented in court.
 
 
 1589
 SYRIA
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no law in Syria banning forced or compulsory labor.
 There are a few instances in which such punishment can be
 imposed as punishment, usually in connection with prison
 sentences for criminal offenses. Article 35 of the
 Constitution states that it is the right and duty of every
 citizen to work and it is a criminal offense for a government
 employee to resign his position without the permission of the
 relevant Minister..
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age in the predominant public sector is
 14, though it is higher in certain industries. The minimum
 age varies more widely in the private sector; the absolute
 minimum age is 12, while parental permission is required for
 children under age 16 to work. Children are forbidden to work
 at night. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor is
 responsible for enforcing minimum age requirements, but the
 number of labor investigators is small, and violation of the
 law may be extensive.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government provides minimum and maximum wage limits in the
 public sector. Salaries are set on a monthly scale. In 1989
 the President issued a decree raising public sector salaries
 by 25 percent while at the same time allowing the price of
 gasoline and some other commodities to increase by 50
 percent. Two months later, following discussions among labor
 unions and employers, the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor
 announced that salaries in the private sector would also be
 raised by 25 percent. The lowest salary scale for an entry
 position, with no experience or credentials and involving no
 physical labor, is approximately $118 per month at the
 official rate of exchange. The highest public sector starting
 salary is approximately $235 per month for someone with a
 Ph.D. degree. Neither of these rates alone is sufficient to
 provide a decent standard of living. As a result, many
 workers take additional jobs or rely on extended families for
 support.
 There is no fixed minimum wage in the private sector for
 permanent employees. However, the monthly minimum would not
 be less, in practice, than that in the public sector.
 According to the 1959 labor law, minimum wage levels in the
 private sector are set by sector and are fixed by the Minister
 of Social Affairs and Labor. Recommendations are put to him
 by a committee, formed by a representative of the Ministry of
 Industry or Economy and Commerce plus a representative of the
 employers' and of the employees, union.
 Syrian labor law extensively regulates conditions of work.
 This includes rules and regulations which severely limit the
 ability of an employer to fire an employee without due cause,
 an issue which the employee may take to a labor committee,
 composed of a representative of the municipality, a judge, the
 Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor, the union, and the
 employer. In the majority of cases, such labor committees
 have decided in favor of the employee. Workers, once hired,
 cannot easily be fired. One exception in the heavily
 regulated labor field relates to day laborers. They are not
 subject to minimum wage regulations and receive compensation
 only for job-related injuries. They are commonly employed in
 
 
 1590
 SYRIA
 small private firms and businesses in order to avoid the costs
 of permanent employees who are well protected, even against
 firing-.
 The workweek consists of six 6-hour days, although in certain
 fields in which workers are not continuously busy, a 9-hour
 day iz. permitted. Labor laws also mandate a full 24-hour rest'
 dayper week. Employees are guaranteed 15 days of paid leave
 per year during the first 5 years, rising to 30 days per year
 for persons over age 50 or with 20 years employment.
 Employers are required to provide limited medical care, and
 establishments with more than 100 employees must hire a nurse
 and offer access to a physician when necessary.
 Public laws mandate safety standards in all sectors, although
 actual enforcement depends on managers and may therefore
 vary. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor has a small
 Office of Health and Safety which seeks to inspect and correct
 unhealthy and unsafe conditions in the workplace. In
 addition, a worker may also file suit against his employer,
 charging that the unhealthy conditions are threatening his
 job. The Government provides disability insurance for
 job-related injuries. Guest workers theoretically receive the
 same benefits, but are often reluctant to press claims because
 workers' permits may be withdrawn at any time. Moreover, many
 work illegally and are not covered by the government system.
 There is no information currently available regarding Syrian
 labor practices inside Syrian free-trade zones.
 
 
 1591
