 SYRIA
 The Syrian Arab Republic is. according to its constitution, a
 representative democracy, but throughout most of its history
 since achieving full independence in 1946 it has been under
 some form of authoritarian rule. Hafiz Al-Assad, who became
 President in 1970, rules Syria in the name of the Ba'ath
 Party. The party has the announced goals of secular socialism
 and Arab Unity. However, the long-term feud between the Syrian
 and Iraqi factions of the Ba'ath Party has resulted in the two
 regimes' support for reciprocal subversion and for terrorist
 acts against each other in third countries. Assad and other
 members of the minority Alawite Muslim sect (10 percent of the
 population) dominate the Government and the Ba'ath Party and
 constitute the majority of the key leadership in the military
 and security forces. The regime's tight control of the Syrian
 political system and its willingness to use whatever force is
 necessary to maintain its position have enabled it to remain in
 power for an unprecedented period (13 years) in a country
 previously characterized by political instability.
 Syria has a mixed economy, but socialism is upheld as the
 ultimate goal of the Government. Roughly 75 percent of
 industry, is owned by the State. Private business and
 investment are also active, but are closely controlled by the
 Government.
 Periodic outbreaks of violence against the regime have occurred
 during Assad's rule, with major outbreaks occurring in every
 year from 1979-1982'; 1983 was free of such outbreaks. The
 Muslim Brotherhood, a banned, secret organization of Sunni
 Islamic fundamentalists, is dedicated to the overthrow of the
 Government and has been the principal source of antiregime
 activity. Some elements of the organization have engaged in
 armed insurrection or acts of terrorism against the
 Government. In 1980 the Government made membership in the
 Brotherhood punishable by death. Government efforts to
 suppress the organization during the period 1979-82 included a
 series ofmassacres in the northern Syrian cities of Hama,
 Homs, and Aleppo. Thousands of suspected Muslim Brotherhood
 members were summarily executed during this period, frequently
 after brutal treatment, including torture. The Government also
 suppressed nonviolent sources of dissent during this period,
 arresting the leaders of the hitherto-independent lawyers' and
 engineers' syndicates in 1980 and placing the groups under
 regime control. Reports of politically inspired arrests have
 declined substantially during 1983.
 Israel has occupied the Golan Heights, in southwest Syria,
 since the 1967 War.  Israel withdrew from portions of the area
 in 1974 under the provisions of the disengagement agreement
 with Syria. In December 1981 it extended Israeli law,
 jurisdiction, and administration to the Golan areas still under
 occupation. Human rights conditions there are covered under
 the report on Israeli-occupied territories.
 Syrian military units have controlled large areas of Lebanon
 since 1976, originally as the principal contributor to the Arab
 Deterrent Force, which was formed by the Arab League in
 response to the 1975-76 Lebanese civil war. Although the
 Government of Lebanon invited the Syrian forces in 1976, it now
 seeks both Syrian and Israeli withdrawal. Despite their
 original role as peace makers, the Syrians have at times been
 
 (1434)
 
 
 1435
 charged with serious human rights violations in Lebanon. These
 events are covered in the Lebanon report. The June 1982
 Israeli invasion of: Lebanon brought Syrian troops into conflict
 with Israeli forces. As a result, Israel still holds
 approximately 300 Syrian prisoners of war, and Syria still
 holds three Israeli prisoners of war.
 Syria has supported a number of terrorist groups that have
 engaged Arab groups has Black June and non-Arab organizations
 like the Iranian Revolutionary Guard presence in Lebanon.
 Political rights in Syria are sharply limited, reserved
 primarily the small elite around President Assad. Popular
 participation in political decisions concerning economic and
 social issues occurs on a limited basis via the Ba'ath Party,
 unions, and other state or party sponsored organizations.
 Media censorship is tight. Activities which the regime
 considers to be a threat to its security can lead to detention
 without charge, severe prison sentences, mistreatment, torture,
 or execution. The Government neither acknowledges human rights
 violations nor facilitates outside investigations of
 allegations of human rights violations.
 During 1981-83, the Syrian regime continued to suppress freedom
 of speech, press, association, and assembly and to deny the
 right of citizens to change their government. It pursued
 dissident elements, carried out cordon-and-search operations
 without judicial safeguards against invasion of the home,
 carried out arrests, in many cases causing persons to
 "disappear," and engaged in torture and other brutal practices.
 There were no indications during 1983 of any trend toward a
 more open political system or toward greater respect for the
 integrity of the person.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Several thousand people have been executed by the Syrian
 Government for political dissidence since 1979 and additional
 thousands, including innocent bystanders, were accidently
 killed or deliberately executed during Government sweep
 operations and attacks on areas of dissident activities. Only
 a handful of unconfirmed reports of executions surfaced in
 1983.
 There have been reports of at least indirect Syrian involvement
 in the April 1983 bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut and the
 October 1983 bombings of U.S. and French Multinational Force
 billets in Beirut, each of which caused extensive loss of life.
 In addition to the conflicts between Palestinian groups in
 Lebanon, internecine fighting between opposing elements of the
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) faction Fatah led to
 gun battles in and around Damascus during 1983. The fighting,
 which appeared to have occurred with Syrian Government
 acquiescence, led to the death of up to 10 people.  Abu Nidal
 and the "Black June" terrorist organization, Palestinian
 offshoot of the Fatah which is hostile to PLO, Israeli, and
 Western interests, have sometimes enjoyed support and
 
 
 1436
 
 protection from the Syrian Government. The Syrian-based Shi'a
 group, the Iraq Movement of the Mujahideen, claimed
 responsibility for the car bombing which killed 30-60 people at
 the Ministry of Planning in Baghdad in August 1982.
 b. Disappearance
 Although no reliable figures are available, it is estimated by
 (non-Syrian) press accounts and some informed observers that up
 to 1,000 inhabitants of Hams still are missing and unaccounted
 for, following the large-scale operations of Syrian security
 forces there. Some private citizens in Syria claim that people
 arrested by the police-are sometimes never heard from again;
 families are not notified, nor are detainees allowed to contact
 their next of kin. It is possible that many of these people
 are dead.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been numerous credible reports of torture being
 used, primarily during arrest and interrogation. The Syrian
 penal code prohibits the use of torture and establishes severe
 penalties for those employing such practices. There are no
 reports or official acknowledgements or punishment of security
 or police officials for acts of torture, however. According to
 Amnesty International, commonly used methods of torture in
 recent years include beatings, whipping of prisoners suspended
 in tires, beatings on the sole of the feet, cigarette burns,
 sexual molestation, and electric shocks.
 Little detailed information is available about Syrian prison
 conditions. No international organizations, such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross, are allowed access to
 detention facilities. Persons charged with or convicted of
 criminal offenses are held separately from those charged with
 political and security offenses. Health care, food, and access
 by family members for persons held in ordinary prisons are
 reported to be adequate. Conditions at prisons where political
 and security prisoners are held are reported to be more severe;
 visits by family members, for example, are not allowed, and
 Amnesty International has indicated concern about inadequate
 health care and the extensive use of torture. In addition,
 there are other reports, which have not been verified, that
 many people wounded during the Government barrage on Hama were
 *forbidden medical treatment and left to die.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exiles
 The Constitution guarantees life, liberty, and personal
 security. The civilian legal code, modeled after French law,
 provides for due process for the accused, although it permits
 pretrial detention for indefinite periods during the
 investigative process. Under the state of emergency, which has
 been in force since 1963, these safeguards can be suspended,
 and an individual may be held indefinitely without charge or
 trial, especially in political and security cases.
 The number of people currently held without trial or charge is
 not known, but is probably significant. Approximately 20
 Balath Party officials and government members of the previous
 regime have been under detention since 1970. According to
 (non-Syrian) press accounts, a large number of military
 officers, possibly as many as 150, were arrested in January
 
 
 1437
 1982 in connection with an alleged coup plot, but no confirmed
 details are available. Similarly, in 1983, there have been
 reports of the arrest of several dozen military officers for
 questioning Syrian Government policies.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to the Napoleonic Code passed down from the French
 administration. The defendant is detained provisionally upon
 the accusation of the public prosecutor, then remanded to a
 judge of arraignment, who may either free him on the basis of
 insufficient evidence or refer the case to a criminal court.
 Defendants are entitled to legal representation of their
 choice; if they cannot afford on attorney, the Court appoints
 and pays for a lawyer. Civilian courts impose no restrictions
 on the lawyer in representing his client and allow the right of
 appeal. These courts are relatively free from governmental
 interference; nevertheless, pressure from the party, state
 security forces, or other special units may affect the course
 of the trials or the verdicts.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Arrests are made secretly and with no legal
 safeguards. The accused cannot be visited or contacted by
 family or friends, who most often do not know the place of
 detention, which may be one of many secret or semisecret
 prisons maintained by different security forces. The accused
 has no right to a judicial determination of the basis.for his
 pretrial detention, and no redress for false arrest. A lawyer
 is chosen by the court, and the accused has no say in his
 selection. All court sessions are closed, and there are no
 official channels for obtaining information on the trial or
 sentencing, though relatives with connections in the Government
 may ultimately succeed in obtaining reliable information and
 even effecting the release of the accused, depending upon the
 amount and type of influence applied.
 The Government does not disseminate any information on the
 number of persons detained for political or security offenses,
 and it is impossible to make an accurate estimate or to analyze
 typical cases. It is clear that such arrests are relatively
 frequent. Family members of persons arrested by seourity
 forces have no way to publicize their cases and would be, in
 any case, too intimidated to do so. There is no opposition
 open enough or strong enough to challenge the Government on
 this matter or to make estimates of its own.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 The Syrian Government interferes with the private lives of its
 citizens in a number of ways. It is widely assumed in Syria
 that electronic surveillance by the Government is widespread.
 Syrian intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards
 to protect officials and important buildings as well as to
 monitor the activity of people living in those neighborhoods.
 The postal system censors the mail, but does not check every
 letter or package. The Ministries of Information and of
 Culture and National Guidance are responsible for censoring
 news and information on the Middle East. Private schools are
 carefully inspected by the Goyernment and follow the
 governmental curriculum.
 
 
 1438
 The Syrian legal system provides safeguards, including a
 requirement of arrest and search warrants, before police are
 allowed to enter private homes., These procedures are generally
 followed in cases relating to ordinary crimes. Regulations
 under the state of emergency currently in effect suspend these
 safeguards in security-related cases. During security
 operations in Syria, such as in Hama in February 1982, there
 were house-to-house searches by security personnel who entered
 private residences with no warrants. This practice has been
 common during the past four years.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, the Ba'ath Party, or
 related institutions is not permitted. The broadcast media and
 publishing houses are wholly owned and operated by the
 Government and the Ba'ath Party and usually give only the
 official views on government policies and all other important
 issues. On the few occasions when there is criticism of
 governmental bodies or operations, it is sanctioned criticism
 which is directed at administrative failings. Officials above
 the middle ranks are rarely, if ever, criticized.
 Imported foreign printed matter and films generally are not
 censored, although articles are occasionally deleted from
 magazines and newspapers before distribution in the country.
 This news material, along with fictional and non-fictional
 literature on the Middle East, is banned when it is considered
 critical of Syria. Control is much stricter on materials in
 Arabic. Censorship is exercised through offices in the
 Ministries of Information and of Culture and National Guidance.
 Aside from a few church-run, private primary and secondary
 schools that are carefully inspected and follow the Ministry of
 education curriculum, schools at all levels are government
 operated. Teachers.are not permitted to express or expound
 ideas contrary to government policy, although in practice there
 is more openness of expression at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can occur only
 with the acquiescence of the Government and usually occur at
 the instigation of the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private
 societies are allowed to meet if they have received
 governmental permission to organize. These are limited to
 nonpolitical activities, and include religious groups, e.g. the
 St. Vincent De Paul Society.
 Professional organizations and labor unions function as parts
 of-the Governmentapparatus and are primarily used to transmit
 instructions and information from the Syrian leadership to
 their members. Unofficially, the unions also function as means
 to keep the leadership informed of grievances and concerns at
 the grass roots level. Strikes are forbidden by law in Syria.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Syrian Government is dominated by members of the Alawite
 sect, a minority (10 percent) of the population, which is
 predominantly Sunni Muslim. Alawites hold a disproportionate
 share of prominent milit&ry positions which enables them to
 
 
 1439
 dominate the country politically. Sunni and Shi'a Muslim,
 Christian, Druze, and Jewish citizens face varying degrees of
 discrimination. Reports of the 1982 Hama incident indicate the
 existence of religious as well as political and social
 dimensions to Alawite-Sunni tension. A large number of mosques
 in Hama were demolished following the fighting. Large-scale
 proselytizing is discouraged in order to avoid tension between
 the various religious groups. For some years, Seventh Day
 Adventists have been forbidden by law to practice their
 religion, and all Adventist church property has been
 confiscated. The 3000-4000 Jews living in Syria are free to
 practice their religion. The situation of the Syrian Jewish
 community has improved in recent years, and, in general, Jews
 are not discriminated against except for restrictions on
 foreign travel (see below).
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Travel within Syria is unrestricted except in the security
 zones of the Golan. All Syrian citizens wishing to travel
 abroad must obtain passports and exit visas. In theory, any
 Syrian can be required to post a bond which would be forfeited
 in case of non-return. Syrian Jews, however, are the only
 category routinely required to post such a bond, which varies
 from $2,000 to $10,000, depending on the person's position in
 the community and economic circumstances. In 1982-83, Syrian
 Jews found it easier to travel overseas, although an official
 ban on the emigration of Jews continued. The Syrian Government
 continued its policy of not issuing passports to all the
 members of a Jewish family at the same time.
 The Government forbids overseas travel in the case of certain
 categories of citizens, e.g.q persons liable for military
 service, and pharmacists, architects, and engineers trained in
 Syria at public expense who have not yet completed a five-year
 government service obligation. Those who attempt to travel
 illegally are subject to fines and detention. Emigration is
 not discouraged for groups other than those mentioned above.
 There are no formal restrictions on repatriation of Syrian
 citizens, although political opponents of the regime might be
 subject to arrest if they returned to Syria. There have been
 no reports of revocation of citizenship by the Syrian
 Government.
 There is a large Palestinian community in Syria estimated at
 200,000 people, who are predominantly refugees from the 1948
 and 1967 Arab-Israeli Wars. Several thousand Lebanese and
 Palestinian refugees entered Syria in 1982 fleeing Israel's
 invasion of Lebanon. Many refugees participate fully in the
 Syrian economy, they experience little discrimination by virtue
 of their refugee status. There have been no incidents of
 forced repatriation of refugees to Lebanon from Syria.
 Palestinians living in Syria are generally free to chose a
 place of residence and occupation. Palestinians occupy several
 senior positi'ons in the Syrian bureaucracy. For the most part,
 however, they are issued special Palestinian travel documents
 by the Syrian Government in lieu of yrian passports, and they
 may not acquire Syrian citizenship.
 
 
 1440
 Section 3   Respect for Political Rights:  The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Syria is ruled by President Hafiz Al-Assad. He is attended by a
 small group of military and political advisors drawn from the small
 Alawite confessional minority and the Sunni majority. Security is
 an Alawite preserve. President Assad uses the Ba'ath Party as his
 instrument. Popular participation in the political process is
 severely restricted. The Constitution stipulates that the Ba'ath
 Party is the leading political organization within Syria. Several
 other parties are permitted by law, but they exercise little actual
 political power and are subordinate to the Ba-ath Party. There is
 no legal political party which is in active opposition to the
 Government. All legal political parties participate in the
 Progressive National Front, a mechanism which in theory is the
 highest political organization in the country. Two political
 groupings are currently illegal: The Syrian Social National Party,
 which was banned by decree in the 1950's after carrying out a series
 of assassinations against government officials, and the Muslim
 Brotherhood, some elements of which have carried out assassinations
 and acts of political violence.
 Candidates for parliament are selected by the ruling Ba'ath Party
 and, in theory, by four other parties which comprise the Progressive
 National Front. Opposition lists of independents are offered but
 rarely prevail probably because of the Front's far greater resources
 and organization and because of restrictions on freedom of
 expression. No independents were elected in the most recent
 elections,'in 1981.
 Section 4   Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 The Syrian Government reacts to charges of human rights violations
 in Syria either by claiming that such charges are an intrusion in
 Syrian internal affairs or by ignoring the charges altogether. The
 last visit to Syria by Amnesty International delegates occurred in
 March 1978; its periodic inquiries since then have received no
 response. The 1983 Amnesty International report, covering 1982,
 expressed concern over detentions of hundreds of political prisoners
 by state security and military courts, the use of torture, the death
 penalty, extralegal executions, and disappearances. Special concern
 was expressed over increasing reports of human rights violations by
 the security forces, particularly the Special Defense Units.
 Amnesty International's charges of serious human rights violations
 were further detailed in a special report on Syria issued in
 November 1983.  The International Islamic Commission on Human Rights
 issued an appeal to the Syrian Government in February 1982 to halt
 "acts of blind violence perpetrated indiscriminately by'the security
 forces against the population of the town of Hama in particular and
 against the population of Syria in general." Freedom House
 categorizes Syria as "not free."
 The Syrian Government regularly participates in United Nations
 conferences on human rights and a Syrian representative chaired a
 November 1982 meeting in Tunis of an Arab League Committee on Human
 Rights. The only internal group monitoring human rights ceased to
 exist in practical terms after some of its officers were arrested in
 April 1980.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Syria's population reached 9.74 million in 1983 on the basis of a
 relatively high growth rate of 3.4 percent. Per capita gross
 
 
 1441
 national product in 1981 rose 17 percent from the previous year
 to $1,569, in part due to inflation. Life expectancy at birth
 in 1980 was over 65 years and the declining infant mortality
 rate is currently 59.4 deaths per 1,000. Both figures reflect
 the priority the Government has placed on improving health care
 and extending delivery systems in rural areas. The most recent
 World Bank data available (1976) indicate that 75 percent of
 Syria's population had access to safe drinking water, 80
 percent in urban areas and 70 percent in rural areas.
 Virtually all urban areas are now electrified and considerable
 progress has been made in rural areas.
 Primary school education is compulsory for both male and female
 children until the age of 13. The total female enrollment
 still lagged far behind that of boys (of boya are enrolled).
 Adult literacy in 1970 was 40 percent, but again there was a
 large discrepancy between males and females, 59.6. compared to
 20 percent. Current figures are not available but literacy
 rates are believed to have increased further, with a continuing
 discrepancy based on sex.
 The equality of women is guaranteed by the Syrian
 Constitution. Women participate extensively in the work force,
 particularly in Damascus, and the women's union works to expand
 the participation of women in all sectors of society, utilizing
 the media and a network of chapters throughout Syria to convey
 its message. At the same time, traditional religious law
 continues to pertain in matters of personal status.
 Particularly among the majority Muslim population, this
 continues to limit women's rights in matters such as marriage,
 divorce, and inheritance. By individual choice, however, civil
 marriages and divorces are possible for members of all of
 Syria's religious communities.
 Traditionally, Syria has been an agricultural country growing
 wheat, cotton, barley, and tobacco. Since independence,
 however, it has built a substantial industrial base focusing on
 textiles, food processing, and light manufacturing. Although
 the Government is the sole purchaser of many agricultural
 commodities, most agricultural land is privately owned. With
 respect to industry, Syrian observers estimate that roughly 15
 percent of industrial production originates with private
 sector, small-scale factories. Recently, Syria has undertaken
 several large-scale industrial projects, totally
 government-owned, to manufacture cement, fertilizer, and
 chemicals, refine petroleum, mine phosphate, and rolled steel.
 Petroleum extraction (8.015 million tons in 1982) has been a
 primary source of foreign exchange in recent years, although
 declining production and greater local consumption have begun
 to erode the positive contribution oil exports have made to
 Syria's balance of trade.
 
 
 1442
 
 U.S.OvERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         1.9      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ........ ......0.0            0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     1.9      0.0      0.0
 A.AIO  ..... ............. .....  0.0    0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................     0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      .1.9     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       1.9      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........      1.9      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         1.9      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON.'ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...     ..........    .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS   .....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG.....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL....        1.9      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............       1.9      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS...........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..... ; ........ .   0.0      0.0      0.0
 ................................................ .o.....
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL .........   15.9     23.6      0.0    641.2
 IBRD              15.6     22.0      0.0    525.7
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     47.3
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.3      0.1      0.0     44.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      1.5      0.0      8.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     15.7
 
 
