SPI@8
Syria, a repressive police state ruled under an emergency law since 1963, did
not prove immune in 2011 to the pro-democracy Arab Spring movements. Antigovernment
protests erupted in the southern governorate of Daraa in mid-
March and quickly spread to other parts of the country. Security forces responded
brutally, killing at least 3,500 protesters and arbitrarily detaining thousands,
including children under age 18, holding most of them incommunicado and
subjecting many to torture. The security forces also launched large-scale military
operations in restive towns nationwide.
In parallel, Syria’s government enacted a number of reforms in an unsuccessful
effort to quell the protest movement, lifting the state of emergency, introducing
a new media law, and granting citizenship to stateless Kurds. But at this writing
the ongoing bloody repression signaled the government’s determination to
crush dissent and reject reforms that might undermine its authority.
Killings of Protesters and Bystanders
Security forces and government-supported armed groups used violence, often
lethal, to attack and disperse overwhelmingly peaceful anti-government protesters
from mid-March onwards. The exact number of dead is impossible to
verify due to restrictions on access, but local groups documented 3,500 civilian
dead as of November 15.
Many of the killings took place during shootings on protesters and funeral processions,
such as the April killings in the central city of Homs of at least 15 people
at the New Clock Tower Square when protesters tried to organize a sit-in,
and in the southern town of Izraa of at least 34 protesters. While in some cases
security forces initially used tear gas or fired in the air to disperse the crowds,
in many others, they fired directly at protesters without advance warning. Many
victims sustained head, neck, and chest wounds, suggesting they were deliberately
targeted. In several cases, security forces chased and continued to shoot
at protesters as they ran away.
Syrian authorities repeatedly claimed that security forces were responding to
armed attacks by terrorist gangs. In most cases that Human Rights Watch documented,
witnesses insisted that those killed and injured were unarmed and
posed no lethal threat. Instances where protesters used lethal force against
Syrian security forces were limited, and often came in response to lethal force
by security forces.
Violations during Large-Scale Military Operations
Security forces conducted several large-scale military operations in restive
towns and cities, resulting in mass killings, arrests, and detentions as well as
the use of torture. In April tanks and armored personnel carriers imposed a
siege on the city of Daraa for 11 days, killing at least 115 residents according to
local activists. Daraa residents told Human Rights Watch that security forces
occupied all neighborhoods, placed snipers on roofs of buildings across the
city, and prevented any movement of residents by firing on those who tried to
leave their homes. Security forces launched a massive arrest campaign, arbitrarily
detaining hundreds. Released detainees said that security forces subjected
them, as well as hundreds of others they saw in detention, to various forms
of torture and degrading treatment.
In May security forces attacked the coastal city of Banyas, using the town’s
sports stadium as a detention facility, and the town of Tal Kalakh, near the
Lebanese border, forcing more than 3,000 Syrians to flee over the border to
Lebanon. In June security forces sent tanks into the northern town of Jisr al-
Shughur following armed confrontations between locally posted security forces
and residents. In July security forces stormed Hama, which had witnessed the
largest anti-government protests in Syria, killing at least 200 residents in four
days, according to lists of the names of those killed provided by local activists.
In August tanks and armored vehicles entered al-Ramel neighborhood in the
coastal town of Latakia. Security forces also stormed the neighborhoods of Bab
Sba, Bab Amro, and Bayyada in Homs on multiple occasions between May and
September.
Arbitrary Arrests, Enforced Disappearances, and Torture
Security forces subjected thousands of people to arbitrary arrests and widespread
torture in detention. The exact numbers are impossible to verify but
information that Human Rights Watch collected suggests that security forces
detained more than 20,000 people between March and September. Many
detainees were young men in their 20s or 30s; but children, women, and elderly
people were also included. While the government appears to have released
most after several days or weeks in detention, several hundred remained missing
at this writing.
According to released detainees, the methods of torture included prolonged
beatings with sticks, twisted wires, and other devices; electric shocks; use of
improvised metal and wooden “racks”; and, in at least one case, the rape of a
male detainee with a baton. The interrogators and guards also subjected
detainees to various forms of humiliating treatment, such as making them kiss
their shoes and declare that President Bashar al-Assad was their god. Several
detainees said their captors repeatedly threatened them with imminent execution,
and all described appalling detention conditions, with overcrowded cells
in which at times detainees could only sleep in turns.
At least 105 detainees died in custody in 2011, according to local activists. In
cases of custodial death reviewed by Human Rights Watch, the bodies bore
unmistakable marks of torture including bruises, cuts, and burns. The authorities
provided the families with no information on the circumstances surrounding
the deaths and, to Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, no investigation has
been launched. In some cases, families of dead detainees had to sign statements
that “armed gangs” had killed their relatives and promise not to hold
public funerals as a condition to receiving the bodies. Some of those who died
in detention were prominent protest leaders like Ghiyath Mattar, a 26-year-old
community organizer from Daraya—a Damascus suburb—whose body security
forces returned to his family four days after detaining him in September.
Denial of Medical Assistance
Syrian authorities in many cases denied wounded protesters access to medical
assistance. On several occasions security forces prevented ambulances from
reaching the wounded and, in at least three instances that Human Rights Watch
documented, opened fire on medical personnel, in one case killing a doctor
and a nurse in Daraa in March.
Security forces also arrested many injured protesters at hospitals, forcing many
wounded to instead seek treatment in makeshift field hospitals—set up in private
homes or mosques—for fear of arrest. In September hospital workers told
Human Rights Watch that security forces forcibly removed 18 wounded persons
from al-Barr hospital in Homs, including five who were still in the operating
room.
Arrest of Activists and Journalists
The Syrian security forces have arrested hundreds of activists since protests
erupted in mid-March, often merely for communicating with media or helping to
organize protests. In April security forces detained Rasem al-Atassi, 66, former
president of the Arab Organization for Human Rights in Syria, and a board member
of the regional Arab Organization for Human Rights. A military investigative
judge ordered his detention for 15 days to investigate his role in supporting
protests. In May security forces detained Mohammed Najati Tayyara, a human
rights activist from Homs who had spoken to international media about the government’s
crackdown. He remained in detention at this writing.
Women activists were also targeted. In May security forces detained journalist
and activist Dana al-Jawabra from outside her house in Damascus. Al-Jawabra,
who hails from Daraa, was active in attempts to break the siege of the town by
attempting to arrange a relief convoy. Also in May security forces detained
human rights lawyer Catherine al-Talli, 32, in Damascus and held her incommunicado
for two days.
In some instances, when the security forces were unable to locate the activist
they were seeking, they detained family members. In May security forces
detained Wael Hamadeh, a political activist and husband of prominent rights advocate Razan Zeitouneh, from his office. The security forces had gone to the
couple’s house on April 30 searching for them but instead detained Hamadeh’s
younger brother, Abdel Rahman, 20, when they could not find them. Security
forces released Wael and Abdel Rahman months later.
The Syrian government also detained journalists trying to report on Syria’s
crackdown. In March Syrian security services detained Reuters journalist
Suleiman al-Khalidi, a Jordanian national, for reporting on the violence in
Daraa. They expelled him from the country after holding him incommunicado for
four days. In April security services detained Khaled Sid Mohand, a Franco-
Algerian freelance journalist, and held him incommunicado for almost one
month. Security services also detained Dorothy Parvaz—a national of the United
States, Canada, and Iran—upon her arrival in Syria in April and held her incommunicado
for six days, and detained Ghadi Frances and Ghassan Saoud, two
Lebanese journalists, for short periods of time.
Reforms
In an attempt to quell the protests, Syrian authorities enacted a number of
reforms, but the ongoing repression undermined their impact and made it
impossible to assess the government’s intent to implement them. On April 4
President Assad enacted a decree that would grant citizenship to a number of
Syria-born stateless Kurds. On April 21 he lifted the state of emergency in place
since 1963 and abolished the State Security Court, an exceptional court with
almost no procedural guarantees. In May and June Assad also issued two general
amnesties, which benefited a small group of political prisoners.
The Syrian authorities also enacted a number of reforms that they say will open
up the political system in Syria and increase freedom of media. On July 28
Assad issued a decree approving a new political parties law. In August Assad
issues a decree for a General Elections Law and approved a new media law
meant to uphold freedom of expression, although the law still requires media
to “respect this freedom of expression” by “practicing it with awareness and
responsibility.”
Women’s and Girls’ Rights
Syria’s constitution guarantees gender equality, and many women are active in
public life. However personal status laws and the penal code contain provisions
that discriminate against women and girls, particularly in marriage, divorce,
child custody, and inheritance. While the penal code no longer fully exonerates
perpetrators of so-called honor crimes, it still gives judges options for reduced
sentences if a crime was committed with “honorable” intent. The nationality
law of 1969 prevents Syrian women married to foreign spouses the right to pass
on their citizenship to their children or spouses.
Key International Actors
In response to the crackdown, the US and European Union imposed sanctions
against individuals and entities, including travel bans and asset freezes against
senior officials in the government and security forces, business officials who
benefited from and/or aided government oppression and a host of entities.
Both the US and the EU froze the assets of Syrian companies and banks tied to
the government or its supporters, and the US government prohibited US entities
and citizens from doing business with those companies and banks. In
September the EU, which buys 95 percent of Syria’s oil exports, prohibited the
purchase of Syrian oil and banned EU companies from investing in Syria’s oil
sector.
A number of Arab states joined together in condemning Syria’s crackdown. In
August Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Tunisia withdrew their ambassadors
from Damascus for consultations. In November the Arab League voted to suspend
Syria’s membership after Syria failed to implement an agreed-to plan to
end to the violence.
Turkey, until recently a close ally and major trade partner, repeatedly condemned
the Syrian crackdown and stopped at least two weapons shipments to
Syria. It also hosted a number of meetings for Syria’s opposition.
In August the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted a presidential
statement condemning ‘the widespread violations of human rights and the
use of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities.” However, in October Russia and China, as well as India, Brazil, and South Africa, refused to support
a Security Council resolution applying significant pressure on the Syrian
government.
In April the UN Human Rights Council “unequivocally condemned the use of
lethal violence against peaceful protesters.” In August a report from the Office
of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights “found a pattern of human
rights violations … which may amount to crimes against humanity,” and the
council again condemned the “grave and systematic human rights violations by
the Syrian authorities” and established “an independent international commission
of inquiry to investigate all alleged violations since March 2011.” The commission
was appointed in September and was due to issue its report in late
November, but had not been granted access to Syria at this writing. Navi Pillay,
the UN high commissioner for human rights, recommended in a briefing to the
Security Council in August that it refer Syria to the International Criminal Court.