 SYRIA
 Despite the existence of some institutions of democratic government, the political
 systemKPlaces virtually absolute authority in the hands of the President, Hafiz Al-
 Asad. ey decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, internal politics, and
 the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from his ministers, high
 ranking members of the ruling Ba'th Party, and a relatively small circle of security
 advisers. Although the Parliament is elected every 4 years, the Ba'th Party is en-
 sured a majority. The Parliament does not initiate laws, but only passes judgment
 on and sometimes modifies those proposed by the executive bran&. The judiciary
 is constitutionally independent but this is not the case in the exceptional (state of
 emergency) security courts, which are subject to political influence. The regular
 courts display independence, although political connections and bribery can influ-
 ence verdicts. In general, all three branches of government are influenced to varying
 degrees by leaders of the Ba'th party, whose primacy in state institutions is man-
 dated by the Constitution.
 The powerful role of the security services in government, which extends beyond
 strictly security matters, stems in part from the state of emergency that has been
 in place almost continuously since 1963. The Government justifies martial law be-
 cause of the state of war with Israel and past threats from terrorist groups. Syrian
 Military Intelligence and Air Force Intelligence are military agencies, while General
 Security, State Security, and Political Security come under the purview of the Min-
 istry of Interior. The branches of the security services operate independently of each
 other and outside the legal system. Their members often ignore the rights of sus-
 pects and detainees and commit serious human rights abuses.
 The economy is based on commerce, agriculture, oil production, and government
 services. There is a generally inefficient public sector, a private sector, and a mixed
 public/private sector. A complex bureaucracy, overarching security concerns, en-
 demic corruption, currency restrictions, lack of modern Financial services, and a
 weak legal system hamper economic growth. The Government has sought to pro-
 mote the private sector through investment incentives, exchange rate consolidation,
 and deregulation, especially with regard to financial transactions governing imports
 and exports. Due to a slowdown in agricultural output and reduced revenues from
 oil exports, real gross domestic product (GDP) growth is about 4.6 percent, down
 from 6 percent in 1996. The high population growth rate of 3.1 ercent means that
 real per capita growth is only 1.5 percent. Annual per capita GEP is about $1200,
 with annual in flation hovering between 16 and 18 percent. Wage increases in the
 public sector have not kept pace with cost of living increases, and the gap between
 rich and poor continues to widen, with many public sector workers relying on second
 jobs to make ends meet.
 The human rights situation remained poor, and the Government continues to re-
 strict or deny fundamental rights. Because the Ba'th party's domination of the polit-
 ical system is provided for by the Constitution, citizens do not have the right to
 change the Government. The Government uses its vast powers so effectively that
 there is no organized political opposition and there have been very few antiregime
 manifestations. Serious abuses include the widespread use of torture in detention;
 poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention without trial; fun-
 damentally unfair trials in the security courts; an inefficient judiciary that suffers
 from corruption and, at times, political influence; infringement on citizens' privacy
 rights; denial of freedom of assembly and association; limits on the freedom of move-
 ment; and, despite a slight loosening of censorship restrictions, the denial of the
 freedoms of speech and of the press. Societal discrimination and violence against
 women are problems. The Government discriminates against the stateless Kurdish
 minority and suppresses worker rights. There were several credible reports of ar-
 rests of political activists, while more than a dozen political prisoners reportedly
 were released from prison.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings and no confirmed reports of deaths in detention, although such deaths have
 occurred in the past. Previous deaths in detention have not been investigated by the
 Government, and the number and identities of prisoners who died in prisons since
 the 1980's remains unknown.
 On December 31, 1996, a bomb exploded on a private transport bus in central Da-
 mascus, killing at least 20 persons and wounding dozens of others. The perpetrators
 and motives for this bomb attack remain unclear.
 
 
 1568
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. Despite inquiries by international human rights organizations and for-
 e     governments, the Government offered little new information on the welfare and
 wereabouts of persons who have been held incommunicado for years or about
 whom no more is known other than the approximate date of their detention (see
 Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading- Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the existence of constitutional provisions and several Penal Code penalties
 -for abusers, there was credible evidence that security forces continue to use torture.
 Former prisoners and detainees have reported that torture methods included elec-
 trical shocks; pulling out fingernails; the forced insertion of objects into the rectum;
 beatings, sometimes, while the victim is suspended from the ceiling; hyperextension
 of the spine; and the use of a chair that bends backwards to asphyxiate the victim
 or fracture the spine. Although torture may occur- in prisons, torture is most likely
 while detainees are being held at one of the many detention centers run by the var-
 ious security services throughout the country,. and particularly while the authorities
 are trying to extract a confession or information a out an alleged crime or alleged
 accomplices.
 The Government continues to deny the use of torture, and claims that it would
 prosecute anyone believed guilty of using excessive force or physical abuse. There
 were no reports of any- prosecutions of security officials during the year, although
 past victims of torture have identified the officials who beat them, up to the level
 of brigadier general. If allegations- of excessive force or physical abuse are to be
 made in court, the plaintiff is required to initiate his own civil suit against the al-
 leged abuser.
 P rison conditions vary-and generally are poor and do not meet minimum inter-
 national standards for health and sanitation. Facilities for political or national secu-
 rity-prisoners. are generally worse thanthose that house common criminals. The
 prison at Tadmur in Palmyra, where many political and national security prisoners
 .have been-kept, is widely considered to have the worst conditions. At some prisons,
 authorities allow visitation rights, but in other cases security officials demand
 bribes from family members who wish to visit incarcerated relatives. Overcrowding
 and substandard or insufficient food exist at several prisons. Some former detainees
 have reported that the Government prohibits reading materials, even the Koran, for
 political prisoners.
 The Government does not permit independent monitoring of prison or detention
 center conditions.
 In instances in which foreign nationals are arrested, the authorities sometimes do
 not inform embassies and delay or deny prison visits by foreign diplomats. The au-
 thorities consider citizens who hold dual nationality to be Syrians only, and thus
 do not necessarily recognize or grant requests by foreign diplomats to visit or other-
 wise assist such persons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Emergency Law, which authorizes the Government to conduct preventive
 arrests, overrides Penal Code provisions against arbitrary arrest and detention, in-
 cluding the need to obtain warrants. Officials contend that the Emergency Law is
 applied only in narrowly defined cases. Nonetheless, in cases involving political or
 national security offenses, arrests are generally carried out in secret, and suspects
 may be detained incommunicado for prolonged periods without charge or trial and
 are denied the right to a judicial determination for the pretrial detention. Some of
 these practices are prohibited by the state of emergency, but the authorities are not
 held to these strictures.
 The Government apparently continues to detain relatives of detainees or of fugi-
 tives in order to obtain confessions or the fugitive's surrender (see Section 1.f.).
 Defendants in civil and criminal trials have the right to bail hearings and the pos-
 sible release from detention on their own recognizance. There is no bail option for
 those accused of national security offenses. Unlike defendants in regular criminal
 and civil cases, security detainees do not have access to lawyers prior to or during
 questioning.
 Detainees have no legal redress for false arrest. Security forces often do not pro-
 vide detainees' families with information on their welfare or location while in deten-
 tion. Consequently, many people who have disappeared in past years are believed
 to be in long-term detention without charge, or possibly to have died in such deten-
 tion. The number of those who disappeared in this way probably has declined over
 the past few years, although this may be due to the Government's success in deter-
 ring opposition political activity rather than a loosening of criteria for detention.
 Many detainees brought to trial have been held incommunicado for years, and their
 trials often have been unfair (see Section i.e.).
 
 
 1569
 Pretrial detention may be lengthy even in cases not involving political or national
 security offenses. The criminal justice system is backlogged. Many criminal suspects
 are held in pretrial detention for months and may have their trials extended for ad-
 ditional months. Lengthy pretrial detentions and drawn-out court proceedings are
 caused by a shortage of available courts and the absence of legal provisions for a
 speedy trial or pleabargaining.
 There were two reports of large-scale politically motivated arrests in 1996 about
 which there was no new information in 1997: in March 1996, up to 100 political ac-
 tivists allegedly were arrested in Dayr Al-Zur, and in April 1996 up to 800 members
 of the Turkoman minority reportedly were detained without charge. Most of the
 Turkomen supposedly were released by July 1996, but some still may remain in de-
 tention.
 The last significant releases of political detainees took place in late November and
 December 1995 (see Section i.e.). While most of the doctors, lawyers, and engineers
 arrested in a mass crackdown in 1980 have been released, some apparently remain
 in prolonged detention without charge. Palestinian, Jordanian, and Lebanese citi-
 zens apparently continue to be detained without charge by Syrian security services
 in both Lebanon and Syria, without any public accounting by the Government.
 Remaining political detainees probably number in the hundreds or more. Even ap-
 proximate figures are difficult to estimate since the Government does not verify pub-
 licly the number of detentions without charge, the release of detainees, or whether
 detainees are subsequently sentenced to prison (see Section i.e.).
 The Government has exiled citizens in the past, although the practice is prohib-
 ited by the Constitution. There were no known instances of forced exile in 1997.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the two exceptional courts dealing with alleged security cases are not
 inde  ndent of executive branch control. The regular court system displays inde-
 pendence, althoug political connections and bribery sometimes influence verdicts.
 The judicial system is composed of the civil and criminal courts, military courts,
 the security courts, and the religious courts, which adjudicate matters of personal
 status such as divorce and inheritance. The Court of Cassation is the highest court
 of appeal. The Supreme Constitutional Court is empowered to rule only on the con-
 stitutionality of laws and decrees. It does not hear appeals.
 Civil and criminal courts are organized under the Ministry of Justice. Defendants
 before these courts are entitled to the legal representation of their choice; the courts
 appoint lawyers for indigents. Defendants are presumed innocent; they are allowed
 to present evidence, and to confront their accusers. Trials are public, except for
 those involving juveniles or sex offenses. Defendants may appeal their verdicts to
 a provincial appeals court and ultimately to the Court of Cassation. Such appeals
 are difficult because the courts do not provide verbatim transcripts of cases-only
 summaries prepared by the presiding judges. There are no juries.
 Military courts have the authority to try civilian as well as military personnel.
 The venue for a civilian 'defendant is decided by a military prosecutor. There were
 continuing reports that the Government operates military field courts in locations
 outside of established courtrooms. Such courts reportedly observe fewer of the for-
 mal procedures of regular military courts.
 The two security courts are the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), which tries
 political and national security cases, and the Economic Security Court (ESC), which
 tries cases involving financial crimes. Both courts operate under the state of emer-
 gency, not ordinary law, and do not observe constitutional provisions safeguarding
 defendants' rights.
 Charges against defendants in the SSSC are often vague. Many defendants ap-
 pear to be tried for exercising normal political rights, such as free speech. For exam-
 ple, the Emergency Law authorizes the prosecution of anyone "opposing the goals
 of the revolution" or "shaking the confidence of the masses in the aims of the revolu-
 tion," or trying to "change the economic or social structure of the State." Nonethe-
 less, the Government contends that the SSSC tries only persons who have sought
 to use violence against the State.
 Under SSSC procedures, defendants are not present during the preliminary, or in-
 vestigative, phase of the trial, when evidence is presented by the prosecutor. Trials
 are usually closed to the public. Lawyers are not ensured access to their clients be-
 fore the trial and are excluded from the court during their client's initial interroga-
 tion by the prosecutor. Lawyers submit written defense pleas, rather than oral pres-
 entations. The State's case is often based on confessions, but defendants have not
 been allowed to argue in court that the confessions were coerced. There is no known
 instance in which the court ordered a medical examination for a defendant who
 claimed that he was tortured. The SSSC reportedly has acquitted some defendants,
 but the Government does not provide any statistics on the conviction rate. Defend-
 
 
 1570
 ants do not have the right to appeal verdicts, but sentences are reviewed by the
 Minister of Interior, who may ratify, nullify, or alter sentences. The President may
 also intervene in the review process.
 Accurate information on the number of cases heard by the SSSC is difficult to ob-
 tain, although in recent years hundreds of cases are believed to have passed through
 the court annually. Many reportedly involved charges relating to membership in
 various banned political groups, including the Party for Communist Action and the
 pro-Iraqi wing of the Bath party. Sentences as long as 15 years have been imposed.
 The Government permitted delegates from Amnesty International (Al) to attend a
 session of the SSSC in March (see Section 4).
 The Economic Security Court (ESC) tries persons for alleged violations of foreign-
 exchange laws and other economic crimes. Prosecution of economic crimes is not ap-
 plied uniformly, as some government officials or business people with close connec-
 tions to the Government likely have violated Syria's strict economic laws without
 prosecution. Like the SSSC, the ESC does not ensure defendants due process. De-
 fendants may not have adequate access to lawyers to prepare their defenses, and
 the State's case is usually based on confessions. Verdicts likely are influenced by
 high-ranking government officials. Those convicted of the most serious economic
 crimes do not have the right of appeal, but those convicted of lesser crimes may ap-
 peal to the Court of Cassation.
 The last major releases of political prisoners and detainees took place in late No-
 vember and December 1995. Originally the Government claimed to have released
 some 1,650 political prisoners in November 1995, but local estimates now place the
 number released between 2,200 and 3,000. Many of those released apparently were
 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who had not been involved in acts of violence.
 The release also may have included some persons from banned Communist parties,
 pro-Iraqi Ba'athists, and Nasserites. Some former prisoners reported having to sign
 loyalty oaths or admissions of guilt as a condition of their release. Other prisoners
 released in November 1995 apparently were in poor health as a result of their incar-
 ceration; they had been incarcerated without-charge or had been detained in prison
 beyond the expiration of their original prison sentences, in some cases for years.
 The Government has released virtually all of those arrested at the time President
 Asad took power in 1970. At least three persons arrested during that period remain
 in prison, even though the sentences of two of them expired in 1985. The third ap-
 parently never was tried.
 The Government denies that it holds political prisoners, arguing that, although
 the aims of some prisoners may be political, their activities, including subversion,
 -were criminal. However, the Emergency Law and the Penal Code are so vague, and
 the Government's power so broad, that many persons were convicted and are in
 prison for the mere expression of political opposition to.the Government. The cur-
 rent number of political prisoners is estimated to be several hundred or more.
 The Government released a number of political prisoners in 1997. In March five
 men affiliated with the Committee for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and
 Human Rights-were reportedly released after serving 5-year terms. In April the
 -Government reportedly freed a leader of the Lebanese branch of the Iraqi Ba'th
 party who had been held in Syria for 2Y2 years. Six or more members of banned
 Communist and left-wing parties also, supposedly were released after serving long
 sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though laws provide for freedom from arbitrary interference, the Emergency Law
 authorizes the security services to enter homes and conduct searches with warrants
 if security matters, very broadly defined, are involved. The security services selec-
 tively monitor telephone conversations and facsimile transmissions. The Govern-
 ment opens mail destined for both citizens and foreign residents. It also prevents
 the delivery of human rights materials.
 The Government apparently has continued its practice of threatening or detaining
 the relatives of detainees or of fugitives in order to obtain confessions or the fugi-
 tive's surrender. One such case involved a Syrian Kurd who was reportedly detained
 for over a month, beaten, and tortured to extract information regarding the where-
 abouts of his brother.
 The incidence of security checkpoints has diminished. There are fewer police
 checkpoints on roads and in populated areas. Generally, the security services set up
 checkpoints to search for smuggled goods, weapons, narcotics, and subversive lit-
 erature. The searches take place without warrants. The Government and the Ba'th
 party have monitored and tried to restrict some citizens' visits to foreign embassies
 and cultural centers.
 
 
 1571
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides citizens with the
 right to express opinions freely in speech and in writing, but the Government re-
 stricts these rights significantly in practice. The Government strictly controls dis-
 semination of information and permits no written criticism of the President, the
 President's family, the Ba'th party, the military, or the legitimacy of the rege. The
 Emergency Law allows the Government broad discretion in determining llea ex-
 pressi-on. It prohibits the publishing of "false information," which opposes "the goals
 of the revolution" (see Section .e.). In the past, the Government has imprisoned
 journalists for failing to observe press restrictions. Two journalists from a govern-
 ment newspaper were allegedly ismissed after publishing an article in July that
 was viewed as insulting to the Prophet Muhammad. In the past, state security serv-
 ices have threatened local journalists for articles printed outside Syria.
 The Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Culture and National Guidance
 censor the domestic and foreign press. They usually prevent publication or distribu-
 tion of any material deemed threatening or embarrassing to the security services
 or high levels of the Government. Censorship is usually stricter for materials in Ar-
 abic. Commonly censored subjects include: the Government's human rights record;
 Islamic fundamentalism  allegations of official involvement in drug traicking; as-
 pets of the Governments role in Lebanon;graphic descriptions of sex; material un-
 favorable to the Arab cause in the Middle East conflict; and material that is offen-
 sive to any of the country's religious groups. In addition, most journalists and writ-
 ers practice self-censorship, in order to avoid provoking a negative government reac-
 tion.
 Recent trends toward modest relaxation of censorship continued during the year.
 The media demonstrated somewhat wider latitude in reporting on regional develop-
 ments, including the Middle East peace process. The media covered some peace
 process events factually, but other events were reported selectively to buttress offi-
 cial views. The Government-controlled press increased for a limited period the num-
 ber of articles critical of issues such as official corruption and governmental ineffi-
 ciency. In April a Government newspaper printed a story describing the torture and
 wrongful imprisonment of a man who served 4 years for allegedly killing a nurse.
 The Government or the Ba'th Party owns and operates the radio and television
 companies and the newspaper publishing houses. There are no privately owned
 newspapers, although foreign-owned, foreign-published newspapers cilate rel-
 atively freely. The Ministry of Information scripts the radio andtelevision news pro-
 grams to ensure adherence to the government line. The Government does not inter-
 iere with broadcasts from abroad.In late 1994, the Government announced that it
 would confiscate satellite receiving dishes and replace them with a government-con-
 trolled cable television distribution system. The confiscation program did not take
 place. Since then, satellite dishes have proliferated throughout all regions and
 among neighborhoods of all social and economic categories.
 The Ministry of Culture and National Guidance censors fiction and nonfiction
 works, including films. It also determines which films may not be shown at the cul-
 tural centers operated by foreign embassies.
 The Government restricts academic freedom. Public school teachers are not per-
 mitted to express ideas contrary to government policy, although authorities allow
 somewhat greater freedom of expression at the unvversity level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly does not
 exist. Citizens may_ not hold meetings unless they obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior. Moat public demonstrations are organized by the Government or
 Ba'th Party. The Government applies the restrictions on public assenbly in Pal-
 estinian refugee camps, where controlled demonstrations have been allowed.
 In June a group of as many as 160 students reportedly assembled in Damascus
 to protest a new educational policy. They were dispersed peacefully by security offi-
 cers, but some allegedly attempted to reassemble later in the day. There were
 unconfirmed reports that some of the students were detained for several days and
 beaten prior to their release.
 The Government restricts freedom of association. Private associations must be
 registered with the Government in order to be considered legal. Some groups have
 not been able to register, presumably because the Government views them as politi-
 cal, even though the oups presented themselves as cultural or professional asso-
 ciations. Unregistered groups may not hold meetings, and the authorities do not
 allow the establishment of indepenent political parties. The Government usually
 grants registration to groups not engaged in political or other activities deemed sen-
 sitive.
 In 1980 the Government dissolved, and then reconstituted under its control, the
 executive boards of professional associations after some members staged a national
 
 
 1572
 strike and advocated an end to the state of emergency. The associations have not
 been independent since that time and are generally led by members of the Ba'th
 party although non-party members may serve on their executive boards.
 c. Vyreedom of Religion.--The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. The only advantage given to
 a particular religion by the Constitution is that which requires the President to be
 a   uslim. All religions and sects must register with the Government, which mon-
 itors fundraising and requires permits for all meetings by religious groups, except
 for worship. Although nolaw prohibits non-Muslims from proselytizing, the Govern-
 ment discourages such activity. The few remaining Jews are generally barred from
 government employment and do not have military service obligations. Jews are the
 only minority group whose passports and identity cards note their religion. There
 is mandatory religious instruction in schools, with governent-approved teachers
 and curricula. Religion courses are divided into separate classes for Muslim and
 Christian students. Jews have a separate primary school for Jews only, which in-
 cludes religious instruction (see Section 5).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts travel near the Golan Heights and Iraq.
 Travel to Israel is illegal. Citizens must have government permission to travel
 abroad. Some have been denied such permission on political grounds, although gov-
 ernment officials deny that this practice occurs. The authorities may prosecute any
 person found attempting to emigrate or travel abroad without official permission,
 or who is suspected of having visited Israel. There is no evidence that the Govern-
 ment persecuted upon their return those who applied for, but were denied, asylum
 abroad. Women over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the permis-
 sion of male relatives. In practice, however, a husband may file a request with the
 Ministry of Interior to prohibit his wife's departure from Syria, and a father or
 brother may request that the Ministry prohibit travel abroad by unmarried daugh-
 ters or sisters, even if they are over 18 years of age.
 The United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) reported that as of Au-
 gust there were 358,374 registered Palestinian refugees in Syria. Palestinian refu-
 gees sometimes encounter difficulties in obtaining travel documents and reentering
 Syria after travel abroad. The Government restricts entry by Palestinians who are
 not resident in Syria. The Government does not allow the Palestinian residents of
 Gaza to visit Syria.
 The Government cooperates on a case-by-case basis with the office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organi-
 zations in assisting refugees. The Government provides first asylum but is selective
 about extending protection to refugees; approximately 1,200 persons sought asylum
 through the UNHCR during the first 8 months of 1997. Although the Government
 denied any forced repatriation of those who may have had a valid claim to refugee
 status, it apparently forcibly repatriated a few Iraqi and Somali refugees. As of Au-
 gust 31, there were an estimated 37,000 non-Palestinian refugees in Syria, of whom
 about 2,424 were receiving assistance from the UNHCR, including 1,500 refugees
 of Iraqi origin at the El Hol camp and other locations.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Although citizens ostensibly vote for the President and Members of Parliament,
 they do not have the right to change their government. The President has run for
 election unopposed since taking power in 1970. Political opposition to his rule is not
 tolerated. The President and his senior aides, particularly those in the military and
 security services, ultimately make all basic decisions on political and economic life,
 with no element of public accountability.
 Moreover, the Constitution mandates that the Bath Party is the ruling party and
 is ensured a majority in all government and popular associations, such as workers'
 and women's groups. Six smaller political parties are also permitted and, along with
 the Ba'th Party, make up the National Progressive Front (NPF), a grouping of par-
 ties that represents the sole framework of legal political participation for citizens.
 While created ostensibly to give the appearance of a multiparty system, the NPF
 is dominated by the Ba'th Party and does not change the essentially one-party char-
 acter of the political system. Non-Ba'th Party members of the NPF exist as political
 parties largely in name only and hew closely to Ba'th Party and government poli-
 cies.
 The Ba'th Party dominates the Parliament, which is known as the People's Coun-
 cil. Although parliamentarians may criticize policies and modify draft laws, the ex-
 ecutive branch retains ultimate control over the legislative process. Since 1990 the
 Government has allowed independent non-NPF candidates to run for a limited num-
 
 
 1573
 ber of seats in the 250-member People's Council. The current number of independ-
 ent deputies is 80, ensuring a permanent absolute majority for the Ba'th Party-
 dominated NPF.
 Persons who have been convicted by the State Security Court may be deprived
 of their political rights after they are released from prison. Such restrictions include
 a prohibition against engaging in political activity, the denial of a passport, and a
 bar on accepting a government job and some other forms of employment. The dura-
 tion of such restrictions may last from 10 years to the remainder of the former pris-
 oner's life. The Government contends that this practice is mandated by the Penal
 Code and has been in effect since 1949.
 Women and minorities, with the exception of the Jewish population and stateless
 Kurds (see Section 5), participate in the political system without restriction. None-
 theless, women are underrepresented in government. There are two female cabinet
 ministers and 24 female Members of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not allow the existence of local human rights groups. One
 or two human rights groups once operated legally but were subsequently banned by
 the Government.
 Amnesty international (AI) visited Syria for 2 weeks in March, the second major
 visit by an international human rights organization (after Human Rights Watch in
 1995). AI delegates met with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Interior, Justice, In-
 formation, and Culture; judges from the SSSC as well as the Court's prosecutor and
 several lawyers; and the secretaries general of the Arab Writers Union and Arab
 Inter-Parliamentary Union. These were the first such meetings with an inter-
 national human rights organization.
 AI credited Syria with an overall improvement in human rights over the last few
 years but called on the Government to review the cases of more than 500 political
 prisoners and to release those detained solely on the basis of their political beliefs.
 As a matter of policy, the Government in its exchanges with international groups
 denies that it commits human rights abuses. It has not permitted representatives
 of international organizations to visit prisons. The Government says that it now re-
 sponds in writing to all inquiries from nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) re-
 garding human rights issues, including the cases of individual detainees and pris-
 oners, through an interagency governmental committee established expressly for
 that purpose. Human Rights Watch reported in 1997 that the Government had not
 responded to its request to account publicly for the possibly thousands of citizens
 who were executed at Tadmur prison in the 1980's. The Government usually re-
 sponds to queries from human rights organizations and foreign embassies on specific
 cases by saying that the prisoner in question has violated national security laws.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for all citizens.
 In practice, membership in the Bath Party or close familial relations with a promi-
 nent party member or government official can be important for economic, social, or
 educational advancement. Party or government connections can pave the way for en-
 trance into better elementary and secondary schools, access to lucrative employ-
 ment, and greater power within the Government, the military, and the security
 services. Certain prominent positions, such as that of provincial governor, are re-
 serve,. solely for Ba'th Party members. A p art from some discrimination against
 Kurds, there are no apparent patterns of systematic government discrimaination
 based on race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status. However, there are
 varying degrees of'societal discrimination in each of these areas.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics for
 domestic violence or sexual assault. This is because the vast majority of cases g
 unreported, and victims generally are reluctant to seek assistance from non-family
 members. There are no laws against spousal rape. One preliminary academic study
 suggested that domestic violence is the largest single reason for divorces, and that
 such abuse is more prevalent among the less-educated. It appears to occur more in
 rural than in urban areas. Battered women have the legal right to seek redress in
 court, but few do so because of the social stigma attached to such action. The Syrian
 Women's Federation offers services to battered wives to remedy individual family
 problems. The Syrian Family Planning Association also seeks to deal with this prob-
 le.Sme private groups, including the Family Planning Association, have orga-
 nized seminars on violence against women, which were reported by the government
 press. There are no specifically designated shelters or safehavens for battered
 
 
 1574
 women seeking to flee their husbands. The Syrian Women's Union, in conjunction
 with the Family Planning Association and Syrian Lawyer's Association, organized
 a conference in March that brought together female writers, professors, lawyers, and
 former diplomats to discuss strategies for advancing women's rights in Syria.
 The Constitution provides for equality between men and women and equal pay
 for equal work. Moreover, the Government has sought to overcome traditional dis-
 criminatory attitudes toward women, and encourages women's education. However,
 the Parliament has not yet changed personal status retirement and social security
 laws that discriminate against women. In addition, some secular laws discriminate
 against women. For example, under criminal law punishment for adultery and dig-
 nity crimes is twice that for the same crime committed by a man.
 Personal status law on divorce is based on Shari'a or Islamic law, and discrimi-
 nates against women. For example, husbands may claim adultery as grounds for di-
 vorce, but wives face more difficulty in presenting the same argument. In addition
 if a woman requests a divorce from her husband, she may not be entitled to child
 support in some instances even if she keeps the children, or even obtaining a di-
 vorce. In addition, under tie law, a woman loses the right to custody of boys at the
 age of 9 years and girls at the age of 12 years.
 Inheritance for Muslims and Christians is based on Shari'a. Accordingly, women
 are usually granted half the inheritance share of male heirs. On the other hand,
 Shari'a mandates that male heirs provide financial support to the female relatives
 who inherit less. For example, a brother who inherits an unmarried sisters share
 from their parents' estate is obligated to provide for the sister's well-being. If the
 brother fails to do so, she has the right to sue, but such cases are not common.
 Shari'a law on marriage and divorce applies to Muslims only. Christians are sub-
 ject to church canon law on marriage and divorce, making divorces difficult to obtain
 in many cases.
 Polygyny is legal but is practiced only by a small minority of Muslim men. Under
 Shari'a, ahusband has the right to take up to four wives without asking the consent
 of his other wife or wives, but he is supposed to treat them equally and be able to
 support all of them. The first wife and later wives have the right to seek a divorce
 if the husband takes an additional wife.
 A father may request that the Government prohibit travel abroad by his unmar-
 ried daughter, and a husband can request that his wife's travel abroad be prohibited
 (see Section 2.d.).
 Women participate actively in public life and are represented in most professions,
 as well as the military. Women are not impeded from owning or managing land or
 other real properTy. Women constitute 6 percent of judges, 10 percent of lawyers,
 57 percent of teahers below university level, and 20 percent nf university profes-
 sors.
 Children.-There is no legal discrimination between boys and girls in school or
 in health care. Education is compulsory for all children, male or female, between
 the ages of 6 and 12. According to the Syrian Women's Union, about 46 percent of
 the total number of students through the secondary level are female.
 Nevertheless, societal pressure for early marriage and childbearing interfere with
 girls' educational progress, particularly in rural areas, where dropout rates for fe-
 male students remain high.
 The law stresses the need to protect children, and the Government has organized
 seminars on the subject of child welfare. Although there are cases of child abuse,
 there is no societal pattern of abuse against children. The law provides for severe
 penalties for those found guilty of the most serious abuses against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled
 and seeks to integrate them into the public sector work force. However, implementa-
 tion is spotty. Regulations reserving 2 percent of government and public sector jobs
 for the disabled are not rigorously implemented. The disabled do not have recourse
 to the courts regarding discrimination. There are no laws mandating access to pub-
 lic buildings for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Although there is a significant amount of religious toler-
 ance, religion or ethnic affiliation can be a contributing factor in determining career
 opportunities. For example, members of the President s Alawi sect hold a predomi-
 nant position in the security services and military, well out of proportion to their
 percentage of the population. Nevertheless, government policy officially disavows
 sectarianism.
 There is little evidence of societal discrimination or violence against religious mi-
 norities, including Jews. Government-run schools offer separate religious instruction
 for Christians and Muslims. Jews have a separate primary school which offers reli-
 gious instruction on Judaism, in addition to traditional subjects. Although Arabic
 is the official language in public schools, the Government allows the teaching of Ar-
 
 
 1575
 menian, Hebrew, and Chaldean in some schools on the basis that these are "litur-
 gical languages." Technically, all schools are government-run and nonsectarian, al-
 though some schools are run in practice by Christian and Jewish minorities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government generally permits national
 and ethnic minorities to conduct traditional, religious, and cultural activities. How-
 ever, the Government's attitude toward the Kurdish minority is a significant excep-
 tion to this policy. Although the Government contends that there is no discrimina-
 tion against the Kurdish population, it has placed limits on the use and teaching
 of the Kurdish Ian age, Kurdish cultural expression, and, at times, the celebration
 of Kurdish festiva . Some members of the Kurdish community have been tried by
 the Supreme State Security Court for expressing support for greater Kurdish auton-
 omy or independence. Although the Asad Government stopped the practice of strip-
 ping Kurds in Syria of their Syrian nationality (some 120,000 lost Syrian nationality
 under this program in the 1960's), it never restored this nationality. As a result,
 those who had their nationality taken away, and their children, have been unable
 to obtain Syrian nationality and passports, or even identification cards and birth
 certificates. Without Syrian nationality, these stateless Kurds, who according to
 UNHCR estimates number about 200,000 people, are unable to own land, cannot
 be employed by the Government, and have no right to vote. They encounter difficul-
 ties in enrolling their children in school. Stateless Kurdish men may not legally
 marry Syrian citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the Constitution provides for this right,
 workers are not free to establish unions independent of the Government. All unions
 must belong to the General Federation of Trade Unions (GFTU), which is dominated
 by the Ba'th Party and is actually a part of the State's bureaucratic structure. The
 GFTU is an information channel between political decisionmakers and workers. The
 GFTU transmits instructions downward to the unions and workers but also conveys
 information to decisionmakers about worker conditions and needs. The GFTU pro-
 vides the Government with opinions on legislation, organizes workers, and formu-
 lates rules for various member unions. The GFTU president is a senior member of
 the Ba'th party. He and his deputy may attend cabinet meetings on economic af-
 fairs. The GFTU controls nearly all aspects of union activity.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, except in the agricultural sector. Nevertheless,
 workers are inhibited from striking because of previous government crackdowns on
 strikers. In 1980 the security forces arrested many union and professional associa-
 tion officials who planned a national strike. Some of those remain in detention or
 have been tried by the State Security Court (see Section 2.b.).
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 In 1992 Syria's eligibility for tariff preferences under the U.S. Generalized System
 of Preferences was suspended because the Government failed to take steps to afford
 internationally recognized worker rights to Syrian workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-This right does not exist in
 any meaningful sense. Government representatives are part of the bargaining proc-
 ess in the public sector. In state-owned companies, union representatives negotiate
 hours, wages, and conditions of employment with representatives of the employers
 and the supervising ministry. Workers serve on the boards of directors of public en-
 terprises.
 The law provides for collective bargaining in the private sector, but any such
 agreement between labor and management must be ratified by the Minister of
 Labor and Social Affairs, who has effective veto power. The Committee of Experts
 of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has long noted the Governments re-
 fusal to abolish the Minister's power over collective contracts.
 Unions have the right to litigate disputes over work contracts and other workers'
 interests with employers and may ask for binding arbitration. In practice, labor and
 management representatives settle most disputes without resort to legal remedies
 or arbitration. Management has the right to request arbitration, but this is seldom
 exercised. Arbitration usually occurs when a worker initiates a dispute over wages
 or severance pay.
 Since the unions are part of the Government's bureaucratic structure, they are
 protected by law from antiunion discrimination. There were no reports of antiunion
 discrimination.
 There are no unions in Syria's seven free trade zones. Firms in the zones are ex-
 empt from the laws and regulations governing hiring and firing, although they must
 observe some provisions on health, safety, hours, and sick and annual leave.
 
 
 1576
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law prohibiting forced
 or compulsory labor. There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor involving
 children or foreign or domestic workers. Forced labor has been imposed as a punish-
 ment for some convicts.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment does not prohibit forced and bonded labor by children, but there were no
 reports of such practices (see Section 6.c.). The minimum age for employment is 15
 in the public sector and 12 in the private sector. In all cases, parental permission
 is required for children under the age of 16. The law rohibits children from work-
 ing at night. However, all these laws apply only to children working for a salary.
 Those working in family businesses who are not technically paid a salary-a com-
 mon phenomenon--do not fall under the law. The Government claims that the ex-
 pansion of the private sector has led to more young children working. The Ministry
 of Labor and Social Affairs is responsible for enforcing child labor laws but does not
 have enough inspetors to ensure compliance with the laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions f Work.-The Minister of Labor and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing minimum wage levels in the public and private sectors. The
 minimum wage is $45 (2,014 Syrian pounds) per month in the public sector and $43
 (1,940 Syrian pounds) per month in the private sector. A committee of labor, man-
 agement, and government representatives submits recommended changes in the
 minimum wage to the Minister. The minimum wage does not provide a decent
 standard of living for a worker and family. As a result, many workers take addi-
 tional jobs or are supported by their extended families.
 The statutory workweek is 6 days of 6 hours each, but in some cases a 9-hour
 workday is permitted. The laws mandate one 24-hour rest day per week. Rules and
 regulations severely limit the ability of an employer to dismiss employees without
 cause. Even if a person is absent from work without notice for a long period, the
 employer must follow a lengthy procedure of trying to find the person and notify
 him, including through newspaper notices, before he is able to take any action
 against the employee. Dismissed employees have the right to appeal before a com-
 mittee of representatives from the union, management, the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Affairs, and the appropriate municipality. Such committees usually find in
 favor of the employee. The law does not protect temporary workers who are not sub-
 ject to regulations on minimum wages. Small private firms and businesses employ
 such workers to avoid the costs associated with hiring permanent employees.
 The law mandates safety in all sectors, and managers are expected to implement
 them fully. In practice, there is little enforcement without worker complaints, which
 occur infrequently despite government efforts to post notices on safety rights and
 regulations. Large companies, such as oil field contractors, also employ safety engi-
 neers.
 The ILO has noted that a provision in the Labor Code allowing employers to keep
 workers at the workplace for as many as 11 hours a day might lead to abuse. How-
 ever, there have been no reports of such abuses. Officials from the Ministries of
 Health and Labor inspect work sites for compliance with health and safety stand-
 ards. Such inspections appear to be haphazard, apart from those conducted in hotels
 and other facilities that cater to foreigners. Rural enforcement of labor laws is also
 more lax than that in urban areas, where inspectors are concentrated. Workers may
 lodge complaints about health and safety conditions with special committees estab-
 lished to adjudicate such cases. Workers have the right to remove themselves from
 hazardous conditions without risking loss of employment.
