 SYRIA
 The Syrian Arab Republic is, according to its Constitution, a
 representative democracy, but throughout most of its history
 since achieving full independence in 1946 it has been under
 some form of authoritarian rule. Hafiz al-Assad, who became
 President via the military in 1970, rules Syria in the name of
 the Ba'ath Party. The party has the announced goals of secular
 socialism and Arab unity; however the long-term feud between
 the Syrian and Iraqi factions of the Ba'ath Party has resulted
 in the two regimes' support for reciprocal subversion and for
 terrorist acts against each other in third countries. Assad
 and other members of the minority Alawite Muslim sect (10
 percent of the population) dominate the Government and the
 Ba'ath Party and constitute the majority of the leadership in
 the military and security forces. The regime's tight control
 of the Syrian political system and its willingness to use
 whatever force is necessary to maintain its position have
 enabled it to remain in power for an unprecedentedly long
 period (12 years) in a country previously characterized by
 political chaos.
 Syria has a mixed economy, but socialism is upheld as the
 ultimate goal of the Government. Most industry -- roughly 75
 percent -- is owned by the state. Private business and
 investment are also active, but are closely controlled by the
 Government.
 Periodic outbreaks of violence against the regime have occurred
 during Assad's rule, with major outbreaks occurring in every
 year since 1979. The Muslim Brotherhood, a banned, secret
 organization of largely Sunni Islamic fundamentalists, is
 dedicated to the overthrow of the Government and has been the
 principal source of anti-regime activity. Some elements of the
 organization have engaged in armed insurrection or acts of
 terrorism against the Government. In 1980 the Government made
 membership in the Brotherhood punishable by death. Efforts to
 suppress the organization during the period 1979-82 produced a
 series of massacres in the northern Syrian cities of Hama,
 Homs, and Aleppo. Thousands of suspected Muslim Brotherhood
 members were summarily executed during this period, frequently
 after brutal treatment or torture. The Government also clamped
 down on non-violent sources of dissent during this period,
 arresting the leaders of the hitherto-independent lawyers' and
 engineers' syndicates in 1980 and placing the groups under
 regime control.
 Israel has occupied the Golan Heights, in southwest Syria,
 since 1967. Israel withdrew from portions of the area in 1974
 under the provisions of the Disengagement Agreement with
 Syria. In December 1981 it extended Israeli law, jurisdiction,
 and administration to the Golan areas still under occupation.
 Human rights conditions in the Golan Heights are covered under
 Israeli-occupied territories.
 Syrian military units have controlled large areas of Lebanon
 since 1976, originally as the principal contributor to the Arab
 Deterrent Force, which was formed by the Arab League in
 response to the 1975-76 Lebanese civil war. Although the
 Government of Lebanon invited the Syrian forces in 1976, it now
 seeks both Syrian and Israeli withdrawals. Despite their
 original role as peacemakers, the Syrians have at times been
 charged with serious human rights violations in Lebanon. These
 events are covered in the Lebanon report.
 
 
 1281
 The June 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon brought Syrian troops
 into conflict with Israeli forces. As a result, Israel held
 approximately three hundred Syrian prisoners of war and Syria
 held between three and six Israeli prisoners of war.
 Syria has supported a number of terrorists groups that have
 engaged in killings outside of Syria.
 Political rights are sharply limited, mostly to President Assad
 and the small elite around him. Media censorship is endemic.
 Activities which the state considers to be threats to its
 security can lead to detention without charge, severe prison
 sentences, mistreatment, torture, or execution. The Government
 neither acknowledges human rights violations nor facilitates
 outside investigations of allegations of human rights
 violations.
 During 1982, the Syrian regime continued to suppress freedom of
 speech, press, association, and assembly and to limit
 participation in the political system. It pursued dissident
 elements, carried out cordon-and-search operations without
 judicial safeguards against invasion of the home, carried out
 large-scale arrests, in many cases causing persons to
 "isappear,' and continued to engage in torture and other
 brutal practices. For the third straight year, anti-regime
 activity by the Muslim Brotherhood in Hama resulted in harsh
 repression by government forces. The suppression of the 1982
 uprising was particularly severe, resulting in the destruction
 of major parts of the city, the death of thousands of people,
 and the injury of many more.
 There were no indications during 1982 that any trend toward a
 more open political system or toward greater respect for the
 integrity of the person.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 Several thousands of persons are estimated in third country
 press accounts to have been executed by the Syrian Government
 for political dissidence since 1979. Additional thousands -
 including innocent bystanders - were killed or executed during
 Government sweep operations and attacks on areas of dissident
 activities.
 In February 1982, members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood in
 the city of Hams attempted an armed resurrection, reportedly
 seizing several Government buildings. The insurrection was
 reportedly touched off by an unsuccessful Government raid on a
 Muslim Brotherhood hideout in Hams. Dissident elements were
 heavily armed and hiding in buildings in the center of the
 city. After a number of Government security personnel were
 killed trying to root them out, the Syrian army was ordered to
 seal off Hama and use artillery and other. heavy weapons,
 levelling major portions of the city. Evidence on the number
 of people killed is scanty because the Government restricted
 access to the city for some time, and has attempted to stifle
 information on events there. Nevertheless, there have been
 press accounts that several thousand persons were killed. The
 Muslim Brotherhood also killed an unknown number of.soldiers
 and civilian supporters of the Syrian Government.
 A car bomb explosion near the Ministry of Information in
 Damascus February 18, 1982 killed several people. Four other
 bombing incidents occurred in Damascus in the latter half of
 1981, one of which killed 200 people. The Muslim Brotherhood
 is believed to have been responsible for at least some of these
 incidents. There have been allegations of Syrian involvement in
 the September 14 bomb assassination in Beirut of Lebanese
 President-elect Bashir Gemayel and 26 other persons.
 
 
 1282
 Abu Nidal and the 'Black June* terrorist organization - an
 anti-PLO Palestinian offshoot of the Fatah targetted against
 PLO, Israeli, and Western interests - have sometimes enjoyed
 support and protection from the Syrian Government. The
 Syrian-based Shia group, the Iraq Movement of the Mujahideen,
 claimed responsibility for the car bombing which killed 30-60
 people at the Ministry of Planning in Baghdad in August 1982.
 b. Disappearance
 Although no reliable figures are available, it is estimated by
 press accounts and some informed observers that up to 1,000
 inhabitants of Hama still are missing and unaccounted for.
 Some private citizens in Syria claim that, in general, people
 arrested by the police are sometimes never heard from
 again--families are not notified, nor are detainees allowed to
 contact their next of kin.
 c. Torture
 There have been numerous credible reports of torture being
 used, primarily during arrest and interrogation periods. The
 Syrian Penal Code prohibits the use of torture and establishes
 severe penalties for those employing such practices. There are
 no reports or official acknowledgements of punishment of
 security or police officials for acts of torture, however.
 According to Amnesty International, commonly used methods of
 torture in recent years include beatings, whipping of prisoners
 suspended in tires, beatings on the soles of the feet,
 cigarette burns, sexual molestation, and electric shocks.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Little detailed information is available about Syrian prison
 conditions. No international organizations, such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross, are allowed access to
 detention facilities. Persons charged with or convicted of
 criminal offenses are held separately from those charged with
 political and security offenses. Health care, food, and access
 by family members for persons held in ordinary prisons are
 reputed to be adequate. Conditions at prisons where political
 and securityprisoners are held are reported to be more severe;
 visits by family members, for example, are not allowed, and
 Amnesty International has indicated concern about inadequate
 health care and the extensive use of torture. In addition,
 there are other reports, which have not been verified, that
 many people wounded during the government barrage on Hama were
 forbidden medical treatment and left to die.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Syrian Constitution guarantees life, liberty, and personal
 security. The civilian legal code, modeled after French law,
 provides for due process for the accused, although it permits
 pre-trial detention for indefinite periods during the
 investigative process. Under the state of emergency, which has
 been in force since 1963, these safeguards can be suspended,
 and an individual may be held indefinitely without charge or
 trial, especially in political and security cases.
 The number of people currently held without trial or charge is
 not known, but may be significant. Approximately 20 Ba'ath
 Party officials and Government members of the previous regime
 have been under detention since 1970. According to press
 accounts, a large number of military officers, possibly as many
 as 150, were reportedly arrested in January 1982 in connection
 with an alleged coup plot, but no confirmed details are
 available.
 In October 1982 the Syrian Government released nine members of
 the Lebanese Phalange Party whom it had detained in Lebanon.
 Six of them had been held since 1978, the others since 1980.
 
 
 1283
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of military courts or of the state security
 court. Under this system, the accused has no right to a
 judicial determination of the basis for his pre-trial detention
 and may not choose his lawyer; counsel is appointed by the
 court. All court sessions are closed. Official information on
 the number of individuals tried by those courts or on the
 verdicts rendered is not available. Defendants in civilian
 courts are entitled to legal representation of their choice; if
 they cannot afford an attorney, the court appoints and pays for
 a lawyer. Civilian courts impose no restrictions on the lawyer
 in representing his client and allow the right of appeal. In
 some cases, political considerations can affect the course of
 trials or verdicts.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The Syrian legal system provides safeguards, including the
 requirement to obtain judicial arrest and search warrants,
 before police are allowed to enter private homes. These
 procedures are generally followed in cases relating to ordinary
 crimes. Regulations under the state of emergency currently in
 effect suspend these safeguards in security-related cases.
 During security operations in Syria, such as in Hama in
 February 1982, there were house-to-house searches by security
 personnel who entered private residences with no warrants.
 This practice has been common during the past three years.
 It is widely suspected in Syria that electronic serveillance by
 the government of residents in Syria is common.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, of the Balath Party, and of
 their institutions is not permitted. The broadcast media and
 publishing houses are wholly owned and operated by the
 Government and the Ba'ath Party and usually give only the
 official views on Government policies and all other important
 issues., On the few occasions when there is criticism of
 governmental bodies or operations, it is sanctioned criticism
 which is directed at administrative failings. Officials above
 the middle ranks are rarely, if ever, criticized.
 Imported foreign printed matter and films generally are not
 censored. However, some foreign literature, usually fiction
 and non-fiction about the Middle East, is banned if considered
 critical of Syria. Control is much stricter on materials in
 Arabic. Censorship is exercised through censorship offices in
 the Ministries of Information and of Culture and National
 Guidance. The postal system operates a separate censorship of
 mail, but it does not check every letter or package. The
 widespread belief that electronic eavesdropping by the
 government is common acts as a constraint of freedom of
 expression.
 Aside from a few church-run, private, primary and secondary
 schools that are carefully inspected and follow the Ministry of
 Education curriculum, schools at all levels are government-
 operated. Teachers are not permitted to express or expound
 ideas contrary to government policy, although in practice there
 is more openness of expression at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can occur only
 with the acquiescence of the government and usually occur at
 the instigation of the government or the Ba'ath Party.
 
 
 1284
 Professional organizations and labor unions are active and
 well-organized, but they function as parts of the government
 apparatus and are primarily used to transmit instructions and
 information from the Syrian leadership to their members.
 Unofficially, the unions also function as means to keep the
 leadership informed of grievances and concerns at the
 grass-roots level. Strikes are forbidden by law in Syria.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Syrian government is dominated by members of the Alawite
 sect, a minority (10 percent) of the population, which is
 predominantly-Sunni Muslim. Alawites hold a disproportionate
 share of prominent political and military positions, and Sunni
 Muslim, Christian, Druze, and Jewish citizens face varying
 degrees of discrimination. In 1981, there was an incident in
 which a Ba'ath Party youth group rampaged through Damascus,
 ripping off head scarves of some traditionally dressed Muslim
 women and insulting them. Details of the 1982 Hama incident
 show that the Alawi-Sunni tension included religious
 dimensions. A large number of mosques in Hama were demolished
 following the fighting. Large-scale proselytizing is
 discouraged in order to avoid tension between the various
 religious groups. For some years Seventh Day Adventists have
 been forbidden by law to practice their religion, and all
 Adventist church property has been confiscated.
 The Syrian Jewish community, now approximately 3,500 - 4,000
 persons, exists under close governmental scrutiny and is denied
 political participation. However, Jewish religious practices
 are observed without harassment.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Travel within Syria is unrestricted except in the security
 zones of the Golan. All Syrian citizens wishing to travel
 abroad must obtain passports and exit visas. In theory any
 Syrian can be required to post a bond which would be forfeited
 in case of non-return. Syrian Jews, however, are the only
 category routinely required to post such a bond, which varies
 from $2,000 to $10,000, depending on the person's position in
 the community and economic standing. In 1982, Syrian Jews
 found it easier to travel overseas, although an official ban on
 the emigration of Jews continued. The Syrian government
 continued its policy of not issuing passports to all the
 members of a Jewish family at the same time.
 The government forbids overseas travel in the case of certain
 categories of citizens, e.g., persons liable for military
 service, and pharmacists, architects, and engineers trained in
 Syria at public expense who have not yet completed a five-year
 government service obligation. Those who attempt to travel
 illegally are subject to fines and detention. Emigration is
 not discouraged for groups other than those mentioned above.
 There are no formal restrictions on repatriation of Syrian
 citizens, although political opponents of the regime might be
 subject to arrest if they returned to Syria. There have been
 no reports of revocation of citizenship by the Syrian
 government.
 There is a large Palestinian community in Syria estimated at
 200,000 people, who are predominantly refugees from the 1949
 and 1967 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand Lebanese and
 Palestinian refugees entered Syria in 1982 fleeing Israel's
 invasion of Lebanon. Many refugees participate fully in the
 Syrian economy; they experience little discrimination by virtue
 of their refugee status. There have been no incidents of
 forced repatriation of refugees to Lebanon from Syria.
 
 
 1285
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Syria is ruled by President Hafiz al-Assad and a group drawn
 from the small Alawite confessional minority that uses the
 ruling Ba'ath Party as its instrument. Popular participation
 in the political process is severely restricted. The
 Constitution stipulates that the Ba'ath Party is the leading
 political organization within Syria. Several other parties are
 permitted by law, but they exercise little actual political
 power and are subordinate to the Ba'ath Party. There is no
 legal political party which is in active opposition to the
 Government. All legal political parties participate in the
 Progressive National Front, a mechanism which in theory is the
 highest political organization in the country. Two political
 groupings are currently illegal: the Syrian Social National
 Party, which was banned by decree in the 1950's after carrying
 out a series of assassinations against Government officials,
 and the Muslim Brotherhood, some elements of which have carried
 oue assassinations and acts of political violence.
 Candidates for Parliament are selected by the ruling Ba'ath
 Party and, in theory, by four other parties which comprise the
 Progressive National Front. Opposition lists of independents
 are offered but rarely prevail probably because of the Front's
 far greater resources and organization and because of
 restrictions on freedom of expression. NO independents were
 elected in the most recent elections, in 1981.
 The equality of women is guaranteed by the Syrian
 Constitution. In practice, however, opportunities for women
 are limited by social and religious custom and tradition. The
 women's union works to expand the participation of women in all
 sectors of society, utilizing the media and a network of
 chapters throughout Syria to convey its message.
 As a political system dominated by one religious group, Syria
 does not afford the Sunni majority or the non-Alawite
 minorities equal opportunities for political participation.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Syrian Government reacts to charges of human rights
 violations in Syria either by claiming that they are an
 intrusion in Syrian internal affairs or by ignoring such
 charges altogether. The last visit to Syria by Amnesty
 International delegates occurred in March 1978; its periodic
 inquiries since then have received no response. The 1982
 Amnesty International Report, covering 1981, expressed concern
 over detentions of hundreds of political prisoners, detentions
 without trials, summary procedures in trials of political
 prisoners by state security and military courts, the use of
 torture, the death penalty, extra-legal executions, and
 disappearances. Special concern was expressed over increasing
 reports of human rights violations by the security forces,
 particularly the Special Defense Units. The International
 Islamic Commission on Human Rights issued an appeal to the
 Syrian Government in February 1982 to halt 'acts of blind
 violence perpetrated indiscriminately by the security forces
 against the population of the town of Hama in particular and
 against the population of Syria in general." Freedom House, in
 its 1982 survey, Freedom in the World, categorized Syria as
 *not free.'
 The Syrian Government regularly participates in United Nations
 conferences on human rights and a Syrian representative chaired
 a November 1982 meeting in Tunis of an Arab League committee on
 human rights. The only internal group monitoring human rights
 ceased to exist in practical terms after some of its officers
 were arrested in April 1980.
 
 
 1286
 4.   Economic,\So'ial, and-Cultural Situation
 Syria has a population of_9.3 million and a per capita GNP of
 $1,340. It has, in recent y-ears, made substantial progress in
 raising the adult literacy rate to 53-percent and in expanding
 the areas where electricity (42 percent total, 85 percent
 urban, 10 percent rural) and adequate safe water (75 percent
 total, 80 percent urban, 20 percent rural) are available.
 Traditionally, Syria has been an agricultural country growing
 wheat, cotton, barley, and tobacco. Since independence,
 however, it has built a substantial industrial base focusing on
 textiles, food processing, and light manufacturing. Although
 the Government is the sole purchaser of many agricultural
 commodities, most agricultural land is privately owned. With
 respect to industry, Syrian observers estimate that roughly 15
 percent of industrial production originates with private
 sector, small-scale factories. Recently, Syria has undertaken
 several large-scale industrial projects, totally
 Government-owned, to manufacture cement, fertilizer, and
 chemicals, refine petroleum, mine phosphate, and roll steel.
 Petroleum extraction (8.3 million tons in 1980) has been a
 primary source of foreign exchange in recent years, although
 declining production and greater local consumption have begun
 to erode the positive contribution oil exports have made to
 Syria's balance of trade.
 Although primary and secondary school enrollment is at a lower
 level for females than males, equality of the sexes is a stated
 objective of the Syrian Government and one which statistics
 indicate it is pursuing with some success. Eighty-four percent
 of primary and 35 percent of secondary school age females are
 enrolled in schools. One hundred percent of primary school age
 males attended school and 60 percent of secondary school age
 males were enrolled in 1978. Between 1960 and 1978 the life
 expectancy for Syrians at birth rose from 50 to 65 years. The
 population growth rate for the decade of the 1970's was 3.4
 percent. The infant mortality rate in 1981 was 81 per 1,000.
 The incomes of less than a quarter of Syria's population are
 estimated to be below the absolute poverty level while
 statistics on food and nutrition indicate Syrians are able to
 meet all basic calorie requirements. The ratio of calorie
 supply available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements is 108 percent.
 Within the limits of available resources, Syria can be expected
 to continue efforts to improve economic conditions.
 
 
 1287
 U.S.OV:RScAS -LOANS AND  ATS- W L!-TICNS A'J2 LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 ( J.S.FISCAL YERS -  :LLICS OP ' LLAS
 COUNTRY: SYRIA
 19.10    1931     1922
 Io.CUN. ASSLST.-TOT4L...         1.1      1.9      0.0
 LaANS ..............        0.0      1.3      0.0
 GANTS ..........           1.1      1.9      0.0
 A.AI0  .................        90      0.0      0.0
 LOAN& ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      3.0      0.0
 (SSC.SU'P.ASS!ST.)...         0.3      M.0     0.0
 i.FCDO  FJR.  AC  .......       1.1      1.9      0.0
 LOANS ......'.........       0.      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  .............       1.1      1.9      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL,.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 AEPAY. .N $-LO;NS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         a.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Z-TOTAL ......           1.1      1.9      0.0
 VOL.RELZI- A& FCY ...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.3THER M CON. ASSIST...       11.0      3.0      0.0
 LOANS$,.............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PACt COPS .....           0.3      0.0      0.0
 NAROTIC......,           O.       0.0      0.0
 OTmER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 I.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.3      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRNTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.1      0.0      0.0
 e.GREOIT SAL$S-FMS  ...       0.0      1.0      0.0
 ,INTL  wL.e.TRN! ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-XLcSS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 I.OTdER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ILI.TOTAL !(ON. 6 M:L...         1.1      1.9      0.0
 LOAN4 ...............    .. 0.3      l.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............      .. 1.1      1.9      0.0
 UTHER US LOANS ...........       3.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-Ii CANK LOANS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ......... ...      . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 A5SISTAN t FRUM INTENATIONAL AGENCIES
 190U     1961     1932     1946-82
 TOTAL ........   21.6     15.9     23.5    590.1
 LdO           1.0     15.6     22.0    473.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOA                0.0      0.0      0.0     43.6
 1O                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD3                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               5.6      0.5      0.0     44.2
 OTHER-UN           0.3      0.0      1.5      8.2
 EEC               15.7      0.0      0.0     15.7
 
 
 1288
