 SYRIA
 Despite the existence of some institutions of democratic government, the political
 system places virtually absolute authority in the hands of the President, Hafiz Al-
 Asad. Key decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, internal politics, and
 the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from his ministers, high-
 ranking members of the ruling Ba'th Party, and a relatively small circle of security
 advisers. Although the Parliament is elected every 4 years, the Ba'th Party is en-
 sured a majority. The Parliament does not initiate laws, but only passes judgment
 on and sometimes modifies those proposed by the executive branch. The judiciary
 is constitutionally independent, but this is not the case in the exceptional (state of
 emergency) security courts, which are subject to political influence. The regular
 courts display independence, although political connections and bribery can influ-
 ence verdicts. In general, all three branches of government are influenced to varying
 degrees by leaders of the Ba'th Party, whose primacy in state institutions is man-
 dated by the Constitution.
 The powerful role of the security services in government, which extends beyond
 strictly security matters, stems in part from the state of emergency that has been
 in place almost continuously since 1963. The Government justifies martial law be-
 cause of the state of war with Israel and past threats from terrorist groups. Syrian
 Military Intelligence and Air Force Intelligence are military agencies, while General
 Security, State Security, and Political Security come under the purview of the Min-
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1800
 istry of Interior. The branches of the security services operate independently of each
 other and outside the legal system. Their members often ignore the rights of sus-
 pects and detainees and commit serious human rights abuses.
 - The economy is-based, on commerce, agriculture, oil production, and government
 services. There is a generally inefficient public sector, a private sector, and a mixed
 public/private sector. A complex bureaucracy, overarching security concerns, en-
 demic corruption, currency restrictions, lack of modern financial services and com-
 munications, and a weak legal system hamper economic growth. The Government
 has sought to promote the private sector through investment incentives, exchange
 rate consolidation, and deregulation, especially with regard to financial transactions
 governing imports and exports. While Syria posted a gross domestic product (GDP)
 growth of 3.6 percent in 1996, it posted a negative real growth rate of 4.4 percent
 in 1997 due to a slowdown in agricultural output and reduced revenues from oil ex-
 ports. The high population growth rate -of 3.3 percent further eroded economic per-
 ormance for 1997. Real annual-per capita GDP was approximately $837, down from
 $952 in 1996. However, the Government has been very successful in controlling the
 money supply, lowering inflation to about 2 percent in 1997. Wage increases in the
 public sector have not kept pace with cost of living increases. Salaries were last
 raised in 1994 and average only about $100 per month. Consequently, the gap be-
 tween rich and poor continues to widen, with many public sector workers relying
 on second jobs to make ends meet.
 The human rights situation remained poor, and the Government continues to re-
 strict or deny fundamental rights, although there was marginal improvement in a
 few areas. Despite parliamentary elections on November 30 and December 1, the
 Ba'th Party continues to dominate the political system, as provided for by the Con-
 stitution, and citizens do not have the right to change their government. The Gov-
 ernment uses-its vast powers so effectively that there is no organized political oppo-
 sition and there have been very few antiregime manifestations. Serious abuses in-
 clude the widespread use of torture in detention; poor prison conditions; arbitrary
 arrest and prolonged detention without trial; fundamentally unfair trials in the se-
 curity courts; an inefficient judiciary that suffers from corruption and, at times, po-
 litical influence; infringement on citizens' privacy rights; denial of freedom of assem-
 bly and association; some limits on freedom of religion; limits on freedom of move-
 ment; and, despite a slight loosening of censorship restrictions, the denial of the
 freedoms of speech and of the press. Societal discrimination and violence against
 women are problems. The Government discriminates against the stateless Kurdish
 minority and suppresses worker rights. In the first significant releases of political
 prisoners since 1995, the Government in March released 121 Lebanese prisoners
 and, in May and June, up to 325 others, most of whom are believed to be Syrian
 citizens.-                             ,
 RESPECT FORHUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity-of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 Three policemen reportedly were convicted in May and sentenced to 10 years at
 hard labor by the Aleppo Criminal Court for the torture and killing of a 50-year-
 old man accused of-heroin dealing, marking the first time since 1994 that members
 of the security forces were held accountable for their actions (see Section 1.d.).
 There were unconfirmed reports of deaths in detention, and such deaths have oc-
 curred in the past. Previous deaths in detention have not been investigated by the
 Government, and the number and identities of prisoners who died in prisons since
 the 1980's remains unknown.
 In July Lebanon's military prosecutor charged 18 members of the Lebanese
 Forces, an outlawed rightwing Christian militia, with carrying out the December 31,
 1996 bombing of a bus in Damascus, which killed at least 20 persons and wounded
 dozens of others. Eleven of the 18 persons charged were in custody.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. Despite inquiries by international human rights organizations and for-
 eign governments, the Government offered little new information on the welfare and
 whereabouts of persons who have been held incommunicado for years or about
 whom no more is known other than the approximate date of their detention, includ-
 ing Palestinians and Jordanian and Lebanese citizens reportedly abducted from
 Lebanon during and after Lebanon's civil war (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the existence of constitutional provisions and several Penal Code-penalties
 for abusers, there was credible evidence that security forces continued to use tor-
 
 
 1801
 
 ture. Former prisoners and detainees report that torture methods include electrical
 shocks; pulling out fingernails; the forced insertion of objects into the rectum; beat-
 ings, sometimes while the victim is suspended from the ceiling; hyperextension of
 the spine; and the use of a chair that bends backwards to asphyxiate the victim or
 fracture the spine. Although torture may occur in prisons, torture is most likely
 while detainees are being held at one of the many detention centers run by the var-
 ious security services throughout the country, and particularly while the authorities
 are trying to extract a confession or information about an alleged crime or alleged
 accomplices.
 The Government continues to deny the use of torture, and claims that it-would
 prosecute anyone believed guilty of using excessive force or physical abuse. Past vic-
 tims of torture have identified the officials who beat them, up to the level of briga-
 dier general. If allegations of excessive force or physical abuse are to be made in
 court, the plaintiff is required to initiate his own civil suit against the alleged
 abuser.
 Prison conditions vary and generally are poor and do not meet minimum inter-
 national standards for health and sanitation. Facilities for political or national secu-
 rity prisoners are generally worse than those that house common criminals. The
 prison in Palmyra, where many political and national security prisoners have been
 kept, is widely considered to have the worst conditions. At some prisons, authorities
 allow visitation rights, but in other cases security officials demand bribes from fam-
 ily members who wish to visit incarcerated relatives. Overcrowding and the denial
 of sufficient nourishment occurs at several prisons. Some former detainees have re-
 ported that the Government prohibits reading materials, even the Koran, for politi-
 cal prisoners.
 The Government does not permit independent monitoring of prison or detention
 center conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Emergency Law, which authorizes the Government to conduct preventive
 arrests, overrides Penal Code provisions against arbitrary arrest and detention, in-
 cluding the need to obtain warrants. Officials contend that the Emergency Law is
 applied only in narrowly defined cases. Nonetheless, in cases involving political or
 national security offenses, arrests generally are carried out in secret, and suspects
 may be detained incommunicado for prolonged periods without charge or trialand
 are denied the right to a judicial determination for the pretrial detention. Some of
 these practices are prohibited by the state of emergency, but the authorities are not
 held to these strictures.
 The Government apparently continues to detain relatives of detainees or of fugi-
 tives in order to obtain confessions or the fugitive's surrender (see Section 1.f.).
 Defendants in civil and criminal trials have the right to bail hearings and the pos-
 sible release from detention on their own recognizance. There is no bail option for
 those accused of national security offenses. Unlike defendants in regular criminal
 and civil cases, security detainees do not have access to lawyers prior to or during
 questioning.
 Detainees have no legal redress for false arrest. Security forces often do not pro-
 vide detainees' families with information on their welfare or location while in deten-
 tion. Consequently, many people who have disappeared in ast years are believed
 to be in long-term detention without charge, or possibly to have died in detention.
 It appears that the number of such disappearances has declined in recent years, al-
 though this may be due to the Government's success in deterring opposition political
 activity rather than a loosening of criteria for detention. Many detainees brought
 to trial have been held incommunicado for years, and their trials often have been
 unfair (see Section I.e.).
 Pretrial detention may-be lengthy even in cases not involving political or national
 security offenses. The criminal justice system is backlogged. Many criminal suspects
 are held in pretrial detention for months and may have their trials extended for ad-
 ditional months. Lengthy pretrial detention and drawn-out court proceedings are
 caused by a shortage of available courts and the absence of legal provisions for a
 speedy trial or plea bargaining.
 There were two reports of large-scale politically motivated arrests in 1996 about
 which there was no new information: In March 1996, up to 100 political activists
 allegedly were arrested in Dayr Al-Zur, and in April 1996 up to 800 members of
 the Turkoman minority reportedly were detained without charge. Most of the
 Turkomen supposedly were released by July 1996, but some still may remain in de-
 tention.
 The last significant release of political detainees took place in late 1995 (see Sec-
 tion I.e.). Most of those arrested in a mass crackdown in 1980 have been released,
 but some apparently remain in prolonged detention without charge. Some Palestin-
 
 
 1802
 ians, Jordanians, and Lebanese apparently continue to be detained without charge
 by Syrian security services in both Lebanon and Syria, without any public account-
 ing by the Government. Amnesty International (AI) reported that "hundreds of Leb-
 anese,- Palestinians, and Jordanians have been arbitrarily arrested, some over 2 dec-
 ades ago, and remain in prolonged and often secret detention."
 The number of remaining political detainees is unknown. Estimates of detainees
 are difficult to confirm because the Government does not verify publicly the number
 of detentions without charge, the release-of detainees, or whether detainees are sub-
 sequently sentenced to prison (see Section l.e.).
 In October the Jordanian Government asked the Syrian Government to account
 for 429 named Jordanian nationals, 239 of whom Jordan claims have been missing
 since they entered Syria, and 190 of whom-Jordan claims are Syrian prisoners.
 Families of missing Jordanians allege that there are more than 700 Jordanians in
 Syrian detention. The press reported that government sources stated that the
 namesprovided by Jordan were being examined and that the Government would
 respond officially.'
 The Government has exiled citizens in the past, although the practice is prohib-
 ited by the Constitution. There were: no knowninstances of forced exile during the
 year. In June the  Government reportedly pardoned and allowed the return of a
 former army officer who left Syria for Iraq in 1966.
 -e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the two exceptional courts dealing with alleged security cases- are not
 independent-of executive branch control. The regular court system displays consider-
 able independence in civil cases, although political connections and bribery some-
 times influence verdicts.
 The judicial system is composed of the civil and criminal courts, military courts,
 the security courts, and the reli.'ous courts, which adjudicate matters of personal
 status such as divorce and inheritance. The Court of Cassation is the highest court
 of appeal. The Supreme Constitutional Court is empowered to rule only on the con-
 stitutionality of lawsand decrees. It does not-hear appeals.
 Civil and criminaLcourts are -organized under the Ministry of Justice. Defendants
 before these courts are entitled to the legal representation of their choice; the courts
 appoint lawyers for indigents. Defendants are presumed innocent; they are allowed
 to present evidence and to confront their accusers. Trials are public, except for those
 involving juveniles or sex offenses. Defendants may appeal their verdicts to a pro-
 vincial appeals court and ultimately to the Court of Cassation. Such appeals are dif-
 ficult because the courts do not provide verbatim transcripts of cases--only sum-
 maries prepared by the presiding judges. There are no juries.
 Military courts have the authority to try civilians as well as military personnel.
 The venue for a civilian defendant is decided by.a military prosecutor. There were
 continuing reports that the Government operates military field courts in locations
 outside established courtrooms. Such courts reportedly observe fewer of the formal
 procedures of regular military courts.
 The two security courts-are the Supreme State Security Court (SSSC), which tries
 political and national security cases, and the Economic Security Court (ESC), which
 tries cases involving financial crimes. Both courts operate under the state of emer-
 gency, not ordinary law, and do not observe constitutional provisions safeguarding
 defendants' rights.
 Charges against defendants in the SSSC are often vague. Many defendants ap-
 pear to be tried for exercising normal political rights, suchas free speech. For exam-
 ple, the Emergency Law authorizes the prosection of anyone "opposing the goals
 of the revolution" or "shaking the confidence of the masses in the aims of the revolu-
 tion," or trying to "change the economic or social structure  of the State." Nonethe-
 less, the Government contends that the SSSC tries only persons who have sought
 to use violence against the State.
 Under SSSC procedures, defendants are not present during the preliminary, or in-
 vestigative, phase of the trial, when eviden 'e is presented by the prosecutor. Trias
 usually are closed tothe public. Lawyers are not ensured access to their clients be-
 fore the trial and are excluded from the court during their cient's initial interroga-
 tion by the prosecutor. Lawyers submit written defense pleas, rather than oral pres-
 entations. The State's case often is based on confessions, but defendants have not
 been allowed to argue in court that the confessions were coerced. There is no known
 instance in which the court ordered a medical examination for a defendant who
 claimed.that he was tortured. The SSSC reportedly has acqultted some defendants,
 but the Government does not provide any statistics on the conviction rate. Defend-
 ants do not have the right to appeal verdicts, but sentences are reviewed by the
 Minister of Interior, who mnay ratify, nullify, or alter sentences. The President may
 also intervene in the review process.
 
 
 1803
 Accurate information on the number of cases heard by the SSSC is difficult to ob-
 tain, although in recent years hundreds of cases are believed to have passed through
 the court annually. Many reportedly involved charges relating to membership in
 various banned political roups, including the Party of Communist Action and the
 pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'th Party. Sentences as long as 15 years have been imposed.
 The Government permitted delegates from AI to attend a session of the SSSC in
 1997 (see Section 4).
 The Economic Security Court (ESC) tries persons for alleged violations of foreign-
 exchange laws and other economic crimes. Prosecution of economic crimes is not ap-
 plied uniformly, as some government officials or business people with close connec-
 tions to the Government likely have violated Syria's strict economic laws without
 FrOSecution. Like the SSSC, the ESC does not ensure defendants due process. De-
 endants may not have adequate access to lawyers to prepare their defenses, and
 the State's case is usually based on confessions. Verdicts likely are influenced by
 high-ranking government officials. Those convicted of the most serious economic
 crimes do not have the right of appeal, but those convicted of lesser crimes may ap-
 peal to the Court of Cassation.
 Major releases of political prisoners and detainees took place in late 1995. Origi-
 nally the Government claimed to have released some 1,650 political prisoners in
 1995, but local estimates now place the number released at between 2,200 and
 3,000. Many of those released apparently were nembers of the Muslim Brotherhood
 who had not been involved in acts of violence. The release also may have included
 some persons from banned Communist parties, pro-Iraqi Ba'athists, and Nasserites.
 Some former prisoners reported having to sign loyalty oaths or admissions of guilt
 as a condition of their release. Other prisoners released in November 1995 appar-
 ently were in poor health as a result of their incarceration; they had been incarcer-
 ated without charge or had been detained in prison beyond the expiration of their
 original prison sentences, in some cases for years.
 The Government has released virtually all of those arrested at the time President
 Asad took power in 1970. However, at least two persons arrested during that period
 remain in prison, even though the sentence of one of them expired in 1985. The sec-
 ond apparently never was tried.
 The Government denies that it holds political prisoners, arguing that, although
 the aims of some prisoners may be political, their activities, including subversion,
 were criminal. However, the Emergency Law and the Penal Code are so vague, and
 the Government's power so broad, that many persons were convicted and are in
 prison for the mere expression of political opposition to the Government. The cur-
 rent number of political prisoners is unknown.
 The Government released a number of political prisoners and detainees during
 the year. In March 121 Lebanese were freed. There are also unconfirmed reports
 that up to 325 other persons were released in May and June, most of whom were
 Syrians.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though laws provide for freedom from arbitrary interference, the Emergency Law
 authorizes the security services to enter homes and conduct searches with warrants
 if security matters, very broadly defined, are involved. The security services selec-
 tively monitor telephone conversations and facsimile transmissions. The Govern-
 ment opens mail destined for both citizens and foreign residents. It also prevents
 the delivery of human rights materials.
 The Government apparently has continued its practice of threatening or detaining
 the relatives of detainees or of fugitives in order to obtain confessions or the fugi-
 tive's surrender (see Section 1.d.). A 1997 case involved a Syrian Kurd who report-
 edly was detained for over a month, beaten, and tortured to extract information re-
 garding the whereabouts of his brother.
 The incidence of security checkpoints has diminished. There are fewer police
 checkpoints on roads and in populated areas. Generally, the security services set up
 checkpoints to search for smuggled goods, weapons, narcotics, and subversive lit-
 erature. The searches take place without warrants. The Government and the Ba'th
 Party have monitored and tried to restrict some citizens' visits to foreign embassies
 and cultural centers.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides citizens with the
 right to express opinions freely in speech and in writing, but the Government re-
 stricts these rights significantly in practice. The Government strictly controls dis-
 semination of information and permits no written or individual criticism of the
 President, the President's family, the Ba'th Party, the military, or the legitimacy of
 the regime. The Government also does not permit sectarian issues to be raised. De-
 
 
 1804
 
 tention and- beatings for individual expressions of opinion that violate these unwrit-
 ten rules occur frequently. The Emergency Law allows the Government. broad dis-
 -cretion in determining what constitutes illegal expression- It prohibits the publish-
 ing of "false information," which opposes "the goals of the revolution" (see Section
 I.e.). In the past, the Government has imprisoned journalists for failing to- observe
 press restrictions. In 1997 two journalists from a government newspaper allegedly
 were dismissed after publishing an article that was viewed as insulting to the
 Prophet Muhammad. State security services are known to threaten local journalists,
 including with removal of credentials, for articles printed outside Syria.  �
 The Ministry of Information and the Ministry of Culture and National Guidance
 censor the domestic and foreign press. They usually prevent publication or distribu-
 tion of any material deemed threatening or embarrassing to the security services
 or high levels of the Government. Censorship is usually stricter for materials in Ar-
 abic. Commonly censored subjects include: the Government's human rights record;
 Islamic fundamentalism;' allegations of official involvement in drug trafficking; as-
 pects of the Government's role in Lebanon;- graphic descriptions of sex; material un-
 favorable to the Arab cause in the Middle East conflict; and material that is offen-
 sive to any of the country's religious groups. In addition, -most journalists and writ-
 ers practice self-censorship to avoid provoking a negative government reaction.
 Recent trends- toward modest relaxation of censorship continued, The media dem-
 onstrated somewhat wider latitude in reporting on regional'developments, including
 the Middle East peace process. The media coverdd some peace process events factu-
 ally, but other events were reported selectively to buttress official views. The gov-
 ernment-controlled press continued to publish articles critical of issues such as offi-
 cial corruption and governmental inefficiency, but less aggressively than in previous
 years.
 The Government- or the Ba'th Party owns and operates the radio and television
 companies and the newspaper publishing houses. There are no privately owned
 newspapers, although foreign-owned, foreign-published newspapers circulate rel-
 atively freely. The Ministry of Information scripts the radio and television news pro-
 grams to ensure adherence to the government line. The. Government does not inter-
 fere with broadcasts from abroad. In late 1994, the Government announced that it
 would confiscate satellite receiving dishes and replace them with a government-con-
 trolled cable television digtribution system. The confiscation program did not take
 place. Since then, satellite dishes have proliferated throughout- all regions and
 among neighborhoods of all social and economic categories. Internet access and ac-
 cess to e-mail is limited.
 -The Ministry of Culture and National Guidance censors fiction and nonfiction
 works, including films. It also determines which films may not be shown at the cul-
 tural centers operated by foreign embassies.
 The Government restricts academic freedom. Public school teachers are not per-
 mitted to express ideas contrary to government policy, although authorities allow
 somewhat greater freedom of expression at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly does not
 exist. Citizens may not hold meetings unless they obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior. Most public demonstrations are organized by the Government or
 Ba'th Party. The"Government applies the restrictions on public assembly in Pal-
 estinian refugee camps, where controlled demonstrations have been allowed.
 1 n 1997 a group of as many as 160 students reportedly assembled in Damascus
 to protest a new educational'policy. They were dispersed peacefully by security offi-
 cers, but some allegedly attempted to reassemble later in the day. There were
 unconfirmed reports that some of the students were detained for several days and
 beaten prior to their release.
 In December the Government organized a student march in protest against U.S.
 and UK air strikes against Iraq. The march turned violent resulting in significant
 damage to diplomatic property.
 The Government restricts freedom of association. Private associations must be
 registered with the Government in order to be considered legal. Some groups have
 not been able to register, presumably because the Government views them as politi-
 cal, even though the groups presented themselves as cultural or professional asso-
 ciations. Unregistered groups may not hold meetings, and the authorities do not
 allow the establishment of independent political parties. The Government usually
 grants registration to groups not engaged in political or other activities deemed sen-
 sitive.
 In 1980 the Government dissolved, and then reconstituted under its control, the
 executive boards of professional associations after some members staged a national
 strike and advocated an end to the state of emergency. The associations have not
 
 
 1805
 
 been independent since that time and generally are led by members of the Ba'th
 Party, although non-party members may serve on their executive boards.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. The only advantage given to
 a particular religion by the Constitution is that which requires the President to be
 a Muslim. All religions and sects must register with the Government, which mon-
 itors fund raising and requires permits for all meetings by religious groups, except
 for worship. Although no law prohibits non-Muslims from proselytizing, the Govern-
 ment discourages such activity. The few remaining Jews generally are barred from
 government employment and do not have military service obligations. Jews are the
 only minority group whose passports and identity cards note their religion. There
 is mandatory religious instruction in schools, with government-approved teachers
 and curricula. Religion courses are divided into separate classes for Muslim and
 Christian students. Jews have a separate primary school for Jews only, which in-
 cludes religious instruction (see Section 5).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government restricts travel near the Golan Heights. Travel to
 Israel is illegal. Citizens must have government permission to travel abroad. Some
 have been denied such permission on political grounds, although government offi-
 cials deny that this practice occurs. The authorities may prosecute any person found
 attempting to emigrate or travel abroad without official permission, or who is sus-
 pected of having visited Israel. There is no evidence that the Government per-
 secuted upon their return those who applied for, but were denied, asylum abroad.
 Women over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the permission of
 male relatives. However, a husband may file a request with the Ministry of Interior
 to prohibit his wife's departure from the country. The Government's use of police
 checkpoints has been reduced (see Section 1.f.).
 As of June 30, 365,805 Palestinian refugees were registered with the United Na-
 tions Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) in the country. Palestinian refugees some-
 times encounter difficulties in obtaining travel documents and reentering Syria after
 travel abroad. The Government restricts entry by Palestinians who are not resident
 in Syria. The Government does not allow the Palestinian residents of Gaza to visit
 Syria.
 There are no laws with provisions for dealing with refugees/asylees in accordance
 with the-1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Proto-
 col. The Government cooperates on a case-by-case basis with the office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organi-
 zations in assisting refugees. The Government provides first asylum but is selective
 about extending protection to refuges; approximately 3,000 persons sought asylum
 through the UNHCR during the first 8 months of 1998. Although the Government
 denied any forced repatriation of those who may have had a valid claim to refugee
 status, it apparently forcibly repatriated Iraqi, Somali, and Libyan refugees. In a
 case widely reported in the press, 6 Algerians were forcibly repatriated in April and
 another 16 in June. As of August 31, there were an estimated 37,000 non-Palestin-
 ian refugees in Syria, of whom about 3,917 were receiving assistance from the
 UNHCR, including 1,359 refugees of Iraqi origin at the El Hol camp and other loca-
 tions.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Although citizens ostensibly vote for the President and Members of Parliament,
 they do not have the right to change their government. The President has run for
 election unopposed since taking power in 1970. Political opposition to his rule is not
 tolerated. The President and his senior aides, particularly those in the military and
 security services, ultimately make all basic decisions on political and economic life,
 with no element of public accountability.
 Moreover, the Constitution mandates that the Ba'th Party is the ruling party and
 is ensured a majority in all government and popular associations, such as workers'
 and women's groups. Six smaller political parties also are permitted and, along with
 the Ba'th Party, make up the National Progressive Front (NPF), a grouping of par-
 ties that represents the sole framework of legal political participation for citizens.
 While created ostensibly to give the appearance of a multiparty system, the NPF
 is dominated by the Ba'th Party and does not change the essentially one-party char-
 acter of the political system. Non-Ba'th Party members of the NPF exist as political
 parties largely in name only and hew closely to Ba'th Party and government poli-
 cies.
 The Ba'th Party dominates the Parliament, which is known as the People's Coun-
 cil. Although parliamentarians may criticize policies and modify draft laws, the ex-
 
 
 1806
 ecutive branch retains ultimate control over the legislative process. Since 1990 the
 Government has allowed independent non-NPF candidates to run for a limited num-
 ber of seats in the 250-member People's Council. The current number of non-NPF
 deputies is 83, ensuring a permanent absolute majority for the Ba'th Party-domi-
 nated NPF.
 Elections for the 250 seats in the People's Council took place on November 30 and
 December 1.
 Persons who have been convicted by the State Security Court may be deprived
 of their political rights after they are released from prison. Such restrictions include
 a prohibition against engaging in political activity, the denial of a passport, and a
 bar on accepting a government job and some other forms of employment. The dura-
 tion of such restrictions may last from 10 years to the remainder of the former pris-
 oner's life. The Government contends that this practice is mandated by the Penal
 Code and has been in effect since 1949.
 Women and minorities, with the exception of the Jewish population and stateless.
 Kurds (see Section 5), participate in the political system without restriction. None-
 theless, women are underrepresented in government. There are 2 female cabinet
 ministers and 26 female Members of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not allow the existence of local human rights groups. One
 or two human rights groups once operated legally but subsequently were banned by
 the Government.
 Amnesty international (AI) visited Syria for 2 weeks in 1997, the second major
 visit by an international human rights organization (after a Human Rights Watch
 visit in 1995). Al delegates met with the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Interior, Jus-
 tice, Information, and Culture; judges from the SSSC as well as the Court's prosecu-
 tor and several lawyers; and the secretaries general of the Arab Writers Union and
 Arab Inter-Parliamentary Union. These were the first such meetings with an inter-
 national human rights organization.
 AI credited Syria with an overall improvement in human rights over the last few
 years but called on the Government to review the cases of more than 500 political
 prisoners and to release those detained solely on the basis of their political beliefs.
 As a matter of policy, the Government in its exchanges with international groups
 denies that it commits human rights abuses. It has not permitted representatives
 of international organizations to visit prisons. The Government states that it now
 responds in writing to all inquires from nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) re-
 garding human rights issues, including the cases of individual detainees and pris-
 oners, through an interagency governmental committee established expressly for
 that purpose. Human Rights Watch reported in 1997 that the Government had not
 responded to its request to account publicly for the possibly thousands of citizens
 who were executed at Tadmur prison in the 1980's. The Government usually re-
 sponds to queries from human rights organizations and foreign embassies on specific
 cases by saying that the prisoner in question has violated national security laws.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for all citizens.
 In practice, membership in the Ba'th Party or close familial relations with a promi-
 nent party member or government official can be important for economic, social, or
 educational advancement. Party or government connections can pave the way for en-
 trance into better elementary and secondary schools, access to lucrative employ-
 ment, and greater power within the Government, the military, and the security
 services. Certain prominent positions, such as that of provincial governor, are re-
 served solely for Ba'th Party members. Apart from some discrimination against
 Kurds, there are no apparent patterns- of systematic government discrimination
 based on race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status. However, there are
 varying degrees of societal discrimination in each of these areas.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics for
 domestic violence or sexual assault. This is because the vast majority of cases go
 unreported, and victims generally are reluctant to'seek assistance from non-family
 members. There are no laws against spousal rape. One preliminary academic study
 suggested that domestic violence is the largest single reason for divorces, and that
 such abuse is more prevalent among the less-educated. It appears to occur more in
 rural than in urban areas. Battered women have the legal right to seek redress in
 court, but few do so because of the social stigma attached to such action. The Syrian
 Women's Federation offers services to battered wives to remedy individual family
 
 
 1807
 roblems. The Syrian Family Planning Association also seeks to deal with this prob-
 em. Some private groups, including the Family Planning Association, have orga-
 nized seminars on violence against women, which were reported by the government
 press. There are no specifically designated shelters or safehavens for battered
 women seeking to flee their husbands. The Syrian Women's Union, in conjunction
 with the Family Planning Association and Syrian Lawyer's Association, organized
 a conference in 1997 that brought together female writers, professors, lawyers, and
 former diplomats to discuss strategies for advancing women's rights.
 The Constitution provides for equality between men and women and equal pay
 for equal work. Moreover, the Government has sought to overcome traditional dis-
 criminatory attitudes toward women, and encourages women's education. However,
 the Parliament has not yet changed personal status retirement and social security
 laws that discriminate against women. In addition, some secular laws discriminate
 against women. For example, under criminal law punishment for adultery and dig-
 nity crimes for a woman is twice that as for the same crime committed by a man.
 For Muslims, personal status law on divorce is based on Shari'a or Islamic law,
 and discriminates against women. For example, husbands may claim adultery as
 grounds for divorce, but wives face more difficulty in presenting the same argument.
 If a woman requests a divorce from her husband, she may not be entitled to child
 support in some instances. In addition, under the law, a woman loses the right to
 custody of boys at the age of 9 years and girls at the age of 12 years.
 Inheritance for Muslims is based on Shari'a. Accordingly, women usually are
 granted half of the inheritance share of male heirs. However, Shari'a mandates that
 male heirs provide financial support to the female relatives who inherit less. For
 example, a brother who inherits an unmarried sister's share from their parents' es-
 tate is obligated to provide for the sister's well-being. If the brother fails to do so,
 she has the right to sue.
 Christians and other sects are subject to their respective religious laws on mar-
 riage, divorce, and inheritance.
 Polygyny is legal but is practiced only by a small minority of Muslim men. Under
 Shari'a, a usband has the right to take up to four wives without asking the consent
 of his other wife or wives, but is supposed to treat them equally and have the means
 to support all of them. The first wife and later wives have the right to seek a divorce
 if the husband takes an additional wife.
 A husband can request that his wife's travel abroad be prohibited (see Section
 2.d.).
 Women participate actively in public life and are represented in most professions,
 as well as the military. Women are not impeded from owning or managing land or
 other real property. Women constitute approximately 6 percent of judges, 10 percent
 of lawyers, 57 percent of teachers below university level, and 20 percent of univer-
 sity professors.
 Children.-There is no legal discrimination between boys and girls in school or
 in health care. Education is compulsory for all children, male or female, between
 the ages of 6 and 12. According to the Syrian Women's Union, about 46 percent of
 the total number of students through the secondary level are female.
 Nevertheless, societal pressure for early marriage and childbearing interfere with
 girls' educational progress, particularly in rural areas, where dropout rates for fe-
 male students remain high.
 The law stresses the need to protect children, and the Government has organized
 seminars on the subject of child welfare. Although there are cases of child abuse,
 there is no societal pattern of abuse against children. The law provides for severe
 penalties for those found guilty of the most serious abuses against children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against the disabled
 and seeks to integrate them into the public sector work force. However, implementa-
 tion is spotty. Regulations reserving 2 percent of government and public sector jobs
 for the disabled are not implemented rigorously. The disabled do not have recourse
 to the courts regarding discrimination. There are no laws that mandate access to
 public buildings for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Although there is a significant amount of religious toler-
 ance, religion or ethnic affiliation can be a contributing factor in determining career
 opportunities. For example, members of the President's Alawi sect hold a predomi-
 nant position in the security services and military, well out of proportion to their
 percentage of the population. Nevertheless, government policy officially disavows
 sectarianism.
 There is little evidence of societal discrimination or violence against religious mi-
 norities, including Jews. Government-run schools offer separate religious instruction
 for Christians and Muslims. Jews have a separate primary school, which offers reli-
 gious instruction on Judaism, in addition to traditional subjects. Although Arabic
 
 
 1808
 is the official language in public schools, the Government allows the teaching of Ar-
 menian, Hebrew, and Chadean in some schools on the basis that these are "litur-
 gical languages." Technically, all schools are government-run and nonsectarian, al-
 though some schools are run in practice by Christian and Jewish minorities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government generally permits national
 and ethnic minorities to conduct traditional, religious, and cultural activities. How-
 ever, the Government's attitude toward the Kurdish minority is a significant excep-
 tion to this policy. Although the Government contends that there is no discrimina-
 tion against the Kurdish population, it has placed limits on the use and teaching
 of the Kurdish language, Kurdish cultural expression, and, at times, the celebration
 of Kurdish festivals. Some members of the Kurdish community have been tried by
 the Supreme State Security Court for expressing support for greater Kurdish auton-
 omy or independence. Although the Asad Government stopped the practice of strip-
 ping Kurds in Syria of their Syrian nationality (some 120,000 lost Syrian nationality
 under this program in the 1960's), it never restored this nationality. As a result,
 those who had their nationality taken away, and their children, have been unable
 to obtain Syrian nationality and passports, or even identification cards and birth
 certificates. Without Syrian nationality, these stateless Kurds, who according to
 UNHCR estimates number about 200,000 people, are unable to own land, cannot
 be employed by the Government, and have no right to vote. They also encounter dif-
 ficulties in enrolling their children in school. Stateless Kurdish men may not marry
 Syrian citizens legally.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the Constitution provides for this right,
 workers are not free to establish unions independent of the Government. All unions
 must belong to the General Federation of Trade Unions (GFTU), which is dominated
 by the Bath Party and is actually a part of the State's bureaucratic structure. The
 GFTU is an information channel between political decisionmakers and workers. The
 GFTU transmits instructions downward to the unions and workers but also conveys
 information to decisionmakers about worker conditions and needs. The GFTU pro-
 vides the Government with opinions on legislation, organizes workers, and formu-
 lates rules for various member unions. The GFTU president is a senior member of
 the Ba'th Party. He and his deputy may attend cabinet meetings on economic af-
 fairs. The GFTU controls nearly all aspects of union activity.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, except in the agricultural sector. Nevertheless,
 workers are inhibited from striking because of previous government crackdowns on
 strikers. In 1980 the security forces arrested many union and professional associa-
 tion officials who planned a national strike. Some of those remain in detention or
 have been tried by the State Security Court (see Section 2.b.).
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 In 1992 Syria's eligibility for tariff preferences under the U.S. Generalized System
 of Preferences was suspended because the Government failed to take steps to afford
 internationally recognized worker rights to Syrian workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively does not exist in any meaningful sense. Government representa-
 tives are part of the bargaining process in the public sector. In state-owned compa-
 nies, union representatives negotiate hours, wages, and conditions of employment
 with representatives of the employers and the supervising ministry. Workers serve
 on the boards of directors of public enterprises.
 The law provides for collective bargaining in the private sector, but any such
 agreement between labor and management must be ratified by the Minister of
 Labor and Social Affairs, who has effective veto power. The Committee of Experts
 of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has long noted the Government's re-
 fusal to abolish the Minister's power over collective contracts.
 Unions have the right to litigate disputes over work contracts and other workers'
 interests with employers and may ask for binding arbitration. In practice, labor and
 management representatives settle most disputes without resort to legal remedies
 or arbitration. Management has the right to request arbitration, but this is seldom
 exercised. Arbitration usually occurs when a worker initiates a dispute over wages
 or severance pay.
 Since the unions are part of the Government's bureaucratic structure, they are
 protected by law from antiunion discrimination. There were no reports of antiunion
 discrimination.
 There are no unions in the seven free trade zones. Firms in the zones are exempt
 from the laws and regulations governing hiring and firing, although they must ob-
 serve some provisions on health, safety, hours, and sick and annual leave.
 
 
 1809
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law prohibiting forced
 or compulsory labor, including that performed by children. There were no reports
 of forced labor involving children, or foreign or domestic workers. Forced labor has
 been imposed as a punishment for some convicts.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 15 in the public sector and 12 in the private sector.
 In all cases, parental permission is required for children under the age of 16. The
 law prohibits children from working at night. However, all these laws apply only
 to children who work for a salary. Those who work in family businesses who are
 not technically paid a salary-a common phenomenon--do not fall under the law.
 The Government claims that the expansion of the private sector has led to more
 young children working. The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws but does not have enough inspectors to ensure compliance
 with the laws. The Government does not prohibit forced and bonded labor by chil-
 dren, but there were no reports of such practices (see Section 6.c.). Education is
 compulsory for all children, male or female, between the ages of 6 and 12.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minister of Labor and Social Affairs is re-
 sponsible for enforcing minimum wage levels in the public and private sectors. The
 minimum wage is $44 (2,014 Syrian pounds) per month in the public sector, plus
 other compensation (e.g., meals, uniforms, and transportation). The private sector
 minimum wage is $42 -(1,940 Syrian pounds) per month in urban areas and $39
 (1,790 Syrian pounds) in the countryside. A committee of labor, management, and
 government representatives submits recommended changes in the minimum wage
 to the Minister. The minimum wage has not been adjusted since 1994 and does not
 provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. As a result, many work-
 ers take additional jobs or are supported by their extended families.
 The statutory workweek is 6 days of 6 hours each, but in some cases a 9-hour
 workday is permitted. The laws mandate one 24-hour rest day per week. Rules and
 regulations severely limit the ability of an employer to dismiss employees without
 cause. Even if a person is absent from work without notice for a long period, the
 employer must follow a lengthy procedure of trying to find the person and notify
 him, including through newspaper notices, before he is able to take any action
 against the employee. Dismissed employees have the right to appeal before a com-
 mittee of representatives from the union, management, the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Affairs, and the appropriate municipality. Such committees usually find in
 favor of the employee. The law does not protect temporary workers who are not sub-
 ject to regulations on minimum wages. Small private firms and businesses employ
 such workers to avoid the costs associated with hiring permanent employees.
 The law mandates safety in all sectors, and managers are expected to implement
 them fully. In practice, there is little enforcement without worker complaints, which
 occur infrequently despite government efforts to post notices on safety rights and
 regulations. Large companies, such as oil field contractors, also employ safety engi-
 neers.
 The ILO has noted that a provision in the Labor Code allowing employers to keep
 workers at the workplace for as many as 11 hours a day might lead to abuse. How-
 ever, there have been no reports of such abuses. Officials from the Ministries of
 Health and Labor inspect work sites for compliance with health and safety stand-
 ards. Such inspections appear to be haphazard, apart from those conducted in hotels
 and other facilities that cater to foreigners. Rural enforcement of labor laws is also
 more lax than that in urban areas, where inspectors are concentrated. Workers may
 lodge complaints about health and safety conditions with special committees estab-
 lished to adjudicate such cases. Workers have the right to remove themselves from
 hazardous conditions without risking loss of employment.
