 SYRIA
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime which, although it maintains some of
 the trappings of democratic government places virtual absolute authority in the
 hands of President Hafiz Al-Asad. Key decisions regarding foreign policy, national
 security, and the economy are made by President Asad with counsel from his min-
 isters and principal advisers. Although the Parliament is elected every 4 years, the
 Ba'th Party is guaranteed a majority. The Parliament generally does not initiate
 laws but only passes judgment on those proposed by the executive. All three
 branches of government are guided by the views of the Bath Party, whose primacy
 in state institutions is mandated by the Constitution.
 Except for a hiatus in 1973-74, Syria has been under a state of emergency since
 1963. The Government has justified martial law by the state of war with Israel and
 continuing threats posed by terrorist groups (Islamic extremist, Iraqi, and Leba-
 nese). However, the regime's suppression of all opposition has been so effective that
 antiregime manifestations have been very limitedin recent years.
 The Government maintains an extensive security apparatus. The state of emer-
 gency allows this apparatus wide latitude in dealing with suspects, detainees, and
 prisoners. The several main branches of the security services operate independently
 of each other and outside of the legal system. Each continues to be responsible for
 severe human rights violations.
 Syria's mixed economy, based on commerce and agriculture, is dominated by an
 inefficient public sector, but includes growing private and mixed sectors. Oil is a
 major export. The regime is trying to promote growth in the private sector through
 statutory changes providing incentives, but excessive bureaucracy and endemic cor-
 ruption discourage domestic and foreign investment. Most agricultural land is pri-
 vately owned. In the 1990's, real economic growth has been about 7 percent per
 year. Annual per capita gross domestic product is about $900.
 Although the Government released some political prisoners, responded to some
 international inquiries regarding detainees and prisoners, loosened exit permit issu-
 ance to Syrian Jews, and brougt hundreds of other cases to trial, thereby ending
 long periods of indefinite detention there was no basic change in the human rights
 situation in 1993. Basic human rights remain tightly restricted. It is widely accept-
 ed that several thousand persons remain imprisoned without trial. The major
 human rights problems include arbitrary arrest and detention, systematic torture,
 lack of a fair trial in security cases, and the denial of the right of citizens to change
 their government as well as the freedoms of speech, press, association, and certain
 worker rights. Syrian government resistance to human rights monitoring makes it
 difficult to know precisely the details and numbers of such abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of executions
 for political beliefs in 1993 and no confirmed instances of the Government's
 extrajudicial killing of detainees. However, given past practice and the secrecy that
 still surround those held at various security facilities, the regime may still engage
 in summary executions at such facilities.
 There were credible reports of at least three people dying while in detention. The
 exact cause of death was not determined, and families were not allowed to view the
 remains. Human rights groups have received reports questioning whether the death
 in custody of long-time political prisoner and former President galah Jadid was due
 to natural causes, as claimed by the Government, or whether Jadid was killed.
 Shakar Tabban, a lawyer, reportedly died in December 1992 due to torture and ill-
 treatment.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances in 1993, but the wel-
 fare and whereabouts of hundreds of persons held incommunicado from previous
 years remain largely unknown (see Section I.d.). The Government has provided in-
 formation on a small number of those held incommunicado.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and the Penal Code provides severe pe-
 alties for government officials who engage in it, the practice of torture and atuse
 remains widespread and systematic in criminal, political, and security-related cases.
 Released detainees or prisoners have credibly reported that the Government main-
 tains facilities specially equipped to inflict physical harm on those being held. De-
 tainees are subjected to both physical and psychological abuse. Torture is used to
 extract information from suspects; in some cases relatives or acquaintances of the
 suspect have been tortured in order to obtain information about the suspect. Among
 
 
 1285
 the forms of physical abuse practiced by government-employed torturers are applica-
 tion of electrical shocks on sensitive parts of the body and beatings (sometimes
 while the victim is bent over and suspended from the ceiling in a tire or a chair).
 There are no known instances of the Government investigating or punishing those
 alleged to have committed torture or abuse. (See also Lebanon report.)
 Fifteen members of the Committee for the Defense of Democratic Freedoms and
 Human Rights in Syria (CDF) reportedly went on a 3-week hunger strike in August
 to prtest their imprisonment and alleged torture.
 lPson conditions continue to be poor, particularly in older, more overcrowded fa-
 cilities; security prisons are markedly worse than civilian prisons. Medical treat-
 ment and facilities are inadequate in both types, and injuries and chronic ailments
 from torture, overcrowding, and grossly inadequate sanitation and health facilities
 are either not treated or are treated unsatisfactorily.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-While the Civil Law Code generally pro-
 vides for due process, these provisions do not apply to security and political offenses,
 which are treated under the State of Emergency Law. Under provisions of the state
 of emergency, the Government continues to suspend normal safeguards and engage
 in what the law calls "preventive arrest." Persons are arrested secretly without war-
 rant, held indefinitely without charge or trial, and denied the right to a judicial de-
 termination of the basis for pretrial detention. Detainees have no redress for false
 arrest and usually cannot be contacted by family or friends, who most often do not
 know where the detainee is being held. Some have been held without trial for more
 than 20 years. Under the state of emergency, those suspected of economic-related
 crimes may also be detained without trial or access to counsel or to relatives. Many
 people who have disappeared are believed to be held in the security prisons. Fre-
 quently, the detained person is eventually released without being charged.
 Even with the reported release of more than 4,000 detainees and prisoners (in-
 cluding security detainees and some 60 women detainees) in 1991 and 1992, it is
 still believed that there ar thousands of political detainees. The Syrian Govern-
 ment has not responded to requests by the U.S. Government and human rights or-
 gnizations for a list of names of those amnestied or otherwise released. Members
 of Ba'thist organizations and the banned Party for Communist Action (PCA) were
 reportedly among those released in recent years.
 The Government released at least eight political prisoners in June-July 1993. In
 addition, of the six women taken into custody in late 1992 and early-to-mid 1993,
 three were released in late 1993. According to the Government, the other three were
 released earlier, althouqh human rigbts  ups contend that these three still remain
 in detention. Releases in 1993 included alleged members of the Kurdish Workers
 Party as well as members of the Party for Communist Action. One alleged PCA
 member had been detained previously for 5 years, released, and rearrested in June.
 There were also unconfirmed reports that the Government released in November at
 least 20 members of the banned Muslim Brotherhood after long periods of detention.
 It is possible that some of those released had been tried and found guilty by the
 State Security Court and then released because they had already served the periods
 of incarceration imposed in their sentences.
 The majority of aetainees still held are reputed members of the Muslim Brother-
 hood. Other detainees are connected with factions of the Ba'th Party, the Iraqi wing
 of the Party, or are allegedly associated with the following banned groups: the Party
 for Communist Action, the Syrian Communist Party Political Bureau, the Arab So-
 cialist Union Party in Syria, and the Nasserist Democratic Popular Organization.
 A group known as the Islamic Unification Movement claimed that 120 of its mem-
 bers were being detained. The Government has used the possession of material from
 banned political organizations as a frequent pretext for detention.
 The Government is known to have detained the relatives of suspects in both
 criminal and security cases as a means of compelling individuals being sought by
 authorities to surrender.
 Although the Government has exiled persons in the past, there have been no re-
 ported instances of exile for several years.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system comprises separate civil courts;
 penal and criminal courts, whose jurisdiction includes economic crimes; and reli-
 gious, military, security, and constitutional courts. There are major differences be-
 tween the types of Syrian courts in terms of respect for human rights.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under the jurisdiction of
 the military-controlled State Security Court, established in 1968. Defendants in this
 Court have few safeguards of their rights; court sessions are generally closed (al-
 though an international observer was allowed to attend the sentencing portion of
 a prominent trial in 1992, and Amnesty International representatives attended ses-
 sions of some trials in May 1993); defendants have no say in the selection of a law-
 
 
 1286
 yer, who is chosen by the court; defense attorneys are unable to consult with their
 clients outside the courtroom or to call witnesses to refute prosecution charges; and
 the Government does not allow for independent medical examinations of the defend-
 ants to determine whether physical abuse has occurred during pretrial detention.
 The Government does not generally release information on the trial or sentencing,
 but relatives with influence in the Government sometimes succeed in obtaining in-
 formation and even effecting the release of the accused. The sentences are not sub-
 ject to appeal, but the President may nullify, alter, or confirm State Security Court
 sentences.
 A special military Field Court, created during the period of the Muslim Brother-
 hood rebellion in the early 1980's, reportedly still exists to deal with serious security
 offenses. As part of the Government's general crackdown on smuggling, the Field
 Court reportedly tried cases involving arms trafficking in 1993. The accused is not
 permitted legal representation at Field Court proceedings, which are held in secret.
 Regular civil and criminal courts are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Jus-
 tice. The accused in a criminal case is detained provisionally upon the accusation
 of the public prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The judge may
 either dismiss the charges on the basis of insufficient evidence or refer the case to
 a criminal court. Defendants in civil and criminal courts are entitled to legal rep-
 resentation of their choice. If they cannot afford a lawyer, one will be a ppointed by
 the court. These courts impose no restrictions on lawyers representin their clients
 and allow the right of appeal to criminal or civil appellate courts found in each prov-
 ince. Criminal courts also provide for bail. In noncontroversial cases, courts are nor-
 mally free of governmental coercion, although the Government can bring pressure
 to bear if it wishes to do so. Defendants in criminal cases are allowed to present
 evidence and confront their accusers. Trials are public, except for cases involving ju-
 veniles or for crimes such as rape. Cases are tried before a judge; there is no jury
 system. The slow and cumbersome legal system can leave suspects languishing in
 prison for months. Following the re in Hassakeh prison in May, the alleged per-
 petrators were rapidly executed, raising questions as to whether they had be en af-
 forded due process.
 According to the Constitution, the High Constitutional Court investigates and
 rules on petitions submitted by the President or at least one-fourth of the members
 of the People's Assembly challenging the constitutionality of laws or legislative de-
 crees. It has no appellate jurisdiction over cases from the civil or criminal courts.
 Human rights groups estimated that in 1993 some 330 to 500 cases of political
 detainees were brought before the State Security Court. Many of those tried in 1993
 reportedly had been imprisoned for 10 or more years before trial. One human rights
 group estimated that the State Security Court handed down about 60 sentences be-
 tween July 1992 and May 1993.
 The defendants in many of these trials were reportedly accused of membership
 or participation in the activities of banned political organizations whose activities
 the Government claims include the forcing of political change through violence.
 Some of the alleged activities do not include violence but rather opposition to the
 objectives of the Ba'th Party or the dissemination of false information which could
 weaken the people's confidence in the objectives of the Ba'th revolution. At least 34
 defendants were found guilty of disseminating false information, receiving money
 from abroad, or withholding information from the authorities. Those tried in 1993
 included members of a Syrian human rights group, the Committee for the Defense
 of Democratic Freedoms and Human Rights in Syria (CDF), and those accused of
 membership in the banned Party for Communist Action.
 While the defendants in the 5 CDF cases tried in 1993 had not yet been sentenced
 at year's end, the 10 CDF members found guilty in 1992 received sentences ranging
 from 5 to 10 years. Some sentences specified the "deprivation of civil liberties" after
 prison sentences are completed; such deprivations reportedly include prohibitions on
 foreign travel and holding government positions. Twenty-four members of the PCA
 were also found guilty and sentenced to between 10 and 15 years in prison, some
 with forced labor. The Government charged that the PCA sought to change the gov-
 enent by violence and opposed the objectives of the Ba'thist Revolution. One CDF
 defendant, the writer Nizar Nayuf, was convited for his alleged activities in the
 CDF and for having circulated a leaflet reportedly questioningt~he legitimacy of the
 1991 presidential referendum. The court found him guilty of disseminating false in-
 formation that would undermine public confidence in the Ba'th revolution. Nayyuf
 was awarded one of the Pen Freedom to Write awards in May 1993. Another trial
 involved an engneer, Sayih Khayr Bek, who had been detained since 1980 when
 the regime cracked down on professional associations that had organized a national
 strike to protest the state of emergency.
 
 
 1287
 The Government does not release information on the number of persons detained
 or imprisoned for political or security offenses, but credible estimates run from 3,800
 to 9,000 (including persons held in Syrian detention facilities in Lebanon). The Gov-
 ernment continues to contend that persons are detained not because of their politi-
 cal beliefs but because of criminal acts or actions that violate the state of emer-
 gency. It is clear, however that many persons have been jailed without charge or
 as a result of unfair trials for nonviolent opposition to the regime.
 In June and July the Government released at least eight political prisoners, sev-
 eral of them prominent figures. These included four former ministers and at least
 three Jordanian members of the Ba'th Party-February 23 Movement (supporters of
 former Syrian Leader Salah Jadid who was imprisoned after the coup that brought
 Hafiz Al-Asad to power in 1970). he Jordanians, Majli Nasrawin, Hakim Al-Fayez,
 and Yusuf AI-Burji, had spent 23 years in prison. One human rights group says that
 seven Ba'th Party political prisoners remain in a special wing of Mezze prison. All
 reportedly continue to be allowed monthly family visits under guard in government
 rest houses in Damascus. (See Section l.a. on the death of Salah A-Jadid in cus-
 tody.) Of six female political prisoners taken into custody in late 1992 and 1993,
 three were reportedly released in late 1993. Although human rights organizations
 contend that the other three were still being held in Duma women's prison at the
 end of 1993, the Syrian Government claims that these three were released earlier.
 The Government does not permit access to prisoners by international humani-
 tarian organizations.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though the legal system provides nominal safeguards, including the requirement of
 an arrest or search warrant before police are allowed to enter private homes, regula-
 tions under the state of emergency suspend these protections in security-related
 cases. Domestic intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to protect
 officials and important buildings, as well as to monitor the activity of people living
 in the neighborhoods of protected officials. The presence of police and security offi-
 cials is pervasive, especially in Damascus, although some observers say it is less
 pronounced than it was several years ago.
 Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere by government authorities. Security
 personnel require no warrant for search or arrest in dealing with persons stopped
 at such locations. Security forces at the checkpoints are mostly concerned with clan-
 destine shipments of weapons and subversive literature but also search for smug-
 gled goods, including drugs.
 It is generally accepted that telephone conversations and facsimile transmissions
 are selectively monitored and that conversations are sometimes recorded. The Gov-
 ernment-run postal system selectively censors the mail, including foreign publica-
 tions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-This freedom is sharply limited. The Govern-
 ment does not permit criticism of the President and the regime's legitimacy. Some
 controlled criticism of the Party and the performance of government ministries is
 allowed.
 In 1992 and 1993 trials, the Government accused CDF members of "committing
 acts against the goals of the March 8, 1963, revolution." The group had distributed
 leaflets critical of the handling of the 1991 referendum which granted President
 Asad his fourth 7-year term. Approximately 200 Kurds were reportedly arrested in
 October 1992 for distributing a pamphlet which marked the 30th anniversary of the
 Government's never completed effort to move the Kurds out of the northeastern part
 of Syria and which purportedly depicted an idealized Kurdish state extending south-
 ward into Syria; 30 of these Kurds were said to remain in detention in 1993. Several
 journalists have been in detention for long periods, some for more than 10 years.
 The Government or the Ba'th Party wholly owns and operates all newspaper pub-
 lishing houses and strictly controls the dissemination of information. Censorship of
 foreign and domestic news is exercised through offices in the Ministries of Informa-
 tion and Culture and National Guidance. Subjects deemed by the Government con-
 trary to its interests are not permitted to be discussed in the press. In 1993
 censored subjects included Syria's human rights record, allegations of Syria's in-
 volvement in the Lebanese drug trade, and various aspects of Syria's continuing po-
 litical and security role in Lebanon. Any criticism of government policies or perform-
 ance usually has received official approval, and officials above the middle rank are
 rarely criticized. There was slightly more openness in the media's coverage of the
 Middle East peace process than in the past.
 The Government also owns the broadcast media. Reports on sensitive subjects are
 not broadcast, and new television programs scheduled for broadcast must be ap-
 
 
 1288
 proved by the Minister of Information. Radio broadcasts from neighboring countries,
 including Israel and Iraq, may be received in Syria. Foreign television may be re-
 ceived, athough only with special equipment in many areas. Syria prohibits the re-
 ception of Jordanian television in Syria by technical means. Imported printed mate-
 rial and films are subject to censorship. Articles critical of Syria or Syria's role in
 Lebanon are occasionally deleted from foreign magazines and newspapers before dis-
 tribution. Fiction and nonfiction literature is censored if it is considered overly criti-
 cal of Syria, offensive to one of Syria's religious groups, or too graphic in its descrip-
 tion of sex. Control is particularly strict on materials in Arabic. Films are censored
 for a variety of reasons, such as unfavorable interpretations of the Middle East con-
 flict, sectarianism, or the use of actors or production companies targeted by the Arab
 boycott of Israel.
 The Government closely controls public schools at all levels. The Education Min-
 istry dictates the curriculum followed by the primary and secondary schools run by
 the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) for the Palestinian refugees,
 as well as those operated by minority religious groups, and these schools are subject
 to regular inspection. In all schools, an hour each day is devoted to instruction on
 Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not permitted to express ideas contrary to govern-
 ment policy, although some freedom of expression is tolerated at the university
 level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Public meetings, assemblies,
 or demonstrations may be held only with official permission and are usually held
 at the instigation of the Government or the Ba'th Party. This policy is also applied
 in the 13 Palestinian refugee camps in Syria. Private societies, including religious
 groups, are allowed to meet if they have received government permission to orga-
 nize. Such permission is usually granted, but only for nonplitical activities.
 The Government closely controls the activities of professional associations. The
 Ba'th Party must be notified in advance of association meetings. In 1980 several
 professional associations (doctors, lawyers and engineers) were dissolved after strik-
 ing and calling for an end to the state of emergency; numerous professionals were
 detained at the time. Although the associations have been reconstituted with gov-
 ernment appointees, and some of the detainees have been released, others remain
 in detention without trial. At least one of these detainees had his case brought be-
 fore the State Security Court at the turn of the year.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion, but nearly two-thirds of Syr-
 ians are Sunni Muslim. As a concession to Muslims who object to Ba'thi secularism,
 the 1973 Constitution requires that the President be Muslim. Moreover, the Con-
 stitution refers to Islamic jurisprudence as a principal source of legislation. Other-
 wise, no official preference is given to one religion over another, and the Govern-
 ment officially observes all major Christian and Muslim holidays. Ba'thi secular ide-
 ology and modernizing influences have had some impact in diminishing the impor-
 tance attached to religion and ethnicity, but individual Syrians continue to identify
 themselves by their communal associations. Most religious groups, including Syria s
 small Jewish community are largely free to practice their religions. The Govern-
 ment closely controls fund raising, the construction of worship sites, and the holding
 of all meetings except for worship but generally permits such activities under re-
 strictive conditions. Religious training in the language of the religion is permitted
 within the curriculum for Jews and Christians in Jewish and Armenian schools.
 Non-Muslim gups maintain links with coreligionists outside Syria. Interreligious
 groups visit Syria periodically and meet Syrians of all faiths. One such group met
 with Foreign Minister Shara in 1993.
 One exception to the official policy of religious tolerance is the treatment of Jeho-
 vah'us Witnesses and Seventh-Da Adventists, who are forbidden to organize for-
 mally or own church property. Despite these prohibitions, individual followers of
 these religions are allowed to practice their religion privately.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and minister. While proselytizing
 and conversion are not legally proscribed,-in practice, the Government discourages
 such activities aimed at Muslims. The publication of religious material is subject to
 the same controls as secular material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country. Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Internal travel is restricted in the security zone of theGolan Heights
 and occasionally near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq. Syrian women
 over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel without the prior approval of male
 relatives, but in practice the husband may file a request with the Ministry of Inte-
 rior to prohibit his wife's departure from Syria. Similarly, a father may request that
 the Ministry prohibit travelabroad by unmarried daughters, even if they are over
 18 years of age.
 
 
 1289
 
 In general, the Government restricts foreign travel for citizens liable for military
 service and for certain categories of professionals trained at public expense who
 have not completed required government service. Students traveling abroad for
 higher education must obtain permission from the Foreign Ministry and, like all
 Syrians, are subject to recall by the Government. Travel to Israel, with which Syria
 remains in a state of war, is illegal for all Syrian citizens. Druze inhabitants of the
 Israeli-occupied Golan Heights may visit relatives in Syria under a system operated
 by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC); Syria has set an annual
 quota of 120 adult visitors per year. In October the Government denied the Druze
 permission to attend the funeral of a Druze spiritual leader in the Golan Heights.
 Thereafter, however, between late October and-the end of the year, the Government
 allowed some 300 Golan Heights Druze to enter Syria  al Qusnaitra, according to
 the press, although it continued to refuse to let Druze living in Syria cross into the
 Golan Heights.
 In April 1992, President Asad issued a decision permittingSyrian Jews freedom
 oftravel;bytheend of 1993, the Governmenthad   anted ext permitstomorethan
 85 percent of the Jewish community. Between October 1992 and mid-Deember
 1993, exit permits were issued at a substantially lower rate than in the period from
 April to October 1992. By mid-Decmber, the Government had again accelerated the
 issuance rate. There were 500--000 Syrian Jews who had apphbed for exit permits
 but had not received responses to their applications at the end of 1993. Syrian Jews
 no longer need to post a bnd to ensure their return.
 Palestinians sometimes encounter difficulties obtaining the requisite travel docu-
 ment. Moreover, travel restrictions are sometimes imposed on them. For example,
 one young Palestinian married to a Syrian was not allowed to return to Syria to
 rejoin his wife after a trip to a neighboring Arab country. Any Syrian caught trying
 to emigrate or travel abroad without permission, or suspected of having visited Is-
 rael illegally, may be arrested and prosecuted.
 There is a credible estimate that the Syrian Government has withdrawn Syrian
 nationality from between 90,000 and 120,000 Kurds since the 1960's.
 In addition to 330,000 Palestinian refugees, many of whom have been born in
 Syria, there are also at least 4,700 Iraqi nationals, half of them Iraqi Christians,
 c        brrently registered at a refugee camp in northeastern Syria operated under the
 auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). There
 are over 500 Somali refugees at the same camp. Residents of the camp have been
 allowed to leave the camp freely and seek employment in neighboring areas.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Syrians do not have the ability to change their government legally and peacefully.
 President Asad and his senior advisers effectively control all aspects of political and
 economic life. The ruling Ba'th Party, which emphasizes socialism and secular
 Arabism, is dominated by the military. In recent years, the Party has served prin-
 cipally to legitimize President Asad's rule.
 Although the Government seeks to build national rather than ethnic identity, eth
 nic, religious, and regional allegiances remain important. Members of President
 Asad's own sect, the Alawis, holdmost of the important military and security posi-
 tions. President Asad's fourth 7-year term will expire in March 1999. Women play
 a significant but not a leading role in government. Two of the 29 ministers in the
 present Cabinet are women; 21 of 250 parliamentarians are women. Women are also
 active in Ba'th party "popular organizations."
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of ttuman Rights
 There are no human rights groups legally operating inside Syria, and the Govern-
 ment actively discourages the formation of any such organizations. Most Syrians are
 afraid to criticize their government publicly for human rights violations, and several
 members of a now banned human nghts group, the CDF, have been imprisoned (see
 Section I.e.).
 The Government continues to deny charges of human rights violations, often ig-
 noring them or calling them an intrusion into its internal a]Tairs. However, in a de-
 parture from past practice, the Government responded in 1993 to some written in-
 quiries on detainees and prisoners. An ad hoc government committee on human
 rights determined whether and, if so, how to respond to inquiries regarding individ-
 u al cases. In some cases, the Government claimed that the people in question were
 no longer being held or that they were never held. It responded to some inquiries
 from foreign governments on specific cases, although it has not provided alist of
 those releasd in the 1991 and 1992 amnesties.
 
 
 1290
 Two representatives from Amnesty International (Al) were allowed to visit Da-
 mascus in December 1992. The Al team focused, in part, on ongoing State Security
 Court proceedings; the team met with judges hearing a variety of these trials and
 with defense attorneys and relatives of the defendants. One of the trials the delega-
 tion had planned to attend was postponed. The team also met with Syrian officials
 on other human rights matters. Another Al delegation visited Syria again in May
 1993 to observe sessions of State Security Court trials of some defendants arrested
 between 1980 and 1992 in connection with banned political groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution in principle provides for equal rights and equal opportunity for
 all Syrian citizens. In practice, membership in the Ba th Party or close familial rela-
 tions with a prominent Ba'th Party member can be important to prospering in
 Syria. Party connections can pave the way for entrance into better elementary and
 secondary schools, access to more lucrative employment, and greater power in the
 Government.
 Women.-Syrian law stipulates that the State is to provide equal opportunity to
 women and is to remove impediments that hinder the development of women and
 their full participation in society. Government policies include equal pay for similar
 work and encourage the enrollment of women at all levels of education.
 Nonetheless, traditional concepts of male guardianship of women continue to pre-
 vail in many segments of the society. These concepts often limit a woman's rights
 in matters of marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and personal decisions.
 Moreover, the Government accords religious authorities or courts the right to rule
 on the majority of matters involving social and interpersonal relations. Under Is-
 lamic laws of inheritance, the male offspring receive a disproportionate share of the
 inheritance.
 Wife beating and other physical abuse of women are known to occur, but conserv-
 ative social mores in Syrian society discourage public discussion of the issue, mak-
 ing it difficult to estimate the extent of the problem. There are no official or unoffi-
 cial statistics on domestic abuse. Under the legal system, women have access
 through the courts to redress any grievance caused by violent acts against them.
 There has been an indeterminate, athough almost certainly small, number of court
 actions involving spousal abuse. he vast majority of incidents involving abuse prob-
 bl       reported because of the social stigma attached to legal proceedings in
 suh cases.Incidents are usually handled within the family where a husband's
 physical abuse of his wife is criticized and viewed with shame. Outside the family
 and the courts the Syrian Women's Federation also offers a mechanism to help
 solve individuaf family problems.
 Children.--Syrian law stresses the need to protect children and ensure conditions
 favorable to the development of their faculties. The Government mandates education
 through the sixth grade and provides optional but tuition-free education at higher
 levels. Although the quality of health care varies among regions and facilities, chil-
 dren are provided treatment free or at relatively nominal charge. The Government
 attempts to enforce legislation restricting child labor and to protect the institution
 of the family, although violations of these laws still occur. Violence against children
 warrants tough legal penalties as well as social stigma.
 National /Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Syria's Pa lestinian population, estimated at
 330,000 (296,000 of whom were registered with UNRWA as of mid-1992), occasion-
 ally suffers some forms of discrimination. Although Palestinians enjoy many of the
 same rights as Syrian nationals, they are considered to be temporary residents,
 pending resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict. While generally free of socioeconomic
 restrictions, they may not vote in Syrian elections or obtain Syrian citizenship ex-
 cept through marriage to a Syrian male. For the most part, Palestinians are inte-
 grated into Syrian society. The largest Palestinian camp is, in fact, a neighborhood
 of Damascus.
 The Government has placed limits on the use and teaching of the Kurdish lan-
 g age, on Kurdish cultural expression and, at times, on the celebration of Kurdish
 festivals.
 Religious Minorities.-Although the Constitution stipulates respect for all reli-
 gions, there are various forms of discrimination against religious minorities. Under
 the Constitution, the President must be Muslim. Religion is also a factor in deter-
 mining the opportunities available to Syrian citizens. For example, members of the
 Alawi sect, President Asad's religious group, generally enjoy job preference in the
 Government.
 Though Jews hold some low-level government jobs, such as clerks and teachers,
 they are generally barred from government service. They are also prohibited from
 
 
 1291
 oining the military, and Jewish professionals are exempt from the requirement to
 give the 6 years of government service expected of other Syrians trained at public
 expense. Jews are the only minority whose passports note their religion. They are
 under more thorough surveillance by the intelligence services than is the general
 population.
 Although all Syrians-regardless of religion-are theoretically required to follow
 Islamic laws of inheritance, in practice non-Muslims are usually able to arrange
 their own distribution of inheritances.
 People with Disabilities.--Syrian law is intended to assure the integration of
 handicapped persons into the public sector work force, although practical problems
 hinder its implementation. The Government has not enacted special legislation to
 benefit the disabled. However, it allows the disabled to import specially equipped
 cars with none of the normal vehicle import restrictions except the mandatory pay-
 ment of customs fees.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the 1973 Constitution provides for the
 right of the popular sectors" of society to form trade unions, and the General Fed-
 eration of Trade Unions (GFU) is purportedly an independent organization, in
 practice the Government uses it as a framework for controlling nearly all aspects
 of union activity. Effectively, workers are not free to form labor unions independent
 of the government-prescribed structure. All public sector employees join the GFTU
 union as a condition of employment. Approximately half of all private sector workers
 belong to unions. Agricultural workers are not unionized.
 As with other organizations dominated by the Ba'th Party, the GFTU is charged
 with providing opinions on legislation devising rules for workers, and organizing
 labor. The elected president of the G1FTU is a senior member of the ruling Ba'th
 Party and a member of the Regional Command. With his Deputy, he participates
 in all meetings of the Cabinet's ministerial committees on economic affairs. Accord-
 ing to GFTU officials, the secretaries general of the eight professional unions, some
 of whom are not Bath Party members, are each elected by the respective union's
 membership. While the unions are used primarily to transmit instructions and in-
 formation to the labor force from the Syrian leadership, elected union leaders also
 act as a conduit through which workers' dissatisfaction is transmitted to the leader-
 "rikes are not legislatively prohibited (except in the agricultural sector), but in
 practice they are actively and effectively discouraged. While the right to strike ex-
 ists, there does not appear to be specific legal protection from antistrike retribution.
 Since there is labor participation on all public sector boards of directors, public sec-
 tor strikes do not occur. There were occasional work stoppages in the private sector,
 but wage disputes were usually settled informally through negotiations between em-
 ployers and employees or through resort to legal action based on wage laws. Private
 sector employers may fire any employee at any time, although they are required to
 pay severance and prescribed social security benefits. There were no reported
 strikes in 1993, as was also the case in 1991 and 1992. A number of workers who
 attempted to strike in 1980 remain in prison. One worker, who had been in deten-
 tion for 13 years for involvement in a strike in 1980, was brought to trial at the
 end of 1992 and found guilty and sentenced to prison in 1993. According to an April
 1993 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions report, some of the 68 mem-
 bers of the Syrian Engineers' Association, who were arrested along with members
 of the Doctors' Association because of a 1980 strike action, were re eased under the
 1991 and 1992 amnesties. Others reportedly remained in detention in 1993.
 While noting that the Government has under consideration a draft legislative de-
 cree containing some improvements, the International Labor Organization's Com-
 mittee of Experts reiterated its regret in its annual report that there are no plans
 to move away from the single trade union system or to repeal the ban on strikes
 in the agricultural sector.
 The GFTU is affiliated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade
 Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-In the public sector, unions
 do not normally bargain collectively on wage issues, but union representatives par-
 ticipate with the representatives of the employers and the respective ministry to es-
 tablish sectoral minimum wages according to legally prescribed cost-of-living levels.
 Workers make up the majority of each board o directors in  ublic enterprises, and
 union representation is always included on the boards, although theboards are
 firmly under government control. Unions also monitor and enforce compliance with
 the Labor Law.
 
 
 1292
 Under the law, the unions in the private sector may engage in negotiations for
 collective contracts with employers. The Ministry of Social Afairs and Labor sets
 minimum wages in consultation with the GFTU. Unions have the right to litigate
 contracts with employers and the right to litigate in defense of their own interests
 or those of their members (individually or collectively) in cases involving labor rela-
 tions. Union organizations may also claim a right to arbitration.
 Most workers are protected by law from antiunion discrimination and there were
 no reports of its being practiced (see also Section 6.e.). However, there is no union
 representation in Syria s seven free trade zones, and firms in the zones are exempt
 from Syrian laws and regulations governing the hiring and firing of workers, though
 some provisions concerning occupational health and safety, hours, and sick and an-
 nual leave apply.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no law banning forced or
 compulsory labor; such practices may be imposed in punishment, usually in connec-
 tion with prison sentences for criminal offenses, under the Economic Penal Code,
 the Penal Code, the Agricultural Labor Code, and the Press Act. Such compulsory
 labor is usually in the handicraft industry.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age in the public
 sector is 14, though it is higher in certain industries. The minimum age varies more
 widely in the private sector. The absolute minimum is 12 with parental permission
 required for children under ae 16 to work. Children are forbidden to work at night.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor is responsible for enforcing minimum age
 requirements but lacks an adequate number of labor investigators. In February a
 Syrian newspaper reported frankly on the widespread use of child labor in several
 factories in one of Syria's largest cities. The report noted that Syrian law prohibited
 such practices and called for Ministry of Social Affairs officials to investigate. Work
 hours of young employees are limited, compared to those of the regular work force.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-As mandated in the Constitution the Govern-
 ment legislatively establishes minimum and maximum wage limits in the public sec-
 tor and sets limits on maximum allowable overtime for public sector employees. The
 minimum wage, as set most recently in 1989, was $40 a month plus subsidies for
 staples and bonuses depending on rank and type of job. The minimum wage is not
 adequate to support a worker and his family and as a result, many workers take
 additional jobs, open businesses, or rely on extended families for support. There is
 no single minimum wage in the private sector for permanent employees. According
 to the 1959 Labor Law, minimum wage levels in the private sector are set by sector
 and are fixed by the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor. Recommendations are put
 to the Minister by a committee that includes representatives of the Ministries of in-
 dustry and Economy, as well as representatives of the Employers' Association and
 the Employees' Unions. In practice, private sector monthly minimums are not less
 than those in the public sector. In both sectors, the Ministry of Social Affairs and
 Labor is responsible for enforcing minimum wage levels and does so effectively. The
 courts are also available to settle wage dispute cases, although the adjudication
 process can take months or even years. In the private sector, wage disputes are set-
 tled by union/worker negotiations with management or by resort to the courts.
 The statutory workweek consists of six 6-hour days, although in certain fields in
 which workers are not continuously busy, a 9-hour day is permitted. Labor laws also
 mandate a full 24-hour rest day per week.
 The Labor Law extensively regulates conditions of work. There are rules and reg-
 ulations that severely limit the ability of an employer to fire an employee without
 due cause, an issue that the employer may take to a labor committee. Labor com-
 mittees are composed of representatives of the municipality, the Ministry of Social
 Affairs and Labor, and the union, as well as a judge and the employer. In the major-
 ity of cases, labor committees have decided in favor of the employee. Workers, once
 hired, cannot easily be fired. In practice, workers also have exercised their right to
 contest planned dismissals in the labor committees. One exception in the heavily
 regulated labor field relates to day laborers. They are not subject to minimum wage
 regulations and receive disability compensation only for job-related injuries. Small
 private firms and businesses commonly employ day laborers in order to avoid the
 costs of permanent employees.
 Public laws mandate safety standards in all sectors and managers are expected
 to implement them fully. A special department of the ocial Security establishment
 works at the provincial level with inspectors from the Ministries of Health and
 Labor to ensure compliance with safety standards. In the private sector, unions are
 active in monitoring compliance with the laws and ensuring workers' health and
 safety. Workers have occasionally brought employers before judicially empowered
 labor committees to seek imprvements in working conditions that affect their
 health. Workers have the rigt to remove themselves from dangerous situations
 
 
 1293
 without jeoardy to their continued employment. However, there is no statutory lan-
 guage defining dangerous situations.
 Foreign woikera theoretically receive the same benefits but are often reluctant to
 press claims because their workers' permits may be withdrawn at any time. More-
 over many work illegally and are not covered by the government system. In the lat-
 ter half of 1993, the Government began denying extensions of domestic workers'
 temporary residency permits, thereby forcing them to leave the country. However,
 the Government soon rescinded this policy.

