Syria
Despite Syria's recent public attempts to improve its human rights record, it continues to commit severe and widespread human rights violations. Such violations, including torture, the failure of the government to charge political prisoners and bring them to trial and the absence of the right to legal representation for political prisoners, are in breach of obligations undertaken by Syria as a State Party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and in many cases in breach of Syria's own constitution. Even as the Syrian government was declaring amnesty for approximately 3,500 prisoners in December 1991 and March 1992, its ubiquitous military and security apparatus was detaining others. This reality is, on the whole, faithfully reported by the State Department. However, the report seriously underemphasizes the prevalence of indefinite detention without charge or trial of the Ba'ath Party's political opponents, while devoting paragraphs to describing a court system which has no applicability in political cases falling within the ambit of Syria's draconian State Security Law.
This year's State Department report has been released at a critical time. With the collapse and dissolution of the Soviet Union, which has provided Syria with support since the 1960s, Syria has been forced to develop closer ties to Western governments. It is commendable that in a year when the U.S. government needs Syria's cooperation and has sought such cooperation in order to advance the Middle East peace negotiations, the report presents a generally accurate picture of the serious abuses of human rights com-
mitted by President Asad's government.
However, by failing to give sufficient emphasis to the reasons for many of the political detentions and the laws providing the basis for the detentions, the report understates the extent to which the Syrian government uses its emergency laws to crush opposition activity of all kinds. The report does not make clear that of the thousands of individuals who remain in politically motivated detention, hundreds were never implicated in acts of violence and are either being held for association with unarmed political groups or could be considered prisoners of conscience. Such prisoners of conscience include writers, poets, family members of political dissidents, and dozens of lawyers, physicians and engineers arrested for their political beliefs.
Furthermore, the report downplays discussion of the political arrests that occurred in 1 992. Middle East Watch has received reports documenting more than 250 arrests since December 1991. The Comité de Défense des Libertés Démocratiques et des Droits de l'Homme en Syrie (CDF) reported that an additional 1,250 individuals were detained for questioning about their political activities between January and mid-July, most for short periods. Forty of those newly arrested are believed still detained. Those arrested in 1992 included suspected members of various communist factions, human rights advocates and Lebanese nationals. Many are reportedly being held incommunicado in detention without trial and possibly without charge. Three writers and a folk singer are among those who are currently
369
Syria
being detained. These arrests may have been motivated by their published works. Two doctors and at least six other persons were arrested in 1992 for their suspected affiliation with the banned Party for Communist Action (PCA); all are being held incommunicado. Dr. Akram Salem Ishty, a Lebanese physician and university lecturer at the American University in Beirut was abducted by Syrian security forces from Beirut and taken to Damascus to induce his brother, who is reportedly wanted for membership in the pro-Iraqi wing of the Ba'ath Party, to turn himself in.
The picture the State Department paints of prison conditions in Syria and the treatment of political detainees is accurate as far as it goes. However, it could have been strengthened by describing specific cases such as those of human rights activists Aktham Nu'aysa and Afif Mezher, who were among the 17 CDF supporters tried in March, both of whom were suspended by their wrists tied behind their backs and whipped. Both were unable to walk unassisted at their sentencing in March according to an International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) observer. Although the report mentions the death of political prisoner Munir al Ahmad, it omits mention of the death in prison of lawyer Shakar Tabban who reportedly died as a result of torture and ill-treatment in December. Further, the report does not make clear that some prisoners are held beyond the expiration of their sentences. Amnesty International reports that at least six people remain in prison despite having served their prison sentences. Four of them are former military staff and two are believed to have been arrested in connection with the
Muslim Brotherhood.
March 1993 marks 30 years of the State of Emergency Law in Syria. Under this law. President Asad is authorized: to place restrictions on freedom of individuals with respect to meetings, residence and travel; to preventively detain anyone suspected of endangering public security and order; to authorize search of persons and places at any time without warrant; and to delegate any person to perform any of these tasks.
Detainees arrested under the Emergency Law are deprived of any opportunity to challenge the legality of their arrest and detention before a judicial authority. Even with the release of thousands of political prisoners, there may still be more than 4,000 in political detention. Many of them have been held without trial for lengthy periods, some for more than two decades.
The report also fails to describe other draconian legislation such as Legislative Decree Number 49 of 1981 which declares affiliation with the Muslim Brotherhood a crime carrying a mandatory death sentence. Several thousand people were arrested between 1980 and 1982 for suspected membership in the Muslim Brotherhood. Middle East Watch has lists of 3,504 suspected members and their families arrested at that time who have not been released.
The report clearly states that Syrian trial procedures do not meet international standards and summarizes the trial of the 17 CDF affiliates in March pointing out its major deficiencies. The report gives the misleading impression that an observer
370
Syria
from the ICJ was able to attend the trial of 17 supporters of the proscribed CDF. In fact, the observer was only permitted to attend the sentencing phase of the trial. A Lawyers Committee delegate who was coincidentally in Damascus at the time was denied permission to attend the trial, despite making requests to the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Interior. The State Department's coverage of the trial, coming after lengthy, and largely redundant, descriptions of criminal procedure, fails to place this trial in context. It was a major departure from Syria's usual practice of detaining its dissidents without charge or trial, perhaps indicating some sensitivity on the part of the Syrian government to western concern about the imprisonment of human rights activists, in contrast to the imprisonment of political opponents from leftist or Islamist groups.
By law State Security arrests are not required to follow judicial procedures during any of the phases of investigation, interrogation and trial. The presiding judge may decide at his discretion which, if any, judicial procedures shall apply in his courtroom. Further, there is no appeal of security court decisions.
On August 27, in unprecedented numbers, the government initiated State Security trials in Damascus against an estimated 600 political detainees, both long-term and newly arrested. The report briefly mentions these trials but does not describe the nature of the charges or other important aspects of the trials. Detainees were charged for violations of articles of the State of Emergency Law relating to "opposing any of the goals of the Revolution, or obstructing these goals
through committing demonstrations, assemblies or conducting disorderly acts, or inciting for them, or publishing false news with the aim of causing disorder and shaking the confidences of the masses in the armies of the Revolution."
Defendants suspected of membership in the banned PCA were asked to answer three principal questions: 1) whether they were members of the PCA; 2) whether they had been involved in the distribution of PCA publications; and 3) whether they agreed with the policy of the PCA. If the answer to any of these questions was yes, the prosecution rested its case. These questions suggest that these defendants were being charged with offenses stemming from the peaceful exercise of their rights to free association, expression and thought, all guaranteed by the ICCPR, which Syria has ratified.
The report contains no discussion whatsoever regarding the Syrian government's strict control of Syrian professional associations. There is no independent bar association in Syria. In 1980, following a strike which was organized by the Syrian Bar Association and supported by various other professional associations calling for an end to the State of Emergency, the government disbanded all independent professional associations and arrested many of their members. The government then set up new professional associations with appointed leaderships. The 1981 Advocacy Act places the bar association firmly under government control. Under Article 107 of the Act, the government retains the right to dissolve the bar council, the association's governing body, and to install a replacement at any time if the bar is deemed to
371
Syria
have "deviated from its objectives." Disciplinary violations which may lead to disbarment include opposition to the leadership of the Ba'ath Party, and opposition to the "aspirations of the Arab nation in unity, socialism and freedom." The Ba'ath Party and the Ministry of Justice must be notified in advance of any meeting of the bar association, and be permitted to send representatives to attend.
Article 7 of Decree No. 6 of 1965 states that those accused of treason and espionage shall not be allowed a lawyer during investigations and that their right to counsel during trial is subject to the approval of the court. Many lawyers are hesitant to appear as defense counsel before the State Security courts even if they are permitted to do so, for fear that they will be subjected to harassment as a result. The offices of seven lawyers who defended the accused CDF human rights workers in March were searched by security services in their absence.
Similarly, other professional associations, including the engineers' association and the medical association can only hold meetings with Ba'ath Party approval and Ba'ath Party representatives present. Although elections are held, they are not free in that all association officers must be selected or approved by the party. On March 12, in a nationwide inaugural address. President Asad indicated that there might be some loosening of the controls over professional associations, unions and popular organizations. To date, however, liberalization has not taken place. The Committee on Human Rights of the American Academy of Science estimates that up to 238 scientists,
engineers and health professionals are believed to be detained or imprisoned on political grounds, including 114 members of medical and engineering associations arrested in 1980 for their peaceful advocacy of democratic reforms. Others have been detained in more recent years for their alleged association with prohibited political parties such as the PCA and the Communist Party Political Bureau.
The report, however, does correctly describe how labor unions are not free from governmental control and that the single union system violates ILO Convention 87. The report does not mention that a number of workers who attempted to strike in 1990 are still imprisoned. Strikes of civil servants and workers in the public sector are banned and workers in the military-industrial sectors are warned that any strike or other work action will be considered treason and therefore potentially punishable by the death penalty. The report notes that in June the U.S. Trade Representative announced that Syria would be dropped from the list of countries receiving preferential General System of Preference (GSP) tariff benefits because of violations of workers' rights, particularly the right to form independent trade unions.
As the report notes, the Syrian government has engaged in violations of the civil rights of various religious and ethnic groups in Syria. These include prohibitions on the right to travel of Syrian Jews and widespread arbitrary detentions of Kurds. Although President Asad had lifted foreign travel restrictions on Syrian Jews in late April and granted exit visas to approximately 2,850 Syrian Jews from late April through mid-October, travel
372
Syria
restrictions increased again at the end of the year.
Moreover, since the beginning of October, Syrian security forces have carried out widespread arrests of Kurds. The arrests apparently began after a leaflet was issued on October 5 by the joint leaderships of three Kurdish political groups in Syria. The leaflet was a public appeal for support to Syrian Kurds to regain their fundamental civil rights. Some of the Kurd leaders, including Mah-moud 'Ammo, are reported to have been treated in a hospital for injuries resulting from torture during interrogation.
For too long there has been an attitude of passive acceptance by the U.S. government toward pervasive human rights abuse in Syria. A similar approach has been widely remarked upon in U.S. relations with Saddam Hussein's Iraq prior to 1991. The U.S. government would do well to recognize that the absence of the Soviet Union from the Middle Eastern equation provides the U.S. government with unprecedented opportunities, and indeed responsibilities, in influencing human rights policies in Syria (as in the many other authoritarian states of the region). The U.S. government should take every opportunity to bolster those in Syria who are striving to promote human rights and the rule of law. By referring to the CDF only in passing, and by omitting all reference to the systemic assault on Syrian professional associations, the State Department may be criticized for bewailing Syria's many failings in the human rights field while missing opportunities to promote change.
The 1992 report on Syria still reads
too much like a laundry list of amnesties and arrests and makes little attempt to discuss the overall significance of these events for the human rights situation in Syria. Admittedly, this is a difficult task, because Syria emits conflicting signals in this area. Nevertheless, the State Department should be firm in its analysis that the fundamentals of a system which may protect human rights in Syria are lacking because the State of Emergency and single party hegemony facilitate arbitrary rule. This context is of overriding importance, and should have received more emphasis in the report.
373
