 SYRIA
 Syria is ruled by an authoritarian regime which exhibits the forms of a democratic
 system but in which President Hafez al-Asad wields almost absolute authority. Key
 decisions regarding foreign policy, national security, and the econcmy are made by
 him with counsel from his principal advisers. The Parliament, in which the Ba'ath
 party is guaranteed a majority, is elected every 4 years but has no independent au-
 thonty. It cannot initiate laws; it may only react to initiatives by the executive. All
 three branches of government are guided by the views of the Ba'ath party, whose
 primacy in state institutions is assured by the Constitution. Except for a hiatus in
 1973-1974, Syria has been under a state of emergency since 1963. The Government
 has justified martial law by the state of war with Israel and continuing threats
 posed by terrorist groups (Islamic fundamentalist, Iraqi, and Lebanese). However,
 the regime's suppression of all opposition has been so effective that antiregime
 manifestations have been very limited for several years.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security apparatus. The several
 main branches of the security services operate independently of each other and out-
 side of the legal system. Each continues to be responsible for severe human rights
 violations.
 Syria's mixed economy, based on commerce and agriculture, is dominated by an
 inefficient public sector but also includes private and joint sectors. During the
 1960's, citing its state Socialist ideology, the Government nationalized most major
 enterprises and espoused economic policies designed to correct previous regional and
 class disparities. The private sector continues to expand gradually, with the regime
 promoting it to spur investment. Most agricultural land is privately owned. None-
 theless, the economy has remained stagnant for several years. Average real growth
 during the 1980's lagged behind the average population growth, and living stand-
 ards declined. Per capita income in 1991 was estimated at $980.
 Following its publicly announced amnesty of 2,864 security prisoners and detain-
 ees in December 1991, the Government in March announced a second mass amnesty
 for 600 persons and in December announced a third amnesty for 554 persons who
 had been arrested for alleged offenses against state security. Nonetheless, virtually
 all basic human rights remained tightly restricted. Major human rights problems
 continued to include torture; arbitrary arrest and detention; lack of a fair trial in
 security cases; and the denial of freedom of speech, press, association, the right of
 citizens to change their government, and certain worker rights. Syrian government
 resistance to human rights monitoring makes it difficult to know precisely the de-
 tails and numbers of such abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-While there were no reports of exe-
 cutions for political beliefs in 1992, it is widely believed that the regime continues
 to execute detainees held in secret at security facilities such as the one at Tadmor.
 A human rights organization reported that Syrian journalist Munir al-Ahmad died
 on January 23 while under detention following his arrest after a trip to Switzerland;
 the Government reportedly accused al-Ahmad of having criticized the Syrian Gov-
 ernment while abroad. There is no indication that government agents responsible
 for political or extrajudicial killings, either in 1992 or in previous years, have ever
 been tried and punished for such abuses.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances in 1992, but the
 whereabouts of hundreds of persons held incommunicado from previous years re-
 main unknown (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Penal Code prohibits torture and provides stiff penalties for it, au-
 
 
 1089
 thorities continued to employ widespread and systematic torture, primarily during
 arrest and interrogation in criminal as well as in political or secunty-related cases,
 and often in specially equiped torture chambers. Detainees are subjected to both
 physical and psychological a use. Among the forms of physical abuse practiced by
 government-employed torturers are the application of electrical shocks to sensitive
 p arts of the body, beatings (sometimes while the victim is bent over and suspended
 rom the ceiling in a tire), and extracting fingernails and toenails. There are no indi-
 cations that the Government has ever investigated or punished those alleged to
 have committed physical abuse.
 Prison conditions in Syria continue to be poor particularly in older more over-
 crowded facilities, and security prisons are maredly worse than civilianipisons.
 Prisoners in civilian facilities must prepare their own food, usually providec by rel-
 atives or purchased from personal funds, and water for drinking and other purposes
 is chronically in short supply. Medical treatment and facilities are inadequate in all
 prisons, andinjuries and chronic ailments from torture and grossly inadequate de-
 tntion facilities are either not treated or are treated unsatisfactorily.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The civil law code generally provides for
 due process, but the provisions of this code do not apply to security or political of-
 fenses, which are treated under the state of emergency law. Under provisions of the
 state of emergency, the Government continues to suspend normal safeguards. Per-
 sons are arrested secretly without warrant, held indefinitely without charge or trial,
 and denied the right to a judicial determination of the basis for pretrial detention.
 Detainees have no redress for false arrest and usually cannot be contacted by family
 or friends, who most often do not know where the detainee is being held. Many per-
 sons who appear to have disappeared are believed to be held in the security prisons.
 Frequently, the detained person is released without ever being charged or convicted.
 No exact estimates of persons detained without trial exist.
 Following its publicly announced amnesty of 2,864 prisoners and detainees in De-
 cember 1991 the Government in March 1992 announced a second mass amnesty of
 an additional 600 detainees. In December 1992 the Government announced a third
 amnesty of 554 detainees which reportedly included 45 Lebanese Islamists. The
 Government was also reported to be bringing an estimated 600 longtime detainees
 to trial. An unknown number of untried security detainees, including Palestinians
 and Lebanese as well as Syrians, were said to be among those released. This group
 reportedly included some of the scores of Ba'ath party members who had been ar-
 rested in 1970 and 1971 following the coup that brought Hafez al-Asad to power,
 among them former president Nur al-Din al-Atassi (who subsequently died in De-
 cember while seeking medical treatment in France), as well as Syrian Communists,
 members of dissident offshoots of the Ba'ath Party, and persons believed by the Gov-
 ernment to have sympathized with or indirectly assisted persons accused of involve-
 ment in violent attacks during the Muslim Brotherhood rebellion of the late 1970's
 and 1980's. Although the Government has not replied to requests from the U.S. Gov-
 ernment and human rights organizations for a list of names of those amnestied,
 many individuals are known to have been released.
 However at least 15 of these former Ba'ath Party members remain in detention
 in a special wing of Mezze prison. All reportedly are allowed occasional family visits
 under guard in government rest houses in Damascus. In February and March, secu-
 rity services reportedly rounded up scores of suspected members and sympathizers
 of the outlawed Party for Communist Action, most of whom were later released after
 interrogation. According to one human rights organization, at least 14 persons have
 been detained since December 1991 without trial
 The Government is known to have detained the relatives of suspects in both
 criminal and security cases as a means of compelling individuals being sought by
 authorities to surrender. The Government has exiled persons in the past, but there
 were no known instances in 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Syrian court system comprises separate civil
 courts; penal and criminal courts, whose jurisdiction includes economic crimes; and
 religious, militarr, security, and constitutional courts. Civil and criminal courts are
 under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice. The accused in a criminal case is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public prosecutor, then remanded
 to a judge for arraignment. The judge may either dismiss the charges on the basis
 of insufficient evidence or refer the case to a criminal court.
 Defendants are entitled to legal representation of their choice. If they cannot af-
 ford a lawyer, one will be appointed by the court. Civil and criminal courts impose
 no restrictions on lawyers representing their clients and allow the right of appeal
 to criminal or civil appellate courts found in each province. Criminal courts also ro-
 vide for bail. In noncontroversial cases, courts are normally free of governmentl co.
 ercion, although the Government can bring pressure to bear if it wishes to do so.
 
 
 1090
 Defendants in criminal cases are allowed to present evidence and confront their
 accusers. Trials are public, except for cases involving juveniles or crimes such as
 rape. Cases are tried before a judge; there is no jury system. The slow and cum-
 bersome legal system can leave suspects languishing in prison for months.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under the jurisdiction of
 the State Security Court, which is under military control. Such persons have no say
 in the selection of a lawyer, who is chosen by the court. Court sessions are generally
 closed, and no official channel exists for providing information on the trial or sen-
 tencing. Relatives with influence in the Government, however, may ultimately suc-
 ceed in obtaining information and even effecting the release of the accused.
 Family members and an observer from the Geneva-based International Commis-
 sion of Jurists (ICJ) in March were permitted to attend the final session of the trial
 in the State Security Court of Aktham Nu'aysa and 16 others (see Section 2.a.). The
 ICJ observer noted numerous irregularities in the ourt proeedings, including the
 inability of defense attorneys to consult with their clients outside the courtroom or
 to call witnesses to refute prosecution charges, and the Government's refusaf to
 allow for an indep    ent medical examination of the defendants to determine
 whether physical abuse had occurred during pretrial detention.
 A special military Field Court, created during the period of the Muslim Brother-
 hood rebellion, may still exist to deal with grave security infractions applicable
 under the state of emergency, though the Field Court's precse nature and the types
 of offenses over which it has jurisdiction are not clear. The accused is not permitted
 legal representation at this Court's proceedings, which are held in secret.
 Tfhe High Constitutional Court investigates and rules on petitions submitted by
 the President or at least one-fourth of the members of the People's Assembly chal-
 lenging the constitutionalitl of laws or legislative decrees. The Court has no appel-
 late jurisdiction over cases from the civil or criminal courts.
 The Government does not release information on the number of persons detained
 forplitical or security offenses, but credible estimates run from 3,800 to 10,000 (in-
 cluding persons held in Syrian detention facilities in Lebanon). The Government
 contends that it holds no political prisoners and that persons are detained not be-
 cause of their political beliefs but because of criminal acts or actions that violate
 the state of emergency;, it is clear, however, that many persons have been jailed
 without charge or as a result of unfair trials for nonviolent opposition (real or sus-
 pected) to the regime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though the legal system provides theoretical safeguards, including the requirement
 of an arrest or search warrant before police are allowed to enter private homes, reg-
 ulations under the state of emergency suspend these protections in security-related
 cases. Domestic intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to protect
 officials and important buildings, as well as to monitor the activity of people living
 in the neighborhoods of protected officials. The presence of police and security offi-
 cials is pervasive, especially in Damascus, although it is less pronounced in the
 provinces. Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere by government authorities.
 Security personnel require no warrant for search or arrest in dealing with persons
 stopped at such locations. Security forces at the checkpoints are mostly concerned
 with clandestine shipments of weapons and subversive literature but also search for
 smuggled goods.
 It is widely believed that telephone conversations are monitored and sometimes
 recorded. The government-run postal system selectively censors the mail, including
 foreign publications.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-This freedom is severely restricted. Public criti-
 cism of the President is not permitted, and criticism of the Government and the
 Ba'ath party is effectively discouraged.
 Syrian authorities arrested lawyer Aktham Nu'aysa and 16 other persons in De-
 cember 1991 for distributing leaflets, produced by the Committees r the Defense
 of Human Rights and Freedom in Syria, critical of the 1991 presidential referen-
 dum. Fourteen of the 17 received sentences ranging from 3 to 10 years under the
 terms of the state of emergency laws for having aisseminated information injurious
 to the security of the State, receiving funds from foreign sources "with the aim of
 committing a verbal or physical act against the goals of the March 8, 1963 revolu-
 tion," and withholding information about a crime against the security of the State.
 Four of the 10 were convicted only of the latter offense and were subsequently re-
 leased as part of the March amnesty.
 The Government or the Ba'ath party wholly owns and operates all publishing
 houses and strictly controls the dissemination of information. Censorship of foreign
 
 
 1091
 and domestic news is exercised through offices in the Ministries of Information and
 Culture and National Guidance. Any subject deemed sensitive to government inter-
 ests will not appear in the press. In 1992 censored subjects included Syria's human
 rights record, the state of lawlessness that prevailed in the province of Latakia for
 much of the year, allegations of Syria's involvement in the Lebanese drug trade,
 various aspects o Syrisa  continuing political and security role in Lebanon, and as-
 pects of the Middle East peace negotiations in Washington. Criticism of government
 policies or operations usually has official approval, and officials above the middle
 rank are rarely criticized.
 The Government also owns the broadcast media. Although reports on sensitive
 subjects are not broadcast, most radio and television broadcasts from neighboring
 countries, including Israel and Iraq, may be received in Syria, and thus reports not
 carried in the Syrian media are nonetheless generally well known.
 The Government censors imported printed material and films. Articles critical of
 Syria or Syria's role in Lebanon are occasionally deleted from foreign magazines and
 newspapers before distribution. Fiction and nonfiction literature is censored if it is
 considered overly critical of Syria, offensive to one of Syria's religious groups, or too
 graphic in its description of sex. ontrol is particularly strict on materials in Arabic.
 The Government closely controls public schools at all levels. Private prima  and
 secondary schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency U     WA)
 for the Palestinian refugees, as well as those operated by minority religious groups,
 are required to follow the curriculum dictated by the Ministry of Education and are
 subject to regular inspection. In all schools 1 hour each day is devoted to instruction
 on Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not permitted to express ideas contrary to gov-
 ernment policy, although some freedom of expression is tolerated at the university
 level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Public meetings, assemblies
 or demonstrations may be held only with official permission and are usually held
 at the instigation of the Government or the Ba'ath party. Private societies, including
 religious groups, are allowed to meet if they receive government Jpermision to orga-
 nize. Such permission is usually granted, but only for nonpolitical activities.
 c. Freedom of Relgion.-There is no state religion, but nearly two-thirds of Syr-
 ians are Sunni Muslim. As a concession to Islamic fundamentalists who object to
 Ba'ath party secularism, the 1973 Constitution requires that the President be Mus-
 lim. Moreover, the Constitution refers to Islamic jurisprudence as a principal source
 of legislation. Otherwise, no official preference is given to one religion over another,
 and all major Christian and Muslim holidays are officially observed by the Govern-
 ment. Ba'ath party secular ideology and modernizing influences have had some im-
 pact in diminishing the importance attached to religion and ethnicity, but individual
 Syrians continue to identiy themselves by their communal associations.
 Most religious groups, including Syria's small Jewish community, are largely free
 to practice their different religions. The Government closely controls funraising,
 the construction of worship sites, and the holding of all meetings except for wor-
 ship, but generally permits such activities under restrictive conditions. Religious
 training in the language of the religion is permitted within the curriculum for Jews
 and Christians in Jewish and Armenian schools. Non-Muslim groups maintain links
 with coreligionists outside Syria.
 One exception to the official policy of religious tolerance is the treatment of Jeho-
 vah's Witnesses and Seventh-Day Adventists, who are forbidden to practice their re-
 ligion or to own church property. The Government has, at various times, detained
 members of the Jehovah s Witnesses for suspicion of involvement in activities that
 threaten the security of the state.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to preach and practice. While proselytizing
 and conversion are not leally proscribed in practice, the Government discourages
 such activities aimed at Muslims. The publication of religious material is subject to
 the same controls as secular material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -Internal travel is restricted in the security zone of the Golan Heights
 and occasionally near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq. Syrian women
 over the age of 18 have the legal right to travel, but, in practice, a husband may
 file a request with the Ministry of Interior to prohibit his wife's departure from
 Syria. Similarly, a father may request that the Ministry prohibit travel abroad by
 minor and dependent children, as well as by unmarried daughters, even if they are
 over 18 years of age.
 In general, the Government restricts foreign travel for citizens liable for military
 service and for certain categories of professionals trained at public expense who
 have not completed required government service. Students traveling abroad for
 higher education must obtain permission from the Foreign Ministry and, like all
 
 
 1092
 
 Syrians, are subject to recall by the Government. Travel to Israel, with which Syria
 remains in a state of war, is illegal for all Syrian citizens. Druze inhabitants of the
 Israeli-occupied Golan Heights may visit relatives in Syria under a system operated
 by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC); Syria sets an annual quota
 of 120 adult visitors per year. As a result of negotiations under the auspices of the
 ICRC, Syria permitted, in addition, an official delegation comprising more than 200
 Druze notables from the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights to visit Syria for 10 days
 in September.
 The Government lifted foreign travel restrictions on Syrian Jews in late April, fol-
 lowing a meeting between President Asad and leaders of the Syrian Jewish commu-
 nity. This policy change enabled entire Jewish families to travel together and elimi-
 nated the requirement that Syrian Jews post a bond to ensure their return. The
 Government, however, remains opposed in principle to Jewish emigration, and Jews
 must have their applications for passports and exit permits approved by Syrian mili-
 tary intelligence. While approximately 2,850 Syrian Jews received passports and
 exit visas from late April trough mid-October of 1992, only a very few exit visas
 were issued to the approximately 900 Syrian Jews who had applications still pend-
 ing in the last 2V2 months of the year. Those Syrian Jews who had previously been
 issued exit permits were allowed to travel freely to and from Syria during this latter
 period, however. Those Syrian Jews still in prison in 1991 for violations of previous
 travel restrictions were freed in late 1991 or 1992. This included the Soued brothers,
 two Syrian Jews arrested in 1987 for traveling to Israel, who were freed in April.
 Young Palestinians sometimes experience difficulties obtaining travel documents.
 Any Syrian caught trying to emigrate or travel abroad without permission, or sus-
 pected of having visited Israel illegally, may be arrested and prosecuted. According
 to Syrian statistics, by early 1992 Syria had absorbed more than 120,000 out of
 150,000 Syrian expatriates who previously resided in Kuwait and who returned to
 Syria after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Refugee flows out of Iraq into Syria
 peaked in 1991. Approximately 4,700 Iraqi nationals, many of them Iraqi Chris-
 tians, are currently registered at a refugee camp in northeastern Syria operated
 under U.N. auspices. There are an estimated 478 Smali refugees at the same camp.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Syrians do not have the ability to change their government legally and peacefully.
 President Asad and his senior advisers effectively control all aspects of political and
 economic life. The ruling Ba'ath party, which emphasizes socialism and secular
 Arabism, is dominated by the military. In recent years, the party has served prin-
 cipally to legitimize President Asad's rule. Although Ba'ath party doctrine seeks to
 build national rather than ethnic identity, ethnic, religious, and regional allegiances
 remain important. Members of President Asad's own sect, the Alawis, hold most of
 the important military and security positions. President Asad's current term will ex-
 pire in March 1999.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no human rights groups legally operating inside Syria, and the Govern-
 ment discourages the formation of any such organizations (see Section 2.a.).
 The Government denies charges of human rights violations, often ignoring them
 or calling them an intrusion into its internal affairs. In a speech in March upon be-
 ginning his fourth term in office, President Asad assailed Western governments for
 their criticism of Syria's human rights record. Syria's officially controlled media at-
 tacked the U.S. Government over the decision in June to suspend Syria's eligibility
 to export goods to the U.S. under the Generalized System of Preferences program
 because of Syria's record on worker rights (see Section 6).
 The Government generally refuses to respond to human rights inquiries on spe-
 cific cases by international human rights organizations and the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission (UNIRC), although it now replies more frequently to inquiries than in
 the past. In February it submitted to the UNHRC a comprehensive paper on the
 Syrian Jewish community. Amnesty International (Al) did not receive a response to
 the concerns raised by the mission it sent to Syria in 1989, despite Ars subsequent
 communications and offers to send a followup mission. Neither AI nor Middle East
 Watch has been permitted to send observers to Syria to attend trials or investigate
 conditions, although the International Commission of Jurists was permitted to send
 an observer to the final session of a security trial in March, the first time Syria has
 let a foreign observer attend a security trial.
 The ICRC has no access to detainees.
 
 
 1093
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Syrian Constitution stipulates that the State shall guarantee to all citizens
 the principle of equal opportunity and that it shall respect all religions. The Con.
 stitution, moreover guarantees to women all opportunities allowing them to contrib-
 ute filly to the political, social, cultural, and economic life of Syria and commits the
 State to removing those impediments that binder the development and participation
 of women in the construction of a Socialist Arab society.
 Membership in the Ba'ath party or close familial relations with a prominent
 Ba'ath party member can be important to prosperg in Syria. Party connections can
 pave the way for entrance into better elementary and secondary schools, access to
 more lucrative employment, and greater power in the Government. Religion is also
 a factor in determining one's obligations and opportunities. Members of the Alawi
 sect often enjoy job prenerence.
 Though Jews hold some law-level government ,jobs, such a clerks and teachers,
 they are generally barred from government service. Jews are also prohibited from
 joining the milla, and Jewish professionals are exempt from the requirement to
 give the 5 years of government service expected of other Syrians trained at public
 expense. Jews are the only minority whose passports and identity cards note their
 religion. Jews are under more thorough surveillance by the intelligence services
 than is the general population. Despite some easing of the situation since a meeting
 in April between President Asad and Jewish community leaders, contact between
 Syrian Jews and foreigners except on business is difficult. Although the official state
 of war with Israel continues to influence the status of Syrian Jews, the community's
 situation ha improved since the mid-1970's. The Jewish community enjoys freedom
 of economic opportunity, a relatively high standard of living, access to higher edu-
 cation, and entrance into the professions.
 Syria's Palestinian community, which numbers over 300,000, also suffers some
 forms of discrimination. Although Palestinians enjoy many rights similar to those
 of Syrian citizens and generally are integrated into Syrian society, they are officially
 considered to be temporary residents pending the resolution of the Arab-Israeli con-
 flict. While generally free of socioeconomic restrictions, they may not vote in Syrian
 elections or acquire Syrian citizenship except through mamrage to a Syrian ma e cit-
 izen and may not own agricultural land.
 The Syrian Government's sensitivity over Kurdish national aspirations has caused
 it to place limits on the use and teaching of the Kurdish language, Kurdish cultural
 expression and, at times, the celebration of Kurdish festivals. Humn rights groups
 claim that tens of thousands of Kurd born in Syria continue to be denied passporte
 or other documentation for foreign travel. Unconfirmed reports, moreover, indicate
 that security forces in northeastern Syria may have arrested hundreds of Kurds in
 October for participating in demonstrations supporting the radical Kurdish Workers
 Party. These arrests reportedly followed the appearance of an unauthorized pam.
 ph0et marking the 30th anniversary of the begnning of the Syrian Government ef-
 fort-never completely carried out-to move Syria's Kurdish population out of the
 northeastern corner of Syria. The pamphlet also purportedly depicted an idealized
 Kurdish state extending southward into Syria.
 Syrian law provides or the equal rights of women, and the Government continues
 to make efforts to overcome conservative and religiously inspired discriminatory
 treatment of and attitudes toward women. The Government encourages women's en-
 rllment at all levels of education, and its policies include equal pay for similar
 work.
 Traditional concepts of male guardianship of women continue to run counter to
 official policies, however. Particularly among Muslims, these concepts often limit a
 s rights in matters of marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and per-
 sonal decisions. Moreover, the Government accords religious authorities or courts
 the right to rule on the majority of matters involving social and interpersonal rela-
 tions.Wife beating and other physical abuse of women are known to occur, but con-
 servative social mores in Syrian society discurage public discussion of the issue,
 thereby making it difficult  estimate the extent of the problem. Ther ae no offi-
 cial statistics on domestic abuse. Under the Syrian legal system, women have access
 through the courts to redress any grievance caused by violent acts against them,
 but many cases of domestic abuse are not pursued because of the social stigma at-
 tached to legal proceedings in such cases.
 Section 6. Worker Rights.
 a. The Right of Association.-Although the 1973 Constitution provides for the
 right to form trade unions and although the General Federation of Trade Unions
 (GFtU) is purportedly an independent mass organization, in practice the Govern-
 ment uses it ass framework for controlling neary all aspects of union activity. Ef-
 
 
 1094
 fectively, workers are not free to form trade unions independent of the government-
 prescribed structure. In June the International Labor Organization (IO) Commit-
 tee of Experts reiterated its view that the single union system enshrined in Syrian
 law violates ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association. While unions are used
 primarily to transmit instructions and information to the labor force from the Syr-
 ian leadership, elected union leaders also act as a conduit through which workers'
 grievances are transmitted to the leadership.
 While strikes are not legally prohibited (except in the agricultural sector), in prac-
 tice they are actively and effectively discouraged. There were no reported strikes in
 1992. The GFTU like other popular organizations sanctioned by the Government
 and under the effective control of the Ba ath Party, is charged with providing views
 on draft legislation, issuing regulations devising rules for workers, and organizing
 labor. The elected president of the GFU is a senior member of the ruling Ba'ath
 party and a member of the Regional Command. With his deputy, he participates in
 all meetings of the Cabinet's ministerial committees on economic matters. The
 GFTU is aitiated with the International Confederation of Arab Trade Unions and
 is a longtime member of the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade
 Unions.
 In June the U.S. Trade Representative announced that owing to Syria's failure
 to take steps to afford internationally recognized worker rights, its eligibility or tar-
 iff preferences under the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences program was being
 suspended.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-In the public sector, unions
 do not normally bargain collectively on wage issues, but union representatives par-
 ticipate with the representatives of the employer and the respective ministry to es-
 tablish sectoral minimum wages according to legally prescribed oat-of-living levels.
 The board of directors in public enterprises includes two union representatives as
 well as representatives of enterprise management and the relevant Government
 ministries, but such boards are firmly under government control. Unions also mon-
 itor and enforce compliance with the labor law.
 In the private sector, unions are active in monitoring employers' compliance with
 labor laws and ensuring workers' health and safety. Under the law, the unions may
 engage in negotiations for collective contracts with employers. In June the ILO com-
 mittee of experts reiterated its longstanding concern over the Syrian legal provision
 that empowers the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs to declare all orpart of any
 collective agreement invalid on grounds of Syrian economic interest. Unions have
 the right to litigate contracts with employers and the right to litigate in defense of
 their own interests or those of their members (individually or collectively) in cases
 involving labor relations. Union organizations may also claim a right to arbitration.
 Workers are protected by law from antiunion discrimination, and there were no
 reports of it being practiced (see also Section 6.e.).
 There is no union representation in Syria's seven free trade zones and firms in
 the zones are exempt from Syrian laws and regulations governing the hiring and
 iring of workers, though some provisions concerning occupational health and safety,
 hours and sick and annual leave do apply.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no Syrian law banning
 forced or compulsory labor, and such labor may be imposed as punishment, usually
 in connection with prison sentences for criminal offenses, under the Economic Penal
 Code, the Penal Code the Agricultural Labor Code, and the Press Act. Resignations
 of public employees from their jobs are not automatically accepted but require an
 administrative and occasionally even a judicial process.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age in the predomi-
 nant public sector is 14, though it is higher in certain industries. The minimum age
 varies more widely in the private sector. The absolute minimum is 12, with parental
 permission required for children under age 16 to work. Children are forbidden to
 work at night. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor is responsible for enforcing
 minimum age requirements but has only a small number of labor investigators. Vio-
 lation of the law is believed to be extensive, particularly in the agricultural sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government legislatively establishes mini-
 mum and maximum wage limits in the public sector and sets limits on maximum
 allowable overtime for public sector employees. The minimum wage provides a work-
 er and family only a minimal standard of living, and, as a result, many workers
 take additional jobs or rely on extended families for support. There is no single min-
 imum wage for permanent employee, in the private sector. According to the 1959
 labor law, minimum wage levels in the private sector are set by sector and are fixed
 by the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor. The Minister receives recommendations
 from a committee including representatives of the Ministries of Industry and Econ-
 omy, the employers' association, and the employees' unions. In practice, private sec-
 
 
 1095
 tor monthly minimums are not less than those in the public sector. In both the' pub-
 lic and private sectors, the Ministry of Social Affairs andjLabor is responsible for
 enforcing minimum wage levels.
 The statutory workweek consists of six 6-hour days, although in certain fields not
 requiring, continuous labor a 9-hour day is permitted. Labor laws also mandate a
 full 24-hour rest day per week. Provisions of the labor law on the statutory work-
 week are closely observed throughout the government and public sectors. Observ-
 ance is less strict in the private sector. Enforcement, as is the case with all aspects
 of Syrria's labor law, is imited by the inadequate number of government inspectors.
 The Syrian labor law extensively regulates conditions of work. There are rules
 and regulations that severely limit the ability of an employer to fire an employee
 without due cause, an issue that the employer may take to a local labor committee.
 Labor committees are composed of representatives of the municipality, the Ministry
 of Social Affairs and Labor, and the union, as wel as a jug  andthe employer.
 In the majority of cases heard, in the past, labor committees have decided in favor
 of the employee. One exception in the heavily regulated labor field relates to day
 laborers. They are not sub4ect to minimum wage regulations and receive compensa-
 tion only for job-related injuries. Small private firms and businesses commonly em-
 ploy day laborers in order to avoid the costs of permanent employees, who are well
 protected even against firing. Public laws mandate safety standards in all sectors,
 and managers are expected to implement them fully. A special department of the
 social security establishment works, through its regional branches, with inspectors
 at the Ministries of Health and Labor to ensure compliance with safety standards.
 In addition, workers may fle suit against their employers if dangerous working con-
 ditions threaten their health. Foreign workers theoretically receive the same bene-
 fits but are ofen reluctant to press claims because their work permits may be with-
 drawn at any time. Moreover, many work without permits and are not covered by
 the government system.
