Syria
A prominent businessman in Aleppo has characterized Syria as “a society
in custody.” Emergency rule imposed in 1963 remains in effect, and
the authorities continue to harass and imprison human rights defenders
and other non-violent critics of government policies. The government
strictly limits freedom of expression, association, and assembly, and
treats ethnic minority Kurds as second-class citizens. Women face legal
as well as societal discrimination and have little means for redress when
they become victims of rape or domestic violence.
In a positive development, the government released more than one
hundred long-time political prisoners in 2004, bringing to more than
seven hundred the number of such prisoners freed by President Bashar
al-Asad since he came to power in June 2000. Thousands of political
prisoners, however, reportedly still languish in Syria’s prisons.
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention, Torture, and “Disappearances”
Syria has a long record of arbitrary arrests, systematic torture, prolonged
detention of suspects, and grossly unfair trials. Thousands of
political prisoners, many of them members of the banned Muslim
Brotherhood and the Communist Party, remain in detention. In recent
years, dozens of people suspected of being connected to the Muslin
Brotherhood have been arrested upon their voluntary or forced return
home from exile.
The London-based Syrian Human Rights Committee (SHRC) has
alleged that several political prisoners died in custody in 2004 as a result
of torture. While hundreds of long-term political prisoners have been
released in recent years, many remain in detention even after serving
their full prison sentences. The SHRC estimates that about four thousand
political prisoners remain in detention in Syria today. The authorities have refused to divulge information regarding numbers or names of
people in detention on political or security-related charges.
The government has never acknowledged responsibility for an estimated
17,000 persons—Lebanese citizens and stateless Palestinians—who
were “disappeared” in Lebanon in the early 1990s and are known or
believed to be imprisoned in Syria.
Arrests of Human Rights Activists and Political Critics
Human rights activists continue to be a frequent target of the government.
In April 2004 the authorities arrested Aktham Nu’aisse, the fiftythree-
year old head of the Committees for the Defense of Democratic
Liberties and Human Rights in Syria after he organized a peaceful
demonstration outside the parliament building calling for an end to
emergency rule. He was released on bail in mid-August and permitted
to travel abroad, but at this writing still faces charges under Syria’s
emergency law, including “opposing the objectives of the revolution.”
Dr. Arif Dalila, a prominent economics professor and one of many
imprisoned critics of the government, continues to serve a ten-year
prison term imposed in July 2002 for his non-violent criticism of government
policies. Mamoun al-Homsi, a democracy activist and former
member of parliament, is currently serving a five-year jail term for
“attempting to change the constitution.” Five men remained in detention
in late 2004 after being arrested more than a year earlier for downloading
material critical of the government from a banned Web site and
e-mailing it to others.
Discrimination and Violence Against Kurds
On March 12, 2004, a clash between supporters of rival Kurd and Arab
soccer teams in Qamishli, a largely Kurdish city near the border with
Turkey, left several dead and many injured. The following day, Kurds vandalized shops and offices during a funeral for the riot victims, and
the violence spread to nearby areas. Police responded with live ammunition,
killing at least two dozen people, injuring hundreds, and arresting
many hundreds more. Human Rights Watch has received credible
information that some of those detained were tortured in custody, and
at least two of them reportedly died in detention.
Kurds are the largest non-Arab ethnic minority in Syria, comprising
about 10 percent of Syria’s population of 18.5 million, and have long
called for reforms to address systematic discrimination, including the
arbitrary denial of citizenship to an estimated 120,000 Syria-born
Kurds. In June 2004 the authorities reportedly warned leaders of two
unrecognized Kurdish political parties that no independent political
activities would be tolerated.
Discrimination against Women
Syria’s constitution guarantees equality for men and women, and many
women are active in public life, but personal status laws as well as the
penal code contain provisions that discriminate against women. The
penal code allows for the suspension of legal punishment for a rapist if
he chooses to marry his victim, and provides leniency for so-called
“honor” crimes, such as assault or killing of women by male relatives for
alleged sexual misconduct. Punishment for adultery for women is twice
that for men. A husband also has a right to request that his wife be
banned from traveling abroad, and divorce laws are discriminatory.
The government keeps no statistics regarding gender-based crimes such
as domestic violence and sexual assault against women, although nongovernmental
organizations say that domestic violence is common and
that the government does not do enough to combat it or provide for
victims. 
Key International Actors
In May 2004, following U.S. Congressional passage of the Syria
Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Act, President Bush banned
exports of goods to Syria and Syrian commercial flights to the United
States, and froze assets of “certain Syrian individuals and government
entities.” The law, in authorizing such sanctions, cited Syria’s hosting of
Palestinian militant groups, its support for Lebanon’s Hizballah organization,
its military presence in Lebanon, its purported efforts to develop
chemical and biological weapons, and its alleged support for anti-U.S.
forces in Iraq.
In September 2002, the United States forcibly transferred Maher Arar,
a dual Canadian-Syrian national whom the U.S. government alleges to
have ties with al-Qaeda to Syria, despite Syria’s long record of torturing
detainees to extract confessions. Arar was arrested in September 2002
while traveling from Tunisia to Canada through New York’s Kennedy
Airport. U.S. immigration authorities flew Arar to Jordan, where he was
handed over to Syrian authorities, despite his repeated statements to
U.S. officials that he would be tortured in Syria. After he was released
without charge ten months later and allowed to return to Canada, Arar
alleged that he had been tortured repeatedly with cables and electrical
cords by Syrian interrogators. In January 2004, Arar filed suit in U.S.
federal court alleging violations of the Torture Victim Protection Act.
A Syrian-born German national, Muhammad Haydar Zammar, was
arrested in Morocco in November 2001 and secretly transferred to
Syria, reportedly with the assistance of the United States. He is said to
be in solitary confinement in a tiny underground cell in the Palestine
Branch of Military Intelligence headquarters in Damascus, where torture
and ill-treatment are reportedly common.
The European Commission and Syria initialed an Association
Agreement in October 2004 which will be signed in early 2005 and then sent to the parliaments of all European Union member states and the
European Parliament for ratification. The text stipulates that Syria must
implement all international non-proliferation accords and that “respect
for human rights and democratic principles” constitutes “an essential
element of the agreement.” No E.U. member state appeared at this
writing to have called attention to the discrepancy between Syria’s practices
and the human rights provision of the agreement.
In September 2004, France joined the U.S. to co-sponsor U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1559, which demands that “outside powers”—i.e.,
Syria—withdraw their military forces from Lebanon.