SYRIA
Syria was in rapid transition in 1991 as President Hafez al-Asad sought to realign the country in accordance with the changing international order. Coniiising signals emanated from Damascus in the field of human rights which ¿le State Department report barely keeps pace with, largely because of the narrow information base on which the report relies.
Not all of the blame for this rests with the State Department. The Syrian government's resistance and hostility to both domestic and international human rights monitors place substantial obstacles in the way of human rights reporting. However, in other countries where the government has evaded monitoring, such as Iran, the State Department has wisely acknowledged this in the introductory section and qualified the scope of its report accordingly. Set in the context of government obfuscation, the somewhat superficial report would have been a more satisfactory piece of work. As it stands its lack of detail and example detracts from its credibility.
The year 1991 saw dramatic changes in the relationship between Syria and the United States. It is a credit to the State Department that in a year when the U.S. government actively cultivated cooperative relations with Syria, for the sake of both military solidarity during the Persian Gulf War and diplomatic assistance in hostage releases and the Middle East peace process, the report does not refrain from criticizing Syria's continuing record of human rights violations.
However, the generally negative tone of the 1991 report is inadequate to the task of describing complex developments in the human rights situation. There were some dramatic improvements in Syria's human rights record, which are understated in the report. At the same time, the report overlooks violations, some of which arose out of Syria's participation in the Persian Gulf War on the side of U.S.-led anti-Iraqi forces. The report also insufficiently assigns credit and blame for changes in Syria's human rights record over the past year, rendering its analysis of events largely superficial.
361
Syria
The State Department's instructions for the preparation of the country reports require that any "tangible steps" taken by the government to improve its human rights record be indicated in the introduction. Those of the previous two reports for Syria, for example, cited Syria's responsiveness to UN inquiries and Amnesty International delegations (1989) and to U.S. requests for information regarding Syrian Jews (1989 and 1990). This year's report, however, fails to mention any improvements whatsoever in its introduction. The omission is inexplicable since 1991 witnessed mass releases of political prisoners, among other less visible improvements. This information is buried in the middle of the report.
When the report does mention positive developments, however, it sometimes minimizes them by using statistics that understate the extent of these developments. The report notes, for example, that 700 Palestinians who had been arrested for sympathizing with the Palestine Liberation Organization were released in 1991; reliable sources estimate the number released to have been 1,500, at least twice the State Department's estimate. The report's strangely precise figure of 2,864 for the number of people granted amnesty in December is considerably below independent estimates of over 3,500. Numerous releases of political prisoners had taken place in the months prior to the mass pardons at the end of 1991: before November 25, 180 political prisoners had been released; the report's figure for the pre-December period -- 80 -- reflects only those released before April 28, and thus underreports the numbers of individuals involved.
The report omits altogether several important releases of prisoners in 1991, including 60 women prisoners of conscience, who had been detained for up to five years, some of whom allegedly had been tortured. None of them had been charged or tried. Other releases not mentioned in the report are those of four writers in an April amnesty: All al-Kurdi, 'Izzat al'Mahmud, 'Imad Naddaf and Wa'il Sawwah. The report would do well, when detailing releases, to inform the reader how long the detainees had been in prison, and to give any available details about mistreatment or torture during detention.
362
Syria
The report also fails to mention some subtler improvements, such as in the area of freedom of speech. When some 60 writers and other intellectuals signed a statement protesting the U.S. bombing of Baghdad, some who signed were detained briefly but according to a New York Times report "no one [was] arrested or tortured" -- a response hailed by Middle East Watch as "milder than [the government's] reactions to similar protests in the past." There is also evidence of toleration, albeit unofficial, of the activities of two new parties - the Arab Democratic Party and the National Solidarity Party -- and that some previously censored literature appeared in bookstores in 1991, although not as a result of a policy change. While these developments should not be overemphasized in view of the bleakness of the overall record, they should also not be entirely ignored.
It is ironic that, while minimizing or failing to include some tangible improvements in Syria's human rights record, on the one hand, the report significantly underreports or omits the numerous serious human rights violations which continued or were exacerbated in 1991. This is most noticeable in the discussion of political and other extrajudicial killings, denial of fair public trial and violations of the rights of prisoners' relatives.
Thanks largely to the work of illegal domestic human rights groups like the Comité de Défense des Libertés Démocratiques et des Droits de l'Homme en Syrie (CDF), whose existence the report fails to acknowledge, the veil of secrecy which surrounded violations of human rights in Syria is beginning to be lifted. The State Department has not, however, taken full advantage of available information, but has preferred to rely on generalization.
The report cites only two of four known incidents of extrajudicial killings in 1991, omitting mention of the deaths of Adnan Sa'ud and Hussein Zaidan, prisoners who died in custody. CDF claims that Sa'ud died under torture. The report also omits any discussion of whether the government has taken steps to apprehend or punish those responsible for the killings cited.
363
Syria
The report is notable for its complete failure to mention what is surely one of die most egregious violations of human rights: arresting people for merely expressing their beliefs. In 1991 four members of the Workers Revolutionary Party and 29 members of the Arab Socialist Union Party (both of which are legal parties) were arrested apparently for having distributed leaflets criticizing the ruling Ba'ath Party's monopoly on power, a crime which classifies them as political prisoners according to the State Department's definition.
The report also fails to mention the detention of 30 to 50 suspected sympathizers of the CDF in December. The detentions arose out of a public leaflet, circulated clandestinely, issued on December 10 casting doubt on the fairness of the popular referendum, held on December 2, by which President Hafez al-Asad's reelection for a fourth seven-year term was approved by 99.98% of the voters. The leaflets also criticized strong-arm tactics employed to intimidate citizens who declined to take part in the referendum. Seventeen people were eventually brought to trial in March 1992, and 10 received sentences of between 3 and 10 years after a trial which fell far short of international standards.
Syrian security officials often detain relatives of suspects or prisoners, sometimes torturing them in front of the prisoner, in order to extract confessions of crimes, induce suspects to give themselves up or elicit information. Indeed, the practice is so widespread that it is the likely reason for the arrest of most of Syria's female prisoners. Reliable reports attest that the practice continued in 1991, including the egregious case of two Jewish boys under the age of three who were arrested on May 1 in connection with their parents' alleged attempt to leave the country. Many prisoners remain in jail as surrogates for relatives or as punishment for them, a blatant violation of international law. Although this abusive practice falls under at least two State Department human rights categories ~ arbitrary arrest and arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence - it is entirely absent from this year's report, as indeed it was from those of previous years.
364
Syria
Conversely, some of the violations described in the report appear to have a weak basis in fact. For example, in the section on torture the report lists "gouging out of eyes" as a torture method. Unless the State Department is able to substantiate such graphic allegations with case examples it would do better not to report them.
To its credit, the State Department describes prison conditions, such as unsafe and unhygienic facilities, in significantly stronger terms than it has in previous years, voicing condemnation which previously had been lacking or insufficient. In the 1989 report, no mention at all was made of prison conditions; in 1990, the report merely quoted an outside monitoring group as saying the conditions were "appalling;" in 1991, however, the report calls prison conditions "poor" and detention conditions "grossly inadequate." Despite the more appropriately strong language used, however, even the most recent report fails to cite any of the human rights violations recorded in 1991 which were a direct result of these appalling detention conditions. For example, the lawyer Riad al-Turk, a prominent political activist under whose leadership the Communist Party Political Bureau was founded in 1973, who has been imprisoned without charge or trial since 1980, fell into a coma because of maltreatment, was hospitalized for 15 days in March, and returned to the detention center without having made a full recovery. Citing incidents such as this would speak louder than the report's reliance on strong rhetoric.
A series of serious human and civil rights violations, notably arbitrary arrests and denials of freedom of speech, took place in 1991 in connection with the Persian Gulf War. It is these violations which receive the most inconsistent and spotty coverage in the report. The report appropriately draws attention to pertinent issues of censorship, for example, the Syrian government's limiting of internal distribution of information about the anti-Iraqi coalition and the imposition of additional checkpoints at borders, ostensibly for military protection -- a practice which invited widespread harassment and the invasion of privacy of a broad sector of the Syrian population.
365
Syria
However, the report does not address adequately the anti-government hostility which arose internally in opposition to the war. Such opposition was seen as a threat to internal stability and was therefore forcibly repressed by the Syrian government. In late January, 53 members of the Syrian Lawyers Association who signed a statement protesting the Persian Gulf War were called in for questioning by the authorities and some were arrested. When approximately 60 writers and artists signed a similar statement, they met the same fate.
The result of these and other flaws in the presentation of data is that the 1991 report paints with one stroke what is actually a complex picture. The numerous widespread violations of human and civil rights in Syria deserve a more thorough treatment. The State Department needs to rely less on general condemnation and more on specific information which is fortunately becoming more available.
366
