 SYRIA
 Although Syria is nominally a representative democracy,
 President Hafiz al-Asad wields virtually absolute power and
 his Government remains a repressive dictatorship. The regime
 has not permitted other centers of government power, such as
 an independent judiciary or legislature, to develop, and it
 has at times resorted to brutality and forcible repression to
 insure its survival. At the same time, the Government has
 tried to provide for the basic needs of its people and it
 allows a certain amount of regional autonomy.
 The ruling Ba'ath Party, with its emphasis on socialism and
 secular Arabism, gained ascendancy in 1963, but since then
 has become dominated by the military. In recent years, the
 party has served principally to legitimize Asad's rule.
 Although Ba'athism seeks to overcome sectarian and class
 consciousness by building a sense of national rather than
 ethnic identity, ethnic and regional allegiances remain
 important. Members of Asad's own sect, the Alawis, hold most
 of the important military and security positions and run many
 of the nationalized corporations.
 Syria has been under emergency powers since 1963, with a hiatus
 in 1973-4. Martial law has been justified by the state of war
 with Israel and the threats of terrorist groups (Islamic
 fundamentalist, Iraqi, and Lebanese), who were blamed in 1986
 for several bloody incidents of terrorism in Syria. The
 greatest internal terrorist wave occurred in 1980-1982 when
 the Muslim Brotherhood (Sunni Muslim fundamentalists) openly
 challenged the secular Ba'athist, Alawi-dominated regime. The
 Syrian Government suppressed this uprising in 1982 by
 encircling the Muslim Brotherhood stronghold of Hama and
 destroying most of the old city, killing thousands of people.
 The ferocity of that repression has succeeded in discouraging
 further widespread antiregime activity.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. Several main branches of the security services
 exist, and each is suspected of human rights violations.
 Syria has a socialist economy. Although a private sector
 remains, most major enterprises are nationalized. The economy
 suffered a serious downturn in 1986. At the same time, the
 Government used its extensive police powers to exert even
 greater control over the economy and especially the
 flourishing black markets in currency exchange and imported
 goods. The new policies have created shortages, curtailed
 investment, and generated widespread frustration and anger.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation
 in 1986. Syria remained under the rule of a repressive
 dictatorship, and there were no signs of progress toward a
 freer political system or of greater respect for individual
 human rights.
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political executions in Syria are typically a reaction to
 direct and violent threats to the regime. In 1986 there was
 an increase in terrorist incidents and a number of executions
 reportedly resulted. On March 13 and April 16, two large
 bombs were exploded in Damascus. There were also reports of
 
 
 1309
 SYRIA
 other bombs exploding in the coastal towns of Latakia,
 Tartous, and Banyas, and bombs were placed on several buses
 carrying Syrian military cadets. Arrests were made but the
 Government did not publicly identify the perpetrators or
 indicate what became of the persons arrested.
 Amnesty International has documented the case of a member of
 the outlawed Party for Communist Action dying in captivity in
 April 1986 after beatings. The report states that medical
 evidence discovered later refuted the Government's assertion
 that the death was a suicide.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been credible reports over recent years that some
 Syrians arrested for security reasons have never been heard
 from again.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although the penal code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe penalties for such practices, there have been numerous
 credible reports of torture, primarily during arrest and
 interrogation. For example, according to an August 1986
 Amnesty International report, "...security forces are
 routinely and systematically torturing detained political
 suspects."
 Amnesty International has noted that methods of torture
 include pulling out fingernails, swinging detainees in a tire
 and lashing them with straight or barbed wire, and using
 electric shocks. Security forces often will arrest family
 members of a fugitive and detain or torture them until the
 fugitive surrenders to authorities. In 65 cases of detainment
 in 1986 that Amnesty International learned about, 20 persons
 seem to have been arrested principally because of their
 relationship to a fugitive or someone already held captive.
 There have been no reports of punishment of officials who
 engage in such practices.
 Persons charged with or convicted of criminal offenses are
 held separately from those charged with security crimes.
 Conditions in prisons for ordinary criminals are adequate, and
 are better for foreigners than for Syrians. Meals are
 adequate, and provision is made for exercise. Much less is
 known about conditions in security prisons. No international
 groups are allowed access to detention facilities. Families
 are usually not allowed to visit security prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The civilian legal code, modeled after French law, provides
 generally for due process, although it permits indefinite
 pretrial detention during the investigative process. Under
 the state of emergency, normal safeguards can be suspended,
 and a person may be held indefinitely without charge or trial,
 especially in security and political cases.
 In cases involving security or political offenses, arrests are
 made secretly, with no legal restraints. The accused has no
 right to a judicial determination of the basis for pretrial
 detention, no redress for false arrest, and cannot be
 contacted by family or friends, who most often do not know
 where the accused is being held.
 
 
 1310
 SYRIA
 There does not appear to be any forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to the French-based legal code. The defendant is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public
 prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment, who may
 either free him on the basis of insufficient evidence or refer
 the case to a criminal court. Defendants are entitled to
 legal representation of their choice; if they cannot afford a
 lawyer, they will have one appointed by the court. Civilian
 courts impose no restrictions on lawyers in representing their
 clients, and allow the right of appeal. In noncontroversial
 criminal cases, the civilian courts are usually free of
 governmental coercion, although the Government can bring
 pressure to bear if it wishes to do so. The slow and
 cumbersome legal system can leave suspects languishing for
 months.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Such persons have no say in the selection of a lawyer,
 who is chosen by the court. All court sessions are closed,
 and there are no official channels for obtaining information
 on the trial or sentencing, although relatives with influence
 in the Government may ultimately succeed in obtaining
 information and even effecting the release of the accused.
 Families without influence have no way to publicize prisoners'
 cases, and in any event would be too intimidated to do so.
 The Government does not disseminate information on the number
 of persons detained for political or security offenses, but
 the number is probably significant. Some 20 Ba'ath Party and
 government officials have been under detention since 1970.
 According to unconfirmed press reports, as many as 150
 military officers were arrested in 1982 in connection with a
 reported coup, and 60 were arrested in the summer of 1986 for
 the same reason. Reportedly, none has been released. Amnesty
 International documents 65 people detained in 1986 without
 charge, most of them apparently for their political views or
 membership in outlawed organizations. The majority are
 Palestinians, although a significant number are Syrians who
 allegedly have ties to the Party for Communist Action.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to
 protect officials and important buildings, as well as to
 monitor the activity of people living in nearby neighborhoods.
 The presence of police and security officials is pervasive,
 especially in Damascus. Some phone conversations are
 recorded. The postal system censors mail but does not check
 every letter or package. Although the legal system provides
 safeguards, including a requirement of an arrest and search
 warrant before police are allowed to enter private homes,
 regulations under the state of emergency suspend these
 protections in security-related cases.
 Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere and no warrant for
 search or arrest is required at such checkpoints. Security
 forces are most concerned with terrorists and antiregime
 activity, but also search for smuggled goods.
 
 
 1311
 SYRIA
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, the Ba'ath Party, and
 related institutions is not permitted. The Government or the
 Ba'ath Party wholly own and operate all broadcast media and
 publishing houses and strictly control the dissemination of
 all information. Newspapers provide no medium for opposition
 opinion. The occasional criticism of government bodies or
 their operations is usually directed against minor
 administrative failings and corruption. Officials above the
 middle ranks are rarely criticized.
 Imported printed material and films are subject to censorship,
 and articles about Syria are occasionally deleted from foreign
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. News material,
 as well as fictional and nonfictional literature, are
 sometimes banned if the content is considered overly critical
 of Syria. Films are often censored for a variety of reasons,
 such as an unfavorable interpretation of the Middle East
 conflict, sectarianism, or the use of actors or production
 companies targeted by the Arab boycott. Control is much
 stricter on material in Arabic.
 Censorship of foreign and domestic news is exercised through
 offices in the Ministries of Culture and National Guidance and
 Information. In cases of censorship applied to foreign
 broadcasting, blackouts are usually applied for a limited time
 during crises when the Government controls the flow of
 information to the population.
 Schools at all levels are government operated. Even the few
 church-run, private primary and secondary schools are required
 to follow the Ministry of Education's curriculum and are
 subject to regular inspection. Teachers are not permitted to
 express ideas contrary to government policy, although more
 freedom of expression is tolerated at the university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations can be held
 only with official permission, and usually at the instigation
 of the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private societies,
 including religious groups, are allowed to meet if they have
 received governmental permission to organize. They are
 limited, however, to nonpolitical activities.
 Professional organizations and labor unions function as
 dependent parts of the governmental apparatus and are
 primarily used to transmit instructions and information from
 the Syrian leadership. The unions have no political role and
 generally function only as a means of keeping the Government
 informed of grass-roots grievances and concerns. Strikes are
 forbidden by law. In 1986 there was a brief work stoppage by
 Damascus taxi drivers that was quickly curtailed after drivers
 were threatened with the loss of their licenses. Professional
 organizations have a somewhat greater voice in the Government,
 but they too are kept on a short leash.
 In response to observations by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the Government is reported to have made
 efforts to bring its legislation into conformity with the
 Convention on Freedom of Association and Protection of the
 Right to Organize. In its 1985 report, however, the ILO's
 
 
 1312
 SYRIA
 Committee on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations
 stated that it hoped the Government would soon be in a
 position to report real progress in both its legislation and
 the application of the Convention.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although Syria is predominantly Sunni Muslim, the Constitution
 does not espouse a state religion. As a concession to Islamic
 fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi secularism, the current
 regime amended the Constitution to require that the president
 be Muslim. Otherwise, there is no official preference given
 to one religion over another. Sunni Arabs constitute over
 two-thirds of the population. Many key positions in the
 Government, including the presidency, are controlled by
 members of the minority Alawi sect (10-12 percent of the
 population), which is considered heretical by some Islamic
 fundamentalists.
 Ba'athi ideology and modernizing influences have diminished
 the primacy of religion and ethnicity, but individual Syrians
 continue to be identified by their communal associations.
 Non-Alawi groups, including the 3,000-4,000 members of the
 Jewish community, do have the freedom to practice their
 individual religions, but religious training, fund raising,
 construction, and the holding of all meetings except for
 worship are tightly restricted and sometimes banned. One
 exception to the official policy of religious tolerance is the
 treatment of Seventh-Day Adventists, who are forbidden to
 practice their religion or own church property.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted in the country, although
 proselytizing is strictly forbidden. The publication of
 religious materials is subject to the same strict controls as
 secular material.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is unrestricted except in the security zone of
 the Golan and close to the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and
 Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must obtain
 passports and exit visas. Women continue to be required to
 gain permission from husbands or fathers before traveling. In
 theory, any Syrian can be required to post a bond which would
 be forfeited in case of nonreturn. Syrian Jews, however, are
 the only travelers routinely required to post such a bond,
 usually about $500. In recent years, Jews have found it
 somewhat easier to travel overseas, although an official ban
 on their emigration has continued and groups have been caught
 trying to emigrate illegally. The Government continues its
 policy of not issuing passports to all members of a Jewish
 family at the same time, although there have been some recent
 exceptions.
 The Government generally forbids foreign travel for certain
 categories of citizens, e.g., persons liable for military
 service as well as pharmacists, architects, and engineers
 trained in Syria at public expense who have not yet completed
 their 5 years of obligatory government service. Those who
 attempt to travel illegally are subject to fines and
 detention. Frequent exceptions are granted for students who
 receive permission from the Foreign Ministry to continue
 higher studies abroad. Emigration is not discouraged for
 groups other than those mentioned above.
 
 
 1313
 SYRIA
 There are no formal restrictions on the repatriation of Syrian
 citizens, although political opponents of the regime are
 arrested if they return. There have been no reports of
 revocation of citizenship. The Government does not recognize
 renunciation of citizenship or the acquisition of another
 nationality.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Power in Syria resides with President Asad and his senior
 advisors. He and other members of the Alawi sect control many
 of the key positions in the Government, the Ba'ath Party, and
 the military and security forces. Popular participation in
 the political process is greatly limited. By law, the freely
 elected Parliament has precedence over the President's Cabinet
 but in fact acts as a rubber-stamp. Major policy initiatives
 normally take the form of presidential decrees and Ba'ath
 Party resolutions, which are later ratified by the
 Parliament. The Constitution guarantees that the Ba'ath Party
 is the leading political organization, while other parties are
 severely restricted. Many political parties, such as the
 Party for Communist Action, are outlawed.
 In the last presidential election in 1985, Asad received 99
 percent of the vote in which 99 percent of the electorate
 participated, according to government sources. There was no
 opposition candidate.
 There is a certain degree of regional autonomy. Sheiks handle
 local tribal matters, the Druze in Jebal Druze have their own
 governorship, and the major city centers also exercise local
 control. Some nonthreatening ethnic groups, such as the
 Bedouin, are largely allowed to opt out of the system; people
 living in small villages have very little to do with the
 central Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government reacts to charges of human rights violations
 either by denying them, by ignoring them, or by calling them
 an intrusion into Syria's internal affairs. There are no
 internal groups monitoring human rights. Amnesty
 International's inquiries are ignored, and the International
 Committee of the Red Cross has had only limited access to
 prisoners.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Baath Party is an important factor in
 prospering in the Syrian economy. Party connections can pave
 the way for entrance into better schools, access to more
 lucrative employment, and greater power in government.
 The status of Syrian Jews continues to be influenced by the
 ongoing state of war with Israel, but the situation of the
 Jewish community has improved in recent years. Today it
 enjoys a relatively good standard of living, access to higher
 education, and entrance into the professions. Jews are
 subject to restrictions on foreign travel, however, and,
 unlike other Syrian communal groups, their passports and
 identity cards note their religion. Direct contact between
 
 
 1314
 SYRIA
 Syrian Jews and Jews in Israel is still not possible. There
 are unconfirmed reports that Jews are not permitted to hold
 government jobs, and, as in the cases of some other small
 minority groups in Syria, no Jews are known to hold senior
 government or party office. Mandatory public and military
 service is not required of Jews. Indeed, they are not
 permitted to serve in the military.
 There is a Palestinian community of approximately 250,000,
 predominantly made up of those who fled the 1948 and 1967
 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand Lebanese and Palestinians
 also entered Syria in 1982, after Israel's invasion of
 Lebanon. Officially, Palestinians are temporary residents,
 pending the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 Under Syrian law, resident Palestinians enjoy the same access
 as Syrian citizens to employment, social services, and
 education. Palestinians are free to choose their places of
 residence and occupation. Palestinian organizations are free
 to operate their own social institutions within their
 community. The majority participate fully in the Syrian
 economy, although many Palestinians claim that procedures for
 the purchase of real property are cumbersome and that they are
 allowed to own only one building or plot of land.
 The Government allows those Palestinian political groups that
 abide by the official anti-Arafat policy to operate relatively
 freely. Palestinians may not acquire Syrian citizenship or
 vote in Syrian elections, although they currently occupy
 several senior positions in the Syrian bureaucracy.
 Palestinians are required to obtain permission to leave the
 country in addition to the normal exit visa. Young
 Palestinians sometimes find it difficult to obtain the
 requisite Palestinian travel document.
 The equality of women is guaranteed by the Constitution, which
 declares that all obstacles to women's development must be
 eliminated. Historically, Syrian women have benefited from
 enlightened government policies. They were the first female
 Arab constituency to receive the right to vote (1949) and are
 protected under laws of equal pay for equal value of work and
 equality in employment.
 Syrian women hold positions in all areas of the Government and
 the economy. At present, they comprise 12 percent of the
 documented work force; however, a 1982 ILO study suggests that
 79 percent of rural Syrian women are economically active. The
 literacy rate of Syrian women is 43 percent, compared to a
 national rate of 49 percent. Women's enrollment at all levels
 of education is officially encouraged and continues to rise.
 The traditional concept of male guardianship of women
 continues to run against official policy, primarily in
 questions of personal status. Particularly within the Muslim
 community, this often severely limits a woman's rights in
 matters of marriage, divorce, child custody, and inheritance.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Syrian labor statutes provide comprehensive working
 standards, The minimum age in the predominant public sector
 is 18. In the private sector it is more variable; the
 absolute minimum age in the private sector is 12, while
 parental permission is required for children below the age of
 
 
 1315
 SYRIA
 16 to work. The Labor Ministry has an enforcement mechanism,
 but the number of labor investigators is small and violations
 of minimum-age laws may be extensive.
 The workweek is 48 hours (6 8-hour days), although in certain
 fields in which workers are not continuously busy a 9-hour day
 is permitted. In actual practice, government employees rarely
 put in more than a 5-to-6 hour day. The statutes also
 stipulate a full 24-hour rest day per week and a minimum of I
 hour of rest per day; 14 days per year of annual leave (which
 rises to 21 days per year after 10 years' service); 70 percent
 of wages during the first 90 days of illness, then 80 percent
 for the next 90 days; and overtime pay (25 percent for daytime
 overtime, 50 percent for night, 100 percent for holiday).
 Employers are required to provide limited medical care, and if
 there are more than 100 employees a nurse must be hired and
 the service of a physician provided as necessary. The
 Government provides disability insurance, which is paid in
 monthly installments over 25 years. A worker who lost four
 fingers of his right hand in 1986 was awarded a monthly
 stipend which will provide him with a net income of $3,000
 over 25 years. Minimum wages are prescribed in all sectors.
 Guest workers are theoretically entitled to the same
 privileges, but their right to workers' permits is constantly
 in flux. Many are working illegally and are not covered under
 the government system.
 
 
 1316
