 SYRIA
 President Hafiz al-Asad wields virtually absolute power, and
 his Government remains a generally repressive dictatorship.
 The regime has not permitted other centers of government
 authority to develop, and independent political opposition is
 forcibly repressed. There is a Parliament with regular
 elections but it wields no independent authority. The regime
 allows a certain amount of regional autonomy to be exercised
 through local administrative councils affiliated with the
 Ba'ath Party. There is also some degree of latitude, within
 limits defined by the President, granted to the judiciary and
 the economic sector.
 The ruling Ba'ath Party, which emphasizes socialism and
 secular Arabism, gained ascendancy in 1963. It has since
 become dominated by the military, which consumes a large share
 of Syria's scarce economic resources. In recent years, the
 party has served principally to legitimize Asad's rule.
 Although Ba'ath Party doctrine seeks to overcome sectarian and
 class consciousness by building a sense of national rather
 than ethnic identity, ethnic, religious, and regional
 allegiances remain important. Members of Asad's own sect, the
 Alawis, hold many of the most important military and security
 positions.
 Except for a hiatus in 1973-74, Syria has been under emergency
 powers since 1963. Martial law has been justified by the
 state of war with Israel and continuing threats posed by
 terrorist groups (Islamic fundamentalist, Iraqi, Palestinian,
 and Lebanese). The Muslim Brotherhood was, through the early
 1980's, the greatest internal threat to the regime. This
 group of Sunni Islamic fundamentalists openly challenged the
 secular Ba'athist Alawi-dominated regime in the late 1970's
 and early 1980's until its brutal suppression in 1982 at
 Hama. The League for Communist Action is another prominent
 opposition group which has recently become more active. While
 it is unclear which of these groups currently poses the
 greatest threat to the regime, reports of large scale arrests
 in 1988 suggested that opposition groups were still a
 problem. Public manifestation of antiregime activity,
 however, remains very limited.
 The central Government maintains an extensive security
 apparatus. Several main branches of the security services
 exist, and each is suspected of human rights violations.
 Syria has a state. socialist economy and has nationalized most
 major enterprises. The regime has followed economic policies
 designed to correct previous regional and class disparities.
 There is a small but vigorous private sector, and most
 agricultural land is privately owned. Although growth rates
 have been positive since 1985, the economy is plagued by
 stagnation due in part to a severe shortage of foreign
 exchange and structural economic problems.
 There was little change in the overall human rights situation
 in Syria in 1988. Syria remains under the rule of a
 dictatorship, and there were no signs of progress toward a
 freer political system or a greater respect for individual
 human rights. Pervasive denial of human rights, including
 widespread torture and denial of freedoms of speech, press,
 association, and the right of citizens to change their
 government, continued to characterize the regime's record in
 1988.
 
 
 1510
 SYRIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Executions for political beliefs in Syria are typically a
 reaction to direct and violent threats to the regime or the
 suspicion of such threats. There appears to have been a
 decrease in both terrorist incidents and executions in 1988,
 but political executions probably have not ceased altogether.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances reported in 1988. However,
 Amnesty International (AI), in its 1988 Report covering 1987,
 noted that several hundred people, including many civilians,
 reportedly "disappeared" after they were arrested by Syrian
 forces in Lebanon. Many of those arrested in Lebanon,
 according to AI, were transported to Syria where they were
 detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the penal code prohibits torture and establishes
 severe penalties for it, there have been numerous credible
 reports of torture, primarily during arrest and interrogation.
 In its 1988 Report, AI noted that the use of torture by Syrian
 security forces, sometimes employing specially equipped torture
 chambers, was reported to be widespread and routine. Security
 forces often will arrest family members of a fugitive and
 detain or torture them until the fugitive surrenders to
 authorities. There have been no reports of punishment of
 officials who engage in such practices.
 Persons charged with or convicted of criminal offenses are
 held separately from those charged with security crimes.
 Conditions in prisons for ordinary criminals are adequate and
 are better for foreigners than for Syrians. Meals are
 adequate, and provision is made for exercise and recreation.
 At least one prison in the Damascus area also makes provision
 for education and vocational training. Much less is known
 about conditions in security prisons. No international groups
 are allowed access to detention facilities. Families are
 usually not allowed to visit security prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The civilian legal code, modeled after French law, generally
 provides for due process, although it permits indefinite
 pretrial detention during the investigative process. Under
 the state of emergency, normal safeguards can be suspended,
 and a person may be held indefinitely without charge or trial,
 especially in security and political cases.
 In cases involving security or political offenses, arrests are
 made secretly, and there are no legal restraints. The accused
 has no right to a judicial determination of the basis for
 pretrial detention, no redress for false arrest, and cannot be
 contacted by family or friends, who most often do not know
 where the accused is being held. There are no reliable
 estimates of the number of persons detained without trial.
 
 
 1511
 SYRIA
 Exile, sometimes voluntary, is occasionally used to rid the
 regime of troubling elements.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal cases with no political implications are conducted
 according to the French-based legal code. The defendant is
 detained provisionally upon the accusation of the public
 prosecutor, then remanded to a judge for arraignment. The
 judge may either free him on the basis of insufficient
 evidence or refer the case to a criminal court. Defendants
 are entitled to legal representation of their choice; if they
 cannot afford a lawyer, the court will appoint one. Civilian
 courts impose no restrictions on lawyers in representing their
 clients and allow the right of appeal. In noncontroversial
 criminal cases, the civilian courts are usually free of
 governmental coercion, although the Government can bring
 pressure to bear if it wishes to do so. The slow and
 cumbersome legal system can leave suspects languishing in
 prison for months.
 Defendants in criminal cases are assumed innocent until proven
 guilty. Defendants are allowed to present evidence and
 confront their accusers. Trials are public except for cases
 involving juveniles and crimes which may have a negative
 impact on moral sensitivity, such as rape. Religious courts
 usually deal with cases involving marriage, divorce, and
 inheritance.
 In response to the government crackdown against corruption,
 many people were arrested for currency violations in 1987 and
 early 1988." Economic crimes, which had been tried under the
 jurisdiction of the civilian courts, were moved to the
 jurisdiction of the military courts in March. In a similar
 move to toughen the Government's ability to control graft and
 corruption, a Damascus city "administrative decree" was issued
 in February empowering economic tribunals to render sentences
 of life imprisonment and/or the death penalty for economic
 crimes considered severe enough to be "crimes against the
 State." Thus, the death penalty is now authorized for
 nonviolent crime in addition to treason or espionage. Several
 persons were convicted and sentenced to death under those
 laws. According to recent information, the Government has
 executed officials for corruption.
 Persons charged with security or political offenses fall under
 the jurisdiction of the military courts or the state security
 court. Such persons have no say in the selection of a lawyer,
 who is chosen by the court. All court sessions are closed,
 and there are no official channels for obtaining information
 on the trial or sentencing, although relatives with influence
 in the Government ultimately may succeed in obtaining
 information and even effect the release of the accused.
 The Government does not release information on the number of
 persons detained for political or security offenses, but the
 number is probably significant. A number of Ba'ath Party and
 government officials have been detained since 1970. According
 to unconfirmed press reports, as many as 150 military officers
 were arrested in 1982 in connection with a reported coup
 attempt, and 60 were arrested in the summer of 1986 for the
 same reason. Some reportedly were released in 1987. Between
 February and May 1988, unconfirmed reports indicate that up to
 
 
 1512
 SYRIA
 1,200 citizens associated with the Muslim Brotherhood and/or
 the League of Communist Action may have been arrested. Some
 of these probably have been executed. In its 1988 Report, AI
 stated that thousands of political prisoners were detained
 under state of emergency legislation in force continuously
 since 1963 and that some detainees had been held for several
 years. It also said that hundreds of others were arrested
 during 1987 in both Syria and Lebanon.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 Intelligence organizations maintain a network of guards to
 protect officials and important buildings, as well as to
 monitor the activity of people living in those neighborhoods.
 Some telephone conversations are almost certainly recorded.
 The presence of police and security officials is pervasive,
 especially in Damascus. The postal system censors the mail,
 including foreign publications, but it does not check every
 letter or package. Although the legal system provides
 safeguards, including a requirement of an arrest and search
 warrant before police are allowed to enter private homes,
 regulations under the state of emergency suspend these
 protections in security-related cases.
 Security checkpoints can be set up anywhere, and no warrant
 for search or arrest at them is required. Security forces are
 most concerned with terrorists but also search for smuggled
 goods.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Public criticism of the Government, the Ba'ath Party, and
 related institutions is not permitted. The Government or the
 Ba'ath Party wholly own and operate all broadcast media and
 publishing houses and strictly control the dissemination of
 all information.
 Censorship of foreign and domestic news is exercised through
 offices in the Ministries of Information and of Culture and
 National Guidance. Any subject deemed sensitive to government
 interests will not appear in the press or in daily broadcasts.
 In 1988 this included the actions taken by Western states
 against Syria because of its involvement in terrorism, the
 proceedings and decisions of the Palestine National Council-,
 and civil unrpst in either the Soviet Union or Eastern
 European.countries. In some cases, such as the Jordanian
 disengagement from the West Bank, public commentary was
 significantly delayed. In another case, only one newspaper
 published the communique of the Amman summit, critical of
 Iran; its. publisher was subsequently transferred.
 Newspapers provide no medium for opposition opinion. The
 occasional criticism of government politics or their
 operations occurs only when sanctioned by senior government
 officials and is limited to minor administrative failings and
 domestic corruption. There are, however, daily complaints
 about problems in the economy. In this way, the media act to
 portray themselves as defenders of the interests of the
 people. Officials above the middle rank are rarely
 criticized.
 
 
 1513
 SYRIA
 Imported printed material and films are subject to censorship.
 Articles about Syria are occasionally deleted from foreign
 magazines and newspapers before distribution. News material,
 as well as fictional and nonfictional literature, are sometimes
 banned if censors consider them overly critical of Syria.
 Films are censored for a variety of reasQns, such as
 unfavorable interpretation of the Middle East conflict,
 sectarianism, or the use of actors or production companies
 targeted by the Arab boycott. Control is much stricter on
 materials in Arabic.
 Schools at all levels are government operated. Even
 church-run private primary-and secondary schools are required
 to follow the Ministry of Education curriculum and are subject
 to regular inspection. One hour of the school day is devoted
 to instruction on Syrian patriotism. Teachers are not
 permitted to express ideas contrary to government policy,
 although more freedom of expression is tolerated at the
 university level.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Public meetings, assemblies, or demonstrations may be held
 only with official permission, and usually at the instigation
 of the Government or the Ba'ath Party. Private societies,
 including religious groups, are allowed to meet if they have
 received governmental permission to organize. They are
 limited, however, to nonpolitical activities.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although most Syrians are Sunni Muslim, the Constitution does
 not espouse a state religion. As a concession to Islamic
 fundamentalists, who object to Ba'athi secularism, the current
 regime amended the Constitution to require that the president
 be Muslim. Otherwise, there is no official preference given
 to one religion over another. Sunni Arabs constitute over
 two-thirds of the population. Many key positions in the
 Government are controlled by members of the minority Alawi
 sect (10-12 percent of the population), which is considered
 heretical by many Sunni Muslims.
 Ba'athi ideology and modernizing influences have had some
 impact in diminishing the primacy of religion and ethnicity,
 but individual Syrians continue to identify themselves by
 their communal associations. Non-Alawi and non-Sunni groups
 have the freedom to practice their individual religions, but
 religious training, fundraising, construction, and the holding
 of all meetings except for worship are tightly restricted and
 sometimes banned. Non-Muslim groups may maintain links with
 Muslims and coreligionists outside Syria.
 One exception to the official policy of religious tolerance is
 the treatment of Seventh-Day Adventists, who are forbidden to
 practice their religion or own church property.
 Foreign missionaries are permitted to operate, although
 proselytizing is strictly forbidden. The publication of
 religious materials is subject to the same strict controls as
 secular material.
 
 
 1514
 SYRIA
 The status of Syrian Jews continues to be influenced by the
 ongoing state of war with Israel. The 3,000 to 4,000 Jews in
 Syria are free to practice their religion, and the situation
 of the Jewish community has improved in recent years, despite
 the uncertainty dictated by regional developments.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel is restricted only in the security zone of the
 Golan Heights and near the borders with Lebanon, Jordan, and
 Iraq. All citizens wishing to travel abroad must acquire
 passports and exit visas. In theory, Syrians can travel to
 other Arab countries, except Iraq, on their identification
 cards alone, although in practice this applies only to
 Lebanon. Women of any age and children under 16 must have
 permission to travel abroad from husbands or fathers. The
 male head of a household can also register his wife's and
 children's names with immigration authorities to prevent their
 departure from Syria.
 In general, the Government prohibits foreign travel for
 persons liable for military service and for certain categories
 of professionals, such as pharmacists, architects, and
 engineers, trained at public expense, who have not fulfilled 5
 years of government service. Under exceptional circumstances,
 however, persons in these groups may obtain passports valid
 for 3 months and limited for travel to specific countries.
 Students traveling abroad for higher education must obtain
 permission from the Foreign Ministry and, like all Syrians,
 are subject to recall by the Government. Persons caught
 trying to travel illegally are subject to fines and detention.
 Palestinians living in Syria must also obtain an exit visa
 from Syrian authorities, and young Palestinians sometimes
 experience difficulties obtaining the requisite travel
 document.
 Jews, particularly those with significant holdings and
 financial ties in Syria, have found it somewhat easier to
 travel abroad in recent years. with some exceptions, the
 Government continues its policy of not issuing passports to
 all members of a Jewish family at the same time. In theory,
 any Syrian can be required to post a bond of between $300 and
 $1,000 which would be forfeited in the event of nonreturn. In
 reality, only Jews are routinely required to post such bonds.
 Moreover, Jewish emigration continues to be banned. Persons
 caught trying to emigrate, traveling illegally, or suspected
 of having visited Israel are arrested. Beginning in late 1987
 and continuing into 1988, at least 10 Jews were arrested for
 violating travel restrictions and received sentences of 6
 months to 1 year. In the first 9 months of 1988, five who had
 served their term were released. AI issued a report in 1988
 on members of the Syrian Jewish community who had been
 arrested and detained without charge or trial for several
 months. AI's requests to the Syrian Government for
 information about allegations that at least three of these
 detainees were tortured received no response.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Asad and his senior advisers maintain strict control
 over the political life of the nation. Syrians have little to
 say in the determination of their political leadership.
 
 
 1515
 SYRIA
 Popular participation in presidential elections is provided
 for in the Constitution. The Parliament has little real power
 except with respect to labor conditions. Major initiatives
 normally take the form of presidential decrees and Ba'ath
 Party resolutions which are later ratified by the Parliament.
 The Constitution provides that the Ba'ath Party is the leading
 political organization. Other legal parties, which nominally
 are members of a broad-based national front, are severely
 restricted. Some parties, such as the League for Communist
 Action, are outlawed.
 According to official sources, during the 1985 presidential
 elections President Asad received 99 percent of the vote, with
 99 percent of the public participating. There was no
 opposition candidate.
 A certain degree of regional autonomy is permitted as long as
 it does not challenge the central Government's authority.
 Major cities, for example, exercise local administrative
 control. Certain ethnic and social groups, such as the
 Bedouin and people living in small villages, have little
 contact with the central Government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government denies charges of human rights violations,
 often ignoring them or calling them intrusions into internal
 affairs. There are no internal groups monitoring human
 rights. AI's inquiries are ignored, and the International
 Committee of the Red Cross has had only limite- access to
 prisoners. No Syrian has been willing publicly to criticize
 the Government for human right violations.
 The Government exerts great efforts in the U.N. and other
 international bodies to highlight human rights abuse by other
 countries--especially Israel, Iraq, South Africa, and, in
 1987, the United States.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Membership in the Ba'ath Party, or being a close relative of a
 prominent Ba'ath Party member, is important to prospering in
 the Syrian economy. Party connections can pave the way for
 entrance into better schools, access to more lucrative
 employment, and greater power in government. With respect to
 job discrimination based on religion, members of the Alawi
 sect enjoy a favored position and Jews are prohibited from
 joining the military.
 The official state of war with Israel continues to influence
 the status of Syrian Jews, although the community's situation
 has improved in recent years. Today, the Jewish community
 enjoys a relatively high standard of living, access to higher
 education, and entrance into the professions. Jews are
 subject to a stricter application of foreign travel
 restrictions, however, and are the only minority whose
 passports note their religion. Contact between Syrian Jews
 and Israelis is prohibited. Like members of other small
 minorities, no Jews hold senior positions in the Ba'ath
 Party. Jews are not required to perform government service
 and are barred from the military. A few hold low-level
 government positions as clerks and teachers.
 
 
 1516
 SYRIA
 Syria's Palestinian community numbers approximately 250,000
 registered with the United Nations Relief Works Agency and
 consists predominantly of refugees from the 1948 and 1967
 Arab-Israeli wars. Several thousand Lebanese and Palestinians
 also fled to Syria in 1982 following the Israeli invasion of
 Lebanon. Palestinians are officially temporary residents
 pending the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
 Under Syrian law, resident Palestinians enjoy equal access to
 employment, social services, and education. In addition,
 Palestinian organizations. sanctioned by the Government operate
 social institutions within their community. Palestinians may
 choose their place of residence and occupation, and the
 majority participate fully in the local economy. With
 government permission, they may own more than one building or
 plot of land.
 The Government allows the operation of those Palestinian
 political groups that espouse the officially sanctioned policy
 against Yasir Arafat, although their activities are carefully
 circumscribed. Palestinians may not vote in Syrian elections
 or acquire citizenship except through marriage to a male Syrian
 citizen. Although they currently occupy several senior
 positions in the bureaucracy, Palestinians are unofficially
 barred from the highest echelons of the Government.
 The Constitution affirms the rights of women and calls for the
 elimination of all obstacles to women's development.
 Historically, Syrian women have benefited from government
 policies, including the right to vote (1949) and equal pay for
 work of equal value.
 Syrian women hold positions in all sectors of the Government
 and the economy. They presently comprise about 12 percent of
 the documented work force, although the figure probably rises
 in rural areas. Forty-three percent of all women are
 literate, compared to a national average of 49 percent. The
 Government encourages women's enrollment at all levels of
 education.
 Traditional concepts of male guardianship of women continue to
 counteract official policies. Particularly among Muslims,
 these concepts often limit a woman's rights in mattexs of
 marriage, divorce, child custody, inheritance, and personal
 decisions.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Government uses the Syrian General Federation of Trade
 Unions (GFTU) as its framework for controlling nearly all
 aspects of union activity. Workers are not free to form labor
 unions independent of the government-prescribed structure.
 While unions are used to transmit instructions and information
 to the labor force from the Syrian leadership, there are
 indications that elected union leaders, as members of the
 Ba'ath Party, also act as a conduit through which workers'
 dissatisfaction is transmitted to the leadership. The head or
 deputy head of the GFTU, for example, participates in all
 cabinet sessions. In addition, by law at least 51 percent of
 the members of Syria's Parliament must be workers or peasants.
 While strikes are not prohibited under Syrian law (except in
 the agricultural sector), in practice they are effectively
 discouraged.
 
 
 1517
 SYRIA
 The GFTU is affiliated to the International Confederation of
 Arab Trade Unions and the Soviet-controlled World Federation
 of Trade Unions. It also represents Syrian workers in the
 International Labor Organization (ILO).
 Under the 1973 Constitution, the people have the right to form
 trade unions. Syrian labor unions are organized sectorally
 and at local, provincial, and national levels. Under Syrian
 labor law, any group of 50 or more workers in a particular
 profession or sector may form a guild committee. These local
 committees may join to form a provincial union. These
 provincial unions may join with others in the same profession
 to form a national syndicate or union. Officials At all
 levels are elected, and the provincial unions reportedly are
 financially independent of the national syndicate.
 However, the ILO's independent Committee of Experts on the
 Applications of Conventions and Recommendations has observed
 that only one trade union can be set up for the same
 occupation within the same province and that the unions in a
 province can only group themselves- into one provincial
 federation of workers.
 Of the 198 national unions in Syria, all but 8 are part of the
 GFTU structure. The Government maintains that the unions
 which belong to the GFTU chose voluntarily to do so because
 "the central affiliation system enables the workers to attain
 their objectives and their ambitions of having partner status
 in negotiations." The GFTU is charged with providing opinions
 on legislation, devising rules for wo-rkers and labor, and to
 organize labor. The elected president of the GFTU is a senior
 member of the ruling Ba'ath Party. The secretary general of
 the eight nonaffiliated associations, some of whom are not
 Ba'ath Party members, are also elected officials.
 The ILO's Committee of Experts in its 1987 and 1988 reports
 concluded that the GFTU structure amounted to a legally
 mandated system of trade union unity. It observed that under
 the law the GFTU has the right to dissolve the executive
 committee of any trade union. Other observations of the
 committee had to do with restrictions on the right of foreign
 workers to join or form trade unions of their own choosing;
 the interference of public authorities in trade union
 administration; the supervision of their financial accounts;
 the right of the GFTU to dissolve the executive committee of
 any trade union; and the prohibition of strikes in the
 agricultural sector.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 In the public sector, unions do not normally bargain
 collectively on wage issues, but their representatives
 participate with the representatives of the respective
 employer and ministry in establishing sectoral minimum wages.
 Moreover, in a country whose major industries are publicly
 held, workers make up the majority of each board of directors
 and always include union representation on those boards. They
 also monitor and enforce compliance with the labor law. In
 the private sector, unions are active in monitoring compliance
 with the laws and ensuring workers, health and safety. The
 guilds, under the law, can undertake negotiations for
 collective contracts with employers. They can sue and be
 represented in court.
 
 
 1518
 SYRIA
 There is no information currently available regarding Syrian
 labor practices inside Syrian free-trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There have been no indications of forced or compulsory labor
 in Syria.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age in the predominant public sector is 14, though
 it is higher in certain industries. The minimum age varies
 more widely in the private sector; the absolute minimum age is
 12, while parental permission is required for children under
 age 16 to work. Children are forbidden from working at
 night. The Labor Ministry is responsible for enforcing
 minimum ages, but the number of labor investigators is low,
 and violations of the law may be extensive.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government provides minimum and maximum wage limits in the
 public sector. Salaries are set on a monthly scale. The
 wages were set in 1985 and revised in 1987, reflecting an
 approximate increase of 30 percent, while inflation was
 officially estimated at about 70 percent. The lowest salary
 scale for an entry position, with no experience or credentials
 and engaging in no physical labor, is approximately $75 per
 month at the official rate of exchange. The highest public
 sector starting salary is approximately $167 for someone with
 a Ph.D. degree. Neither of these rates alone is sufficient to
 provide a decent standard of living. As a result, many
 workers take additional jobs or live in extended families to
 make ends meet.
 There is no fixed minimum wage in the private sector for
 permanent employees. However, the monthly minimum would not
 be less, in practice, than that in the public sector.
 According to the 1959 labor law, minimum wages in the private
 sector are fixed by the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor.
 Recommendations are put to him by a committee, formed by a
 representative of the Ministry of Industry or of Economy and
 Commerce plus a representative of the employers and of the
 employees (union or guild).
 Syrian labor law extensively regulates conditions of work.
 This includes rules and regulations which severely limit the
 ability of an employer to fire an employee without due cause,
 an issue which the employee may take to court. It has become
 a truism and an economic problem that workers, once hired,
 cannot easily be fired. One exception to the well-regulated
 labor field is that of day laborers. They are not subject to
 minimum wage regulations and receive compensation only for
 job-related injuries. They are commonly employed in small
 private firms and businesses in order to avoid the costs of
 permanent employees.
 The workweek consists of six 6-hour days, although in certain
 fields in which workers are not continuously busy a 9-hour day
 is permitted. Labor laws also mandate a full 24-hour rest day
 per week. Employees are guaranteed 15 days of paid leave per
 year during the first 5 years, rising to 30 days per year for
 persons over age 50 or with 20 years' employment. Employers
 are required to provide limited medical care, and
 
 
 1519
 SYRIA
 establishments with more than 100 employees must hire a nurse
 and offer access to a physician when necessary.
 Public laws mandate safety standards in all sectors, although
 actual enforcement depends on individual managers and may,
 therefore, vary. The Government provides disability insurance
 for job-related injuries. Permanently disabled workers who do
 not return to their job receive severance pay of up to 70
 percent of their last salary, with a sliding scale based on
 the extent of the disability. Employees often experience
 delays in receiving compensation but have recourse to the
 legal system in the event of nonpayment.
 Guest workers theoretically receive the same benefits, but are
 often reluctant to press claims because worker permits may be
 withdrawn at any time. Moreover, many work illegally and are
 not covered by the government system.
 Women may not engage in jobs involving heavy labor and must
 obtain permission to work at night. A woman may take
 maternity leave of 2-1/2 months at full salary, 1 month at 80
 percent of salary, and up to 4 years' leave without pay, after
 which she may rejoin the work force in her former job.
 
 
 1520
