Chad
Chad continues to be destabilized by its ongoing proxy conflict with neighboring
Sudan, although the government was bolstered by the defeat of Chadian rebels
backed by Khartoum in combat in eastern Chad in May. Reports indicate that during
the fighting government forces carried out extrajudicial executions of rebels,
acts of gender-based violence, and used child soldiers. These have also been features
of previous counterinsurgency efforts since the start of hostilities in late
2005. The government’s Chadian rebel adversaries and Sudanese rebel allies
have also been responsible for serious human rights violations, particularly the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Civilians suspected of harboring sympathies for Chadian rebels, and members of
ethnic groups associated with rebel groups, were subject to arbitrary arrest, torture,
and enforced disappearance at the hands of Chadian government security
forces. The government generally failed to ensure accountability for war crimes
and other serious rights abuses, particularly in cases involving government officials
and members of the armed forces.
This impunity raises concerns about the legislative elections scheduled to take
place in 2010, as well as the presidential election slated for 2011. In the current
climate, where security forces are free to abuse civilians without sanction, often
on the basis of ethnicity, the ability of individuals to associate freely and the ability
of political parties to campaign are highly questionable.
Combat near Sudan Border
Government security forces were responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law during and after combat with Chadian rebels in the town of
Am Dam, in the Dar Sila region near the border with Sudan. On the morning of
May 7, 2009, members of the Chadian National Army (ANT) summarily executed at
least nine rebel combatants and were responsible for indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, several of whom were crushed to death when government tanks flattened
homes where rebels were thought to be hiding.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Eastern Chad hosts more than 250,000 refugees from conflicts in Sudan and the
Central African Republic, as well as at least 167,000 internally displaced Chadians
who abandoned their homes between 2005 and 2007. Refugees and IDPs are
exposed to rights abuses in the camp environment, particularly vulnerable groups
such as women, who suffer from sexual- and gender-based violence, and children,
who are targeted for recruitment into armed groups.
In an effort to restore the civilian character of Oure Cassoni camp, which is situated
on the border in close proximity to a military base of the Darfur rebel group the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), the United Nations revived calls to relocate
the camp 40 kilometers to the west. Refugees refused to comply with similar
efforts in 2007.
Nearly 30,000 internally displaced persons returned to their areas of origin in
southeastern Chad in 2009, primarily to cultivate crops or to reassert land claims.
Information about security conditions outside the camps was scarce, and some
IDPs were killed by unidentified gunmen during these temporary returns; other
civilians returned to find that their land had been confiscated by former neighbors.
The Chadian government failed to restore security to the rural areas where
many of these returns took place.
Sexual Violence
Owing to chronic insecurity related to the ongoing conflict and an entrenched culture
of impunity, women and girls in eastern Chad face high levels of sexual violence.
Despite the presence of UN troops and UN-trained Chadian police units,
refugee and IDP women and girls are exposed to sexual abuse both inside the
camps and when they venture outside for water and firewood. The proximity of
Chadian government soldiers constitutes a risk factor for sexual- and genderbased
violence. Human Rights Watch documented numerous instances of rape
and attempted rape by government soldiers following military mobilizations and
clashes with rebel forces in border areas of eastern Chad.
During the May hostilities government soldiers sexually assaulted women and
girls in Am Dam and in surrounding areas, which in conflict constitutes a war crime. Women and girls abandoned the village of Galbassa, 2 kilometers east of
Am Dam, after ANT soldiers sexually assaulted two sisters, ages 14 and 19, on the
night of May 7; they returned only after government security forces had withdrawn
from the area.
Child Soldiers
Government security forces continued to recruit and use children, including the
ANT, the gendarmerie, and the Office of Security Services for State Institutions
(DGSSIE), an elite fighting force that answers directly to President Idriss Deby
Itno. The JEM, which receives backing from the Chadian government, actively and
openly recruited children from refugee camps in eastern Chad, in some cases
threatening refugees and child protection officials for attempting to intervene.
Since May 2007, when the Chadian government reached an agreement with the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to release all children from the armed
forces, 654 child soldiers have been released from the army. However, fewer than
10 percent of those demobilized came from the government ranks; most were
from former rebel groups that had joined forces with the government in peace
accords. UNICEF is allowed to inspect ANT bases for the presence of children, but
access to DGSSIE positions, many of them situated in frontline areas, was routinely
denied. DGSSIE soldiers contacted by Human Rights Watch reported the
presence of children under age 15 in their units. A member of the officer corps
estimated that as much as 5 percent of the 8,000 to 10,000 soldiers in the
DGSSIE were under 18.
United Nations Mission in Chad
The United Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT),
established by the UN Security Council in September 2007 to protect civilians at
risk in eastern Chad, struggled to implement its protection mandate, with just
over half of its 5,200 troops deployed to the field. MINURCAT also failed to exercise
elements of its mandate allowing for reporting on human rights violations; its
human rights unit has not issued any reports on rights abuses in Chad since the
mission was established. MINURCAT forces were able to provide limited escorts to humanitarian actors, as well as area security for refugee and IDP camps in eastern
Chad.
The Integrated Security Detachment (DIS), a component of MINURCAT comprised
of 850 Chadian police officers trained by the UN, has been implicated in serious
abuses against civilians since being deployed to eastern Chad in June 2009. In
response to abuses including unlawful killings of civilians, MINURCAT has withdrawn
the certification of DIS officers implicated in abuses, but the UN has
encountered difficulties ensuring that Chadian authorities launch criminal proceedings
against the accused. MINURCAT human rights officers can monitor abuses
committed by members of the DIS but are prevented by mandate from public
reporting on such abuses. As a result, the DIS is allowed to operate with scant
accountability for crimes committed.
Hissène Habré Trial
Government officials in Senegal continued to stymie judicial proceedings against
former Chadian president Hissène Habré, who stands accused of crimes against
humanity and torture during his 1982-90 rule. Senegalese President Abdoulaye
Wade publicly suggested that Habré could be expelled from Senegal if international
donors did not assume the full expense of organizing a trial, which Senegal
estimated at US$40 million. In February 2009 Belgium asked the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) to order Senegal to prosecute or extradite Habré, and to keep
Habré in Senegal pending a final ICJ decision. In May the ICJ accepted Senegal’s
formal assurance that it would not let Habré leave while the case was being
heard. Belgium was given until July 2010 to file pleadings in the case, while
Senegal was ordered to file its response by July 2011.
Key International Actors
France was instrumental in pushing the Chadian government to agree to an international
inquiry into serious abuses by government forces during and after fighting
with rebel forces in February 2008, and in 2009 French diplomats quietly
urged the government to shed light on the fate of opposition leader Ibni Oumar
Mahamat Saleh, who was “disappeared” by government security forces in
February 2008 and is presumed dead. However, France has done little to ensure the independence of a follow-up body established in January 2009 to carry forward
investigations into crimes committed in February 2008. France historically
has provided crucial military support to the government, but it signaled its displeasure
with the government’s reluctance to negotiate an end of hostilities with
Chadian rebel groups by sending French military aircraft out of the country during
the May 2009 hostilities.
The United States maintains interests in Chad’s petroleum sector, partners with
the Chadian government in counterterrorism efforts, and it is the single largest
contributor to humanitarian operations in the east of the country. On September
15 the US State Department Office of Trafficking in Persons imposed sanctions on
the Chadian government, including the withdrawal of all US military assistance,
for failing to make adequate efforts to combat the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and other instances of child trafficking. That same day President Barack
Obama waived the sanctions, citing US national interests.