 CHAD*
 Chad is beset by fundamental problems anA profound socio-
 economic conflicts. Historically, no nation remotely
 resembling present-day Chad existed, and it was only in the
 late 1930a that.the French colonial administration was
 extended to what is now the national territory. Moreover,
 Chad developed few political and economic institutions during
 the colonial-era. It is-unable to feed its population and
 remains among the world's 10 poorest countries. Chad is rent
 by deep social, ethnic, regional.and religious divisions,
 e.g.,.the nomads of the desert north versus the semi-nomadic
 peoples of the Sahel and the sedentary farmers of the south;
 the Arabs and others of Arabized culture versus the more
 -raditional black African groups; the northern ex-slaves
 versus the southern ex-slaves; the Muslims versus the
 animists and Christians. These differences are further
 exacerbated by external interference.
 These divisions and resulting ethnic/cultural discrimination
 led-to a civil war. which had:been festering since 1965. In
 February 1979, the war. erupted in the streets of N'Djamena,
 the capital, and the old southern-dominated order was over-
 thrown. Thevictors, however, were so ill-equipped to govern
 and sordivided among themselves that it proved impossible to
 constitute .or operate a viable national government. In
 .August,1979,-the leaders of the 11 political factions signed
 an agreement providing for demilitarization of the capital
 -and formation of an interm coalition government pending
 national elections.
 Efforts to implement this agreement were repeatedly frus-
 trated. On the night of March 21, 1980, fighting broke
 .out between the two major factions, the Popular Armed
 Forces (FAP) of President Weddeye Goukouni and the Armed
 Forces of the North (FAN) of former Defense Minister Hissein
 Habre. Four days later, most embassies and foreign residents
 evacuated the city. Chadian refugees streamed across the
 -Chari River to the northern Cameroon city of Kousseri and to
 northern Nigeria. Repeated attempts by a number of concerned
 parties to establish a ceasefire failed. The warring parties
 were left to shoot it out while the Organization of African
 Unity (OAU) tried to bring them to the conference table. On
 October 18,-1980, Goukouni and Habre met in Lome but were
 ,unable-to conclude an accord. Both men left negotiators who
 drafted an agreement, but by early November the war had
 intensified. At the invitation -of President Goukouni,
 -Libyan forces began to.enter the country in massive numbers
 around this time, and by December 15 they succeeded in
 driving Habre's-forces from the capital in retreat. On
 December 16, the defeated Habre signed the redrafted cease-
 fire agreement.
 On December 22, 1980, the OAU met in an emergency session
 .in-Lagos to discuss the future of Chad. The participants
 split over-the wording of the final, communique which did
 .not condemn the Libyan presence in Chad, as some OAU mem-
 bers had wished, but upheld the original Lagos Accord
 *The United States.Embassy in Chad has been closed since
 March 24, 1980.because of the outbreak of fighting in
 N'Djamena.
 (55)
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 5
 
 
 56
 which had established the Provisional Government (GUNT)
 in 1979. On January 6, 1981, the Goukouni government and
 Libya released a communique announcing their intention to
 work toward a merger of their two countries. Repeated
 diplomatic attempts by concerned African states over the
 next few months appeared to make no progress toward a Libyan
 withdrawal from Chad. Nevertheless, in October 1981, Goukouni
 publicly requested that the Libyan forces withdraw from Chad.
 The Libyan leader, Colonel Qadhafi, responded with an immedi-
 ate and precipitous withdrawal of all his troops. By the end
 of the year, the OAU had hastily assembled and dispatched an
 inter-African force to replace the Libyan troops and maintain
 peace among the diverse Chadian factions. There were uncon-
 firmed reports of renewed fighting between the forces of the
 GUNT and those of the dissident leader, Habre. There is
 little indication, as yet, that the various political factions,
 which are heavily based on ethnic loyalties, will be willing
 to participate in a process of internal reconciliation leading
 to a truly unified government.
 Chad is deeply ravaged by the effects of its long civil war.
 The bureaucracy has largely ceased to function. The treasury
 is empty except perhaps in the south where the sale of cotton
 and the payment of veterans' pensions from France provide some
 revenue. Law and order are subordinate to military exigencies.
 The limited modern section of the economy has been shattered.
 The southern part of the country, ruled by a "Permanent Com-
 mittee," has few real ties to the GUNT. Social, ethnic and
 religious divisions have been further intensified by war-
 engendered deaths, thus deepening animosities on all sides.
 Libyan armed forces, during their stay of nearly a year, did
 nothing to alleviate the country's economic crisis, and, in.
 fact, acted as a virtual army of occupation.
 Under these conditions, it is difficult to speak of categories
 of rights or of respect for these rights. No constitution or
 fundamental legal system exists againdt which to evaluate or
 measure performance in human rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a. Torture
 In 1979 there were reports, never verified, that some
 prisoners had been tortured by various armed factions during
 interrogation, particularly during periods of intense combat.
 There have been no such reports since that time.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are no means of confirming reports that all jails have
 been closed and civilian prisoners released. While jails are
 primitive, mistreatment has not normally been a problem
 during confinement. There are reports of summary executions
 of prisoners during combat. Amnesty International reports
 allegations of summary executions of 100 or more persons by
 several of the factions in 1980 and 1981. Although these
 reports are credible, under current conditions they cannot be
 documented. The International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC), which was active in Chad from March 1978 to April
 1980, and returned in Marcn 1981, and which given access to most
 
 
 57
 'prisoners .of war, reported that abuse and executions were
 isolated incidents. There are reports that 50 former prisoners
 of war were returned to their home provinces in southern Chad
 in March 1981.
 c. Disappearances
 .There is no evidence of official responsibility for, or an
 official.policy condoning, disappearances. Until April 1980,
 the ICRC was active in seeking to locate missing persons and
 .apparently had the cooperation of all factions in doing so.
 However, disappearances are a likely consequence of civil war
 conditions.
 d. Arbitary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrests and imprisonment for indeterminate periods
 were daily occurrences with the breakdown of government
 in February 1979 and the renewed outbreak of civil war
 .in March 1980. Armed combatants of the various factions,
 .many of whomawere illiterate or untrained, made arrests
 .on grounds such as suspicion of spying or on simple whim.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Since the judicial system no longer functions, there are no
 .trials in the normal sense of the term.
 f. ..Invasion of the Home
 -Since February 1979, widespread looting of homes by armed
 combatants of various factions has been a serious problem.
 Following the outbreak of fighting in March 1980, all homes
 and offices in the European and administrative sections
 of N'Djamena were-reportedly-looted by government combatants.
 Although this looting is not explicitly condoned by the
 leaders of the various coalition factions, neither have
 they been willing to take the kind of actions which would
 be necessary to suppress it.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Assembly and Religion
 .There are several radio stations and publications operated
 by armed factions in N'Djamena or ad hoc groups in the south.
 A. mimeographed daily information sheet called "Infotchad" is
 -published -under GUNTauspices in N'Djamena. Vice President
 Kamougue closed two news sheets which published articles
 critical of, and threatening, Frenchmen living in the south
 after the opening of a French Consulate in Moundou, the
 south's principal city. Foreign publications apparently
 circulate when they can be obtained. When invited in by one
 of the factions, foreign correspondents are able to function,
 although they are regarded with suspicion and, at times, have
 been subjected to arbitrary actions such as confiscation of
 notes and film. In December 1981 a Chadian stringer for AP
 was arrested, allegedly for filing reports unfavorable
 to the GUNT, and was released after several weeks. Ethnic
 problems erupt from time to time. No serious problems have
 been reported regarding freedom of religion, and all faction
 leaders, as well as the GUNT, profess support of the principle.
 
 
 58
 Since it was not permitted before March 24, 1980, it is
 doubtful that freedom of assembly for political purposes
 could be exercised under military rule.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Domestic travel is not prohibited in principle, but it
 is severely circumscribed by the serious danger involved
 in trying to move between zones controlled by the various
 factions. Emigration and foreign travel are controlled
 in the areas where Chadian authority exists, but not in
 a repressive fashion. A passport office still operates in
 N'Djamena. Members of all factions seem able to travel
 freely outside of Chad.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 At this time, the "political process" in Chad is restricted
 to acquiescence to the GUNT, which has allowed no opposition
 parties to exist in the area under its control. Individuals
 opposed to the GUNT have joined the remaining factions, such
 as Habre's FAN, which are still active outside the capital.
 There are no electoral procedures or political parties in the
 usual sense of the term. Political activities of women are
 limited further by Muslim and tribal traditions.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no reports of any attempts by international or
 nongovernmental groups to investigate alleged human rights
 violations in Chad. The ICRC was active in Chad from March
 1978 to April 1980, when it suspended its operations due
 to the civil war. During that period, it facilitated the
 release of several thousand family members of war prisoners
 held by various factions; it provided food and medicine to
 the war prisoners still being held; it helped protect, feed
 and move refugees; and it passed thousands of family messages
 across hostile lines. After it left N'Djamena, the ICRC
 remained active in refugee relief efforts in Cameroon. On
 March 1, 1981, the ICRC delegation was reestablished in
 N'Djamena, with the consent of the GUNT, where it resumed
 medical and food aid and carried out efforts to locate
 the several hundred former prisoners of war and civilian
 internees scattered in the north and east of the country.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Even before the most recent outbreak of civil war, Chad was
 one of the poorest countries in the world with a per capita
 GNP in 1979 of only $129. Until the Sahel-wide drought of
 1967-1973, Chad was self-sufficient in food production, but
 adverse climatic conditions precipitated a downward economic
 slide which has yet to be reversed, resulting in negative
 growth rates of per capita income, capital investment and
 gross domestic product (GDP). An estimated 87 percent of the
 population is located in the rural areas outside the four
 main cities of N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh and Abeche; virtually
 the entire rural population lives at the subsistence level.
 
 
 59
 There are an estimated 4.3 million people in Chad and the
 population growth rate is estimated at 2.0 percent. The
 total fertility rate in 1979, the most recent year for which
 figures are available, was 5.9 percent. Life expectancy at
 birth was 41 years. The standard of living was somewhat
 higher in the southern part of the country, where a settled
 agricultural lifestyle had prevailed for centuries, than in
 the desert north. Life in the cities was somewhat more
 favorable as well,'as illustrated by the fact that only
 30 percent of urban dwellers lived below the poverty level
 between 1976 and 1977, compared to 56 percent of rural
 dwellers. In the same period, moreover, 43 percent of
 people in the cities had access to safe water, compared to
 only 23 percent in rural areas.
 Since February 1979, all development activities and most
 government services, such as education and health care, have
 been almost totally disrupted. There is little evidence that
 the GUNT has been able to restore these services since the
 heaviest fighting ended in late 1980, although President
 Goukouni has indicated his desire to do so and the GUNT has
 appealed to the UN and to the international community for
 aid in reconstructing the country.
 The intense fighting in Chad's civil war during 1980 resulted
 in the creation of nearly 200,000 refugees and displaced
 persons. The largest concentration of these were the 100,000
 refugees living in the-United Nations High Commission for
 Refugees (UNHCR)-sponsored camp in Kousseri, Cameroon,
 directly across the Chari River from N'Djamena other refugees
 were in Nigeria, Sudan and the Central African Republic. A
 tripartite. refugee commission was established by the UNHCR,
 the GUNT and the Government of Cameroon to arrange for
 eventual repatriation of these refugees to Chad. In September
 1981 this conmission decided to terminate relief assistance as
 of September 30 and to begin UNHCR-administered repatriation
 on October 1, At this writing, the repatriation of these
 refugees seems to be proceeding smoothly, but it is not known
 how many persons will elect to remain outside Chad. Inter-
 national relief efforts administered by CARE are planned to
 facilitate the resettlement of returned refugees inside
 Chad.
 The adult literacy rate in Chad in 1975 was 15 percent;
 this has probably declined during the civil war, which
 caused a nearly total disruption of education. Adjusted
 primary school enrollment, when the educational system was
 still functioning, was 35 percent of eligible school-aged
 children, with 51 percent of eligible boys and 19 percent
 of eligible girls. The role of women in Chad traditionally
 has been circumscribed by Muslim and tribal customs.
 Women generally help their husbands with millet cultivation
 but also cultivate their own crops which can be a source of
 income. Few women have been educated and fewer still have
 begun professional careers. The United States Agency for
 International Development had begun several women-in-develop-
 ment projects with Peace Corps assistance. With the outbreak
 of fighting, however, these projects ended. In the aftermath
 of the war, most women in Chad have been forced to retreat
 to their traditional home areas in the subsistence economy
 or to refugee camps.
 The GUNT has drawn up an extensive compilation of urgent
 developmental needs and has appealed to the international
 L.community for help. This list includes amounts for education,
 rural development, public health, telecommunications, refugee
 resettlement, food aid and infrastructure reconstruction.
 Genuine reconstruction and development in Chad will, however,
 depend on a final end to the civil war, a reconciliation of
 the still-activ.e political factions and the establishment of
 internal stability in the wake of the withdrawal of Libyan
 troops.
 
 
 60
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 IU.S.FISCAL YEARS- NILLIONS OF DOLLARS)'
 COUNTRY: CHAD
 1979     1980     1901
 
 X.ECON, ASSIST.-TOiAL...
 LOANS.e......       '
 GRANTS ............
 A. AID . ee.....eee
 .  LOANS,............
 .*GRANTS ...... ,.....
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)
 S.FOOD  FOR  PEACE.......
 LOANS.........
 GRANTS......... ..'
 TITLE I-TOTAL.o.......
 REPAY. IN -$-LOANS....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR....
 TITLE 11-TOTAL.........
 E.RELIEFEC.DEV C WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ...
 .'C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.;..
 LOANS..............
 "GRANTS... ,...... ..
 PEACE CORPS.....
 .NARCOTICSo*....
 OTHER.............
 II.MIL..ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS............
 GRANTS.............
 .A.,AP GRANTS...........
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN"EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS........
 III. TOTAL ECON.' & NIL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS...............
 OTHER US LOANS .........
 EX-IM BANK. LOANS* ....
 ALL OTHER..............
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL A
 1979     19,80
 TOTAL........      8.4.     1.5
 IORO               0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0"     0.0
 IOB                O.O      0.0
 ADS.               0.0      0.0
 AFOB               6.4      0.0
 UNOP               0.5      1.5
 OTHER-UN           1.5      0.0
 EEC                .0      0.0
 
 10.0,      3.8      0.0
 0.0       0.0
 10.0      3.8       0.0
 3.1      0.2       0.0
 0.0     .0.0       0.0
 3.1      0.2       0.0
 0.0      0.0       0.0
 6.2      3.6       0.0
 0.0      0.0       0.0
 6.2       3.6      0.0
 0.0      0.0       0.0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 0,0      0.0       0.0
 6.2       3.6      0.0
 5.4       2.9      0.0
 0.8      0.7       0.0
 0.7       0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0       0.0
 0.7      0.0.      0.0
 0.7     .0.0.      0.0
 0.0     '0.0.      O. 0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0       0.0
 0.0       0.0,     0.0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 0.0       0.0     .0.0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 0.0.      0.0      0.0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 0.0     O.O       0.0
 10.0       3.8      0.0
 0.0       0.0      O.0
 10.0       3.8      0.0
 0.0       040      0.0
 0.0       0.0       0.0
 0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 GENCIES
 1981     1946-81
 4.1    248.7
 0.0       0.0
 0.0     .0.0
 0.0     78.5
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0     34.0
 0.0     19.8
 4.1      9.6
 0.0    106.8
 
 
