 CHAD
 With his power base in the Armed Forces, Chad's President
 Hissein Habre heads an authoritarian government which came to
 power in 1982 after a protracted civil war. President Habre
 governs through the Council of Ministers and the National
 Consultative Council, both appointive bodies. The multiethnic
 National Union for Independence and Revolution (UNIR), created
 in 1984 to broaden Habre's political constituency, remains the
 only officially recognized political party. In November the
 party held its second National Congress attended by
 representatives from all parts of the country. In accordance
 with the Fundamental Act of 1982, laws, decrees, and
 ordinances are proposed by the President and the Council of
 Ministers and discussed in the National Consultative Council
 prior tQ promulgation.
 President Habre continued his efforts in 1988 to integrate
 disparate elements into his Government. Many former
 opponents, including some who were in armed conflict with the
 Government as recently as 3 years ago, have been brought into
 the civil service and army, several at the ministerial level.
 However, President Habre's long-time opponent, ex-President
 Goukouni Oueddei, remained in exile.
 President Habre employs a large internal security apparatus.
 In addition to the army and police, it includes the National
 Security Service (DDS), the Special Rapid Intervention Brigade
 (BSIR), rural paramilitary police (the gendarmerie), and a
 Presidential Security Service. The Government has been
 concerned about growing terrorism, believed to emanate from
 Libya, and widespread lawlessness in a heavily armed
 population.
 Chad remains desperately poor, and its economy has been
 severely dislocated by the extended war with Libya and by
 declining world prices for its principal export, cotton. Its
 estimated 4.5 million population has one of the lowest per
 capita annual incomes in the world ($178 in 1988). The
 Government relies heavily on foreign donors, particularly
 France, to finance government operations and to fund
 development projects. Some recovery was noted in 1988 as a
 stringent World Bank plan began to operate.
 Human rights in Chad remained tightly circumscribed in 1988.
 The Government continued to hold both a number of persons--
 including some who had returned voluntarily from exile--in
 detention without charge as well as an estimated 2,000 Libyan
 prisoners of war (POW's). Reports also continued to surface
 of human rights violations, including summary executions by
 government forces in 1986. Violations of human rights due to
 war largely ended in 1987, and tensions between Chad and Libya
 eased slightly in 1988 with the reestablishment of diplomatic
 relations in October. At the end of the year, an uneasy truce
 prevailed with Libya, but the key issue, Libyan occupation of
 the Aozou strip on the northern border, remained unresolved.
 In line with his national reconciliation efforts, Habre
 appointed a broadly based Constitutional Commission in July to
 draft a constitution. The Commission was expected to present
 its final draft early in 1989.
 
 
 67
 CHAD
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no verified instances of government-instigated
 political killings in 1988. International human rights
 organizations, e.g., Amnesty International (AI), focused
 attention on information coming to light about extrajudicial
 executions and other violations allegedly committed by
 government forces in 1986.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported disappearances in Chad during 1988. In
 its 1988 report, AI expressed its continuing concern that the.
 Government had failed to account for a number of people who
 "disappeared" in 1986 after being detained in previous years,
 and who were reported to have been executed extrajudicially by
 government security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no confirmed reports of torture of prisoners or
 civilians in Chad during 1988. Again there were numerous
 allegations that Presidential Guard troops used beatings,
 detentions, and other forms of intimidation as a means of
 maintaining security in parts of Guera Prefecture. The abuses
 took place prior to 1988 following an armed Hadjerai
 insurrection movement in which a number of government troops
 had been killed.
 Prison conditions in Chad are poor, and abuses in handling
 prisoners, usually in the form of beatings, are common.
 Conditions are reportedly very harsh in the special detention
 centers maintained by the DDS and other security
 organizations. The lack of food and medical treatment is
 especially glaring, and prisoners in past years have died of
 malnutrition and physical abuse. AI's 1988 report states that
 during 1987 information was received about a number of deaths
 in detention in 1986. Victims included Alhadj Dana Iyo,
 Hassana Tom, Boulema Hassana, Guilou Hassane, and Abdoulaye
 Bichara.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Chadian law, the authorities are required to show
 probable cause in making arrests and to follow established
 judicial requirements in detaining persons (see Section
 l.e.). However, in security/political cases, (the term is
 very broadly interpreted), the Government has a completely
 free hand. Those who express views critical of the
 Government, or hold views different from it, often are
 regarded as endangering the security of the State and may be
 subject to indefini*te detention without trial. Many detainees
 are held incommunicado, and most are never charged or tried.
 For example, Saleh Gaba, a Chadian journalist and part-time
 reporter for the Associated Press and a local Roman Catholic
 radio station, has been held incommunicado since mid-July 1987
 with no date having been set for trial. In October and
 November, there were unconfirmed reports that Gaba had died in
 prison in June.
 
 
 68
 CHAD
 The total number of political detainees as distinct from
 prisoners of war is not known. A number of people, primarily
 members of a clan of the Hadjerai tribe, were arrested on
 security grounds in 1987 and remained in detention during 1988
 without charge or prospects of trial.
 During 1988 Chad held in prison several hundred Chadians,
 former members of armed factions opposed to the Government, as
 well as a large number of Libyans captured during the years of
 struggle (1982-1987). The Government considers these
 captives, including the Chadians, to be prisoners of war
 (POW's) rather than "political detainees." On December 25,
 the Government freed 312 of the Chadian prisoners; less than
 150 of the Chadians remained in prison at the end of the
 year. The Government permits representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) regular visits
 to about 600 POW's captured before early 1986 (mostly Chadians
 who fought on the Libyan side). But it steadfastly refuses
 ICRC access to Libyan POW's captured since 1986 (estimates of
 the number of 1987 captives range up to 2,000). A number of
 Libyan POW's have joined the Libyan National Salvation Front,
 which is opposed to Colonel Qadhafi's regime and which is
 based in Chad. These are no longer considered POW's by the
 Government. 'Under Organization of African Unity (OAU)
 auspices, Libya repatriated 214 Chadians, including a few
 Chadian POW's, in late September.
 The President has called for persons in exile to return to
 Chad; many of them have done so and have been integrated into
 the Government and military. There also have been reports of
 detention by government security forces of former Chadian
 exiles upon their return to Chad. AI's 1988 report listed
 three 1986 arrestees--hadja Merami, her daughter Azzina, and
 Mahamat Abdelbaqui--who were believed still held without
 charge at the end of 1988. AI also received reports of the
 detention without charge of relatives of exiled government
 opponents, including Moussa Konate and Abdellatif Tidjani, who
 as far as is known, were still in detention at the end of 1988.
 President Habre's principal rival, ex-president Goukouni
 Oueddei, remained in self-imposed exile in Libya in 1988,
 demanding a restructuring of the Chadian army and of the sole
 legal political party, UNIR. In November a major armed
 opposition faction, the Revolutionary Democratic Council (CDR)
 of the Chadian national front, led by Acheik Ibn Oumar, signed
 accords in Baghdad agreeing to return to Chad and join the
 Governmerrt. Arrangements were under way at the end of 1988
 for the repatriation of 1,000 of the faction's armed followers.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The regular Chadian judicial system (the Supreme Court and
 several lower courts) and criminal code have evolved from the
 body of law (Napoleonic Code) inherited from the former
 colonial power, France. In theory, this law incorporates
 safeguards against arbitrary arrests and provides for
 specified detainee rights, including the right to counsel and
 the right to be informed promptly of charges.
 In practice, armed conflict over more than 20 years has
 severely disrupted the legal system, and the judiciary is
 subservient to the executive. The Government has made efforts
 to reestablish civilian law enforcement in liberated areas,
 
 
 69
 CHAD
 especially the operation of the regular courts. Whether
 accused of crimes for criminal or security offenses, most
 Chadians do not get speedy trials, in part because of the
 rudimentary nature of the Chadian judicial system. There are
 only a few trained lawyers, judges, and other court
 personnel. Many of Chad's tribunals do not even have law
 books. The few trained judicial officials complain of a heavy
 backlog of cases. Trials can be held in public or private at
 the option of the Government. No legal right to. a timely
 trial exists.
 There is also a traditional system of law presided over by
 sultans and chiefs. It is generally effective and fiir in
 resolving property and other civil disputes and in dealing
 with cases involving petty local crime. Decisions in
 customary courts may be appealed to the regular courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Chadian law, homes may be searched only during the day
 and under authority of a warrant. In practice, there are many
 instances where the law has not been respected. Correspondence
 carried by people traveling overland in Chad is often checked
 by authorities at various points. But correspondence sent
 through the Chadian postal system is only intermittently
 subject to such controls.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Free speech is assured under Chadian law; but, in practice,
 public or private statements critical of the Government would
 be considered seditious by the authorities and would likely
 lead to arrest. There is no prior censorship on the
 publication or broadcast of information in Chad, but the media
 (radio and two news sheets) are largely government controlled
 and directed. The small Chadian press corps is careful not to
 criticize either the Government or its policies. The
 Government does permit controlled criticism of individual
 officials and ministries to appear from time to time.
 Academic freedom is nominally respected but does not include
 freedom to criticize the Government.
 The Government's treatment of foreign correspondents has been
 uneven. At times, the foreign press has been given free
 access to officials and, despite various conflict situations,
 correspondents have been allowed to file their stories with no
 prior censorship. At other times, foreign correspondents have
 been denied visas for entry into Chad or expelled from the
 country for no apparent reason. On a few occasions,
 correspondents have had to submit their stories for government
 approval.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is restricted. Chadians
 may assemble peacefully only as long as the purpose of the
 meeting is not opposed to government policies. Prefects have
 the nominal right to forbid a meeting, but prior permits are
 not required unless the gathering anticipated is large enough
 to cause a public hazard.
 
 
 CHAD
 Membership in UNIR is voluntary. President Habre is intent on
 having a single mass political movement to which all Chadians
 belong. But he refrained in 1988 from forcing the dissolution
 of a number of former opposition political groupings, such as
 those associated with southern factions.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it pertains to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Chad is officially a secular state. Islam, Christianity, and
 other religions are practiced freely. Both Islamic and
 Christian holidays are given official status. More than 50
 percent..of Chad's population is Muslim, and Chad is a member
 of the Organization of Islamic Conferences. Christian
 missionaries may, nevertheless, enter the country,
 proselytize, and provide assistance to local populations.
 They are particularly active in the south. Strictly religious
 publications are allowed to circulate freely. The Government
 neither favors nor disfavors members of particular religions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Chadians enjoy complete freedom to move around the country
 except within military zones or areas of recent or potential
 combat. These restrictions generally pertain only to the
 northern one-third of the country and are not enforced for the
 sparse nomadic population that lives in that large desert
 region. In the north, the retreating Libyans left thousands
 of landmines under the sand; these have claimed some civilian
 victims. International travel is permitted, but regular
 passports are expensive (about $60), and travelers must be
 cleared by Chad's internal security services, a process which
 normally takes less than a week. Chadians are free to
 emigrate.
 In previous years, many Chadians fled to neighboring countries
 because of drought and civil strife. As conditions began to
 improve in 1986, thousands of these displaced Chadians
 returned from neighboring countries. Despite Chad's limited
 material means, these repatriates, as well as those Chadians
 who fled the occupied northern zone, have generally been well
 received. There are almost no refugees from other countries
 in Chad.
 Section 3 Respect for-Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the present Chadian political system, citizens do not
 have the right to change their government. Chad has been in a
 state of civil strife since 1965, with as many as 11 factional
 armies contending at times for control of the country. Since
 June 1982, Chad has been governed by President Hissein Habre,
 who heads a Council of Ministers complemented by an appointed
 National Consultative Council (protolegislature). Both
 Councils are carefully balanced to promote ethnic and regional
 harmony. The source of President Habre's authority is the
 allegiance he commands from the armed forces, the security
 services, and the country's only authorized political
 movement, the National Union for Independence and Revolution
 (UNIR). UNIR's bylaws mandate the popular election of lower
 level officials, but no elections have been scheduled. In
 some areas, traditional leaders (e.g., cantonal or village
 
 
 71
 CHAD
 chiefs) are popularly elected or chosen by the subordinate
 members of the traditional hierarchy (village chiefs or family
 heads, for example).
 Having achieved success on the battlefield, President Habre
 has continued efforts at national reconciliation on the
 political front. The "Libreville Accords," signed in late
 1985 in Gabon by the Government and the opposition parties,
 provide for the eventual drafting of a new constitution by the
 National Consultative Council, to be voted on by referendum
 within 4 years. The new constitution is to provide a time
 frame for free elections. President Habre appointed a
 Constitutional Commission in July 1988 with instructions to
 present the draft of a new constitution for Chad by the end of
 1988. The Commission had not completed its deliberations at
 the end of the year, but it is expected to do so early in 1989.
 In 1984 the Ministry of Social and Women's Affairs was created
 and has since been headed by a woman. One of. the 15 members
 of the Executive Bureau of UNIR's Central Committee is a woman.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government accepted an AI mission in 1985 to discuss human
 rights, including the status and conditions of prisoners of
 war, who, the Government maintains, are held in recognized
 detention centers. It did not respond to several recent AI
 requests for information, including a request in 1986 for
 details on alleged human rights abuses committed by Libyan
 troops in northern Chad. As noted, Chad cooperates with the
 ICRC, but continues to deny the organization access to a
 significant number of Libyan POW's. Chad has no internal
 human rights organizations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are 200 ethnic groups in Chad. These are roughly
 divided between Saharan and Arab Muslims in the northern and
 eastern regions, and Bantu-speaking peoples in the south. The
 latter group includes both those who have retained traditional
 animistic practices and those who have adopted Christianity.
 Over 20 years of conflict have transformed the complexity of
 ethnic divisions beyond simple north-south formulations. In
 an effort to build a national government, President Habre has
 expanded ethnic and geographic representation by appointing
 ministers, deputy ministers, and administrators from all parts
 of the country.
 Officially, Chadian women enjoy full political equality. In
 practice, neither Chadian traditional law nor the inherited
 French colonial code fully protects women's rights. Women
 contribute the bulk of labor in virtually all aspects of
 farming even though the heads of agricultural cooperatives
 still tend to be men. Women also engage in commerce ranging
 from simple market stalls to the ownership of some larger
 businesses. Women serve voluntarily in the armed forces,
 although they are excluded from officer training programs.
 
 
 CHAD
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 About 95 percent of all Chadian workers are involved in
 subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry, or fishing. As a
 result, the labor movement is very small and only marginally
 effective. Chad's labor laws permit the formation and
 functioning of unions subject to restrictions. The country's
 two rival trade union federations were merged in mid-November
 into a single national umbrella organization, the National
 Union of Chadian Trade Unions (UNST), which subsequently
 became the labor wing of. the ruling UNIR party. All unions
 are required to be members of the UNST, which is controlled by
 the Government. The UNST is expected to continue the practice
 of its predecessors in participating in the meetings of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) of which Chad is a
 member. Early indications are that the UNST will not seek to
 affiliate to any international trade union organizations apart
 from African bodies such as the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity.
 The right to strike exists only after arbitration at three
 levels in two Ministries (Labor and Justice) fails. This
 process, which in effect makes most strikes illegal, has been
 criticized by the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions. The ILO is advising the Government in the preparation
 of draft language for a new labor code that would conform to
 ILO conventions and thereby strengthen workers' rights to
 strike under law and in practice.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of labor to organize and bargain collectively is
 established in Chadian law. But it is weakened by provisions
 that allow the authorities to intervene in the collective
 bargaining process and require prior government authorization
 for collective agreements to come into force. Government
 labor tribunals exist to hear worker-employer disputes. Their
 decisions may be appealed to the judicial system. Labor laws
 are applied uniformly throughout the country.
 The ILO's independent Committee of Experts on the Application
 of Conventions and Recommendations noted in 1988 the
 Government's stated intention to amend the labor code to
 reduce significantly government interference in the collective
 bargaining process. It also observed that further steps were
 necessary to repeal or amend ordinances and sections of the
 current labor code in order to prevent antiunion discrimination
 by employers and to eliminate provisions which prevent
 political activity by unions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The ILO has been critical of Chad in the past for the use of
 forned labor. However, the Government is also continuing
 discussions with the ILO on revising its outdated labor laws
 to meet ILO conventions on forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 14 in the wage sector.
 However, as Chad is predominantly a labor-intensive agrarian
 society, children work on-family farms at a much earlier age.
 
 
 73
 CHAD
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The statutory minimum for wage labor is approximately $25 per
 month, which is barely sufficient to provide subsistence.
 Given the Government's frequent budgetary shortfalls, civil
 servants below the executive level receive only 60 percent of
 their salaries on the scale established in 1977. Most
 nonagricultural work is limited to 48 hours per week, with
 overtime to be paid for any excess. Agricultural work is
 supposedly limited to 2,400 hours per year. All workers must
 have at least 24 consecutive hours of rest each week, usually
 on Sunday. Occupational health and safety standards are
 established by law and ministerial decree; but, as with most
 social legislation, enforcement is weak.
 
 
 74
