 CHAD
 Chad is a centralized republic dominated by a strongpresidency. President Idriss
 Deby, leader of the Patriotic Salvation Movement ( S), has ruled since taking
 p ower in a 1990 rebellion. The Sovereign National Conference (CNS) confirmed
 Deby in 1993 as Chief of State and he was elected President in mid-1996 under a
 constitution adopted in a referendum earlier that year. According to widespread
 credible reports, fraud, vote-rigging, and local irregularities marred both the 1996
 presidential election, which Deby won, and the 1997 legislative elections in which
 members of the MPS won 65 of 125 seats in the National Assembly. The Govern-
 ment remained unable to exert effective control over some parts of the country. In
 May a major rebel group based in the southern region, the Armed Forces for the
 Federal Republic/Victims of Aggression (FARFIVA), reached a peace agreement with
 the Government, following the disappearance and presumed death of FARFNVA lead-
 er Laokein Barde Frisson. However, a rebellion led by members of the Toubou eth-
 nic group, including former Defense Minister Youssouf Togoimi, broke out in the
 northwest in October. The judicial system continued to be ineffective, overburdened,
 and subject to outside interference, including by the executive branch.
 The army, gendarmes, police, National and Nomadic Guard (GNNT), and intel-
 ligence services are responsible for internal security. Officers from President Deby's
 Zaghawa ethnic group dominate the Rapid Intervention Force (FIR), and the Na-
 tional Security Agency (ANS), a counterintelligence organization that has acted as
 an internal political police force. The security forces continued to commit serious
 human rights abuses.
 The economy is mainly based on subsistence agriculture, herding, and fishing. An-
 nual per capita income is estimated at $225. The country has little industry; its
 chief export is cotton. Among the impediments to economic growth are corruption,
 numerous state-owned monopolies, and a bloated civil service. Although the country
 has substantial oil reserves, the Government relies heavily on assistance from exter-
 nal donors and international financial institutions.
 The Government's human rights record continued to be characterized by serious
 problems in many areas. The security forces were responsible for the exrjudicial
 killing of many civilians during operations in the south of the country. Members of
 the security forces also tortured, beat, and otherwise abused citizens. Prison condi-
 tions remained harsh and life threatening. Security forces continued to use arbitrary
 arrest and detention. The Government did not prosecute or punish members of the
 security forces who committed human rights abuses. The Government also did not
 prosecute security personnel accused in previous years of killigs, rape, torture, ar-
 bitrary arrest, and detention. Lengthy pretrial detention remained a problem. The
 judiciary remained subject to executive interference and was unable to provide citi-
 zens with prompt and trials. Trials were sometimes not fair: the Government denied
 an opposition party leader access to counsel during a criminal trial. Security forces
 used illegal searches and wiretaps and monitored the contents of private mail. The
 Government arbitrarily conscripted young men into the army without informing
 their families. The Government increasingly restricted freedom of speech and of the
 press, prosecuting an opposition party leader and journalists on criminal libel
 charges and convicting journalists of criminal libel for the first time. The Govern-
 ment at times restricted freedom of assembly and association. There were some lim-
 its on freedom of movement. The Government limited citizens' right to choose their
 government. The Government interfered with the operations of human rights
 groups. Societal discrimination against women remained common; violence against
 women also is believed to be common. Female genital mutilation (FGM) remained
 widespread. Ethnic and regional discrimination remained widespread; northerners,
 and in particular members of President Deby's Zaghawa ethnic minority, continued
 to dominate key positions in the public sector. Serious armed conffict among ethnic
 and regional groups continued.
 FARF/A rebels reportedly committed serious abuses, including killings of civil-
 ians, before signing a peace accord with the Government in May.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Re ports of officially sanctioned
 extrajudicial killings of suspected criminals by police and gendarmes continued, al-
 though they were fewer than in the previous year.
 Police and security forces repeatedly used deadly force against unarmed persons
 who were perceived to support rebel groups in and around the southern towns of
 Sarh in Moyen-Chari prefecture and Moundou in Western Logone prefecture. In
 
 
 March security forces killed a number of unarmed or disarmed persons while con-
 ducting a major counterinsurgency operation, ostensibly directed against the Popu-
 lar Democratic Front rebel group (see Section 1.b.), in the prefecture of Moyen-
 Chari. In the same month, security forces expanded their campaigns in eastern and
 western Logone prefectures against FARF/VA rebels, sympathizers, and highway
 bandits. Amnesty International reported that security forces summarily executed
 approximately 100 persons in this campaign. Security forces repeatedly executed un-
 armed persons, including village chiefs, in reprisal for rebel operations near their
 villages.
 On March 11, in the town of Gore-in Western Logone prefecture, security forces
 shot and killed 15 village chiefs whom they had lured there on the pretext of collect-
 ng tax receipts. Security forces also reportedly killed Gore's canton chief
 Mbiaeye Beye and a 12-year-old child during the same operation.
 As in previous years, the Government took no action to prosecute members of the
 security forces who committed extrajudicial killings. The Government continued to
 grant amnesty to rebels who made peace with it.
 The FARF aiso is believed to have targeted civilians in response to the govern-
 ment offensive in March. However, reports of such attacks ceased after the FARF/
 VA signed a peace accord with the Government in May. In August the National As-
 sembly passed a law giving amnesty to FARFVA members, a number of whom were
 integrated into the army. The leader of the southern region's FARF/VA rebellion dis-
 appeared and reportedly was killed during a skirmish with government troops (see
 Section l.b.).
 b. Disappearance.-As in previous years, there were credible reports of apparent
 disappearances of persons while in government custody. Such disappearances re-
 portedly occurred in Moyen-Chari and Logone prefectures, mostly in Sarh and
 Moundou, during the Government's campaigns in those areas in March. Specific in-
 formation on individual cases was difficult to corroborate in view of the security sit-
 uation that prevailed in the south of the country and the distances involved.
 Laokein Barde Frisson, leader of the southern region's FARFNVA rebellion, appar-
 ently disappeared during the first 4 months of the year. On March 22, the Govern-
 ment issued a warrant for his arrest. He was not present at the May 6 signing in
 Dounia of a peace agreement between the FARF/VA and the Government. In No-
 vember a privately owned weekly newspaper based in N'Djamena, Le Temps, re-
 ported that Barde s lieutenants killed him on April 8. However, there are credible
 indications that Barde was killed in April in a skirmish with government troops.
 The Government continued to fail to provide satisfactory responses to, inquiries by
 human rights organizations about a number of persons who apparently disappeared
 while in government custody "during previous years. For example, Valentin
 Nedoumdingam, who reportedly Was arrested in the south in 1995, then transferred
 to-the prison in Faya Largeau, remained missing without explanation.
 In February the Popular Democratic Front (FDP), headed by Dr. Nahor Ngawara
 Mamouth, kidnaped four French citizens in the Manda Game Park outside Sarh in
 the southern region. Government security forces quickly rescued the hostages
 unharmed and killed 11 rebels in the process.
 In March the Renewed National Front of Chad rebel group kidnaped six French
 citizens and two Italian citizens in the northwestern region; all eight were released
 within 6 days, following negotiations between the rebels and the Government.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution specifically prohibits torture and degrading or humiliating treat-
 ment; however, members of the security forces tortured, beat, abused and raped citi-
 zens. No one was prosecuted for these abuses.
 During the March counterinsurgency campaigns in the south, soldiers, gendarmes
 and members of the GNNT reportedly tortured dozens of civilians.
 The GNNT, which by presidential decree is responsible for combating smuggling,
 frequently is accused of using excessive force in its operations. Guardsmen have
 been arrested and charged for abuses, but there have been no known cases of con-
 victions.
 In March gendarmes beat and arrested Radio France International correspondent
 Dieudonne Djonabaye (see Section 2.a.).
 In early June, south of Guelengdeng, customs agents beat a foreign missionary
 for no apparent reason.
 Prison conditions were harsh and life threatening. Prisons were bharacterized by
 serious overcrowding, poor sanitation; inadequate food, shelter, and medical facili-
 ties; and the mixing of adult male, female, and minor prisoners. The law provides
 that a doctor must visit each prison at least three times a week; however, it was
 credibly reported that this was not done. When captured FARF members were re-
 leased from prison, following the FARF's reconciliation with the Government, 15
 
 
 71
 FARF members were found to have died in prison. Prisoners were almost totally de-
 pendent on their families for food and clothing. All prisons were in need of major
 repairs, and escapes were frequent. However, conditions in some prisons improved
 in some respects during the year. Prison authorities began to try to separate men,
 women, and minors. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) funded
 construction of a separate compound for women at a prison in N'Djamena. During
 the year, the National Assembly enacted legislation mandating separation of minors
 from adult prisoners.
 The Government permitted the ICRC to visit all prisons, including military pris-
 ons, although it insisted on advance notice; the ICRO conducted 37 prison visits dur-
 ing the year. Domestic nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), including human
 rights groups, may visit a prison only with authorization from a court or from the
 Director of Prisons. These groups reportedly were not allowed access to military
 prisons, and their access to civilian prisons depended greatly on the personal incli-
 nations of judges and prison administrators.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution and the Penal Code
 prohibit arbitrary arrest; however, security forces continued to use arbitrary arrest
 and detention. Arrest warrants usually must be signed by a judicial official; how-
 ever, the Government often does not respect these requirements. Numerous in-
 stances of arbitrary arrest and detention were alleged by human rights groups dur-
 ing the Government's spring counterinsurgency campaign in the south of the coun-
 try.
 The ANS arrested opposition political figure Facho Balaam without a warrant on
 October 18 and detained him until October 21 on suspicion of publishing
 antigovernment political tracts.
 The Government did not practice forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution mandates an independent judici-
 ary, however, the judiciary was ineffective, underfunded, overburdened, and subject
 to executive interference. Criminal trials were sometimes unfair. In practice officials
 and other influential persons often enjoyed immunity from judicial sanction.
 The national judicial system operates with courts located in provincial capitals.
 The N'Djamena Court of Appeals, the country's highest court, is supposed to conduct
 regular sessions in the provinces, but rarely does so.
 Applicable law can be confusing, as courts often tend to blend the formal French-
 derived legal code with traditional practices. Residents of rural areas often lack ef-
 fective access to formal judicial institutions. In most civil cases, they rely on tradi-
 tional courts presided over by village chiefs, canton chiefs, or sultans. Decisions may
 be appealed to a formal court.
 Official inaction and executive interference continue to plague the judiciary. Per-
 sons accused of crimes may endure up to several years of incarceration before being
 charged or tried, especially those arrested for felonies in the provinces, who must
 await remand to the overcrowded house of detention in N'Djamena. Justice officials'
 salaries are often low. Although the Government has stated that the strengthening
 and reform of the judiciary are top priorities, it made little progress in these areas.
 The Government has not enforced the Military Code of Justice since the 1979-
 80 civil war, and courts-martial instituted early in the Deby regime to try security
 personnel for crimes against civilians no longer operate. The four remaining military
 magistrates sit as civilian judges on the N'Djamena Court of Appeals.
 In January a dozen armed men in plain clothes arrested Yaya Badit Ali, chairman
 of the opposition National Union for Democracy party (PUJND), at his home in
 N'Djamena. The Government subsequently prosecuted him on charges of criminal
 libel (see Section 2.a.) for stating that the security forces had detained and tortured
 him. Yaya Badit was sentenced to 4 years in prison, of which 2 years were sus-
 pended, afer a trial in which he was denied access to counsel; the Government nei-
 ther allowed him to hire a lawyer nor appointed a lawyer for him.
 There were no reliable figures concerning the number of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of home, correspondence, and other
 communications, as well as freedom from arbitrary search; however, authorities in-
 fringed on those rights. The Penal Code requires authorities to conduct searches of
 homes only during daylight hours and with a legal warrant. In practice, security
 forces ignored these provisions and conducted extrajudicial searches at any time.
 The Government engages in wiretapping without judicial authority and monitors
 the contents of private mail through the postal service.
 The Government arbitrarily conscripted young men into the army and sometimes
 did not inform their families. For example in April 50 Zaghawa youths from
 N'Djamena were forcibly inducted into the army and transferred incommunicado to
 a training camp in the far north, as punishment for starting a brawl at an airstrip
 
 
 72
 near the town of Bahai, near the border with Sudan. In reaction to their disappear-
 ance, their families and friends in N'Djamena attacked public and private schools,
 where they beat teachers and students and killed a headmaster. Many of the youths
 reportedly remained in the army at year's end.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government increasingly restricted these rights in
 practice. The Government prosecuted private print journalists for criminal libel and
 convicted journalists of criminal ibel for the first time. The Government imposed
 both official and informal censorship on the broadcast media.
 A number of private newspapers are published in the capital; some are vocifer-
 ously critical of government poicies and leaders.. The Government did not censor
 these newspapers formally; however, it increasingly prosecuted their journalists for
 criminal libel under the provisions of the 1994 press law. In February the editor-
 in-chief and publication manager of the private newspaper NlDjamena Hebdo,
 Yaldet Begoto Oulatar and Dieudonne Djonabaye, were convicted of slandering the
 President and given suspended sentences of 2 years' imprisonment and a symbolic
 fine of 1 franc. This was the first instance of the conviction of a journalist on
 charges of criminal libel.
 On July 20, the N'Djamena district court convicted two journalists of the
 N'Djamena-based bimonthly private newspaper L'Observateur on criminal charges
 of libeling the Speaker of the National Assembly by publishing allegations of finan-
 cial impropriety made about him during a National Assembly debate by opposition
 National Assembly member Yorongar Ngarlejy. In December an appeals court sus-
 tained the criminal ibel conviction of the two journiaists, editor-in-chief Sy Koumbo
 Singa Gali and reporter Polycarpe Togmassi, but i educed their sentences to 1 year's
 suspended imprisonment and fines of $890 (500,000 CFA francs). Yorongar was sen-
 tenced to a 3-year prison term and a fine, despite his claim of parliamentary immu-
 nity.
 Due to widespread illiteracy- and the relatively high cost of newspapers and tele-
 vision, radio is the most important medium of mass communication and information.
 There is only one privately owned domestic radio station, La Voix du Paysan, which
 js owned by the Catholic Church and began operating in October 1997. Located in
 Doba, it broadcasts locally produced programming including news coverage and po-
 litical commentary in French and indigenous languages for a 140-mile range. The
 Governmenfs High Council on Communications has set the licensing fee for a com-
 mercial radio station at a prohibitively high level: About $9,000 (5 million CFA
 francs) a year, 10 times the fee for radio stations owned by nonprofit NGO's, like
 La Voix du Paysan. Consequently, there have been no applications to establish a
 privately owned commercial radio station. Although several nonprofit NGO's have
 applied for radio station licenses, only the Catholic Church has received such a li-
 cense. At year's end, the other applications remained pending, although none had
 been denied.
 On March 29, gendarmes beat and arrested Radio France International cor-
 respondent Dieudonne Djonabaye outside the entrance of a French military base.
 According to the Government, Djonabaye had refused to provide proper identifica-
 tion. He was freed from detention hours later.
 The state owns and operates the only domestic television broadcasting station.
 There have been no requests to establish a private television station, economic pre-
 conditions for which may not exist. There is one privately owned cable television
 service that distributes foreign-sourced programming in French and Arabic, but rel-
 atively few citizens can afford to subscribe.
 There are no domestic Internet service providers. The Government does not re-
 strict access to the Internet specifically, but the state-owned firm that enjoys a mo-
 nopoly on access to international telecommunications reportedly sets prices and pro-
 vides quality that may discourage the establishment of private domestic Internet
 service providers.
 The official media, consisting of a national radio network, a press agency, and
 N'Djamena's only national television station, are subject to both official and infor-
 mal censorship. However, at times they are critical of the Government. The official
 media also give priority to government officials and events, while providing less at-
 tention to the opposition. Officials of the state-owned radio network sometimes re-
 fused to broadcast opposition statements, even when radio broadcast time was pur-
 chased in advance. The Higher Council .on Communications (HCC), an independent
 institution, acts as an arbiter whose main function is to promote free access to the
 media. It promulgated rules for equal access for official political statements broad-
 
 
 73
 cast during the 1996 constitutional referendum and the presidential and legislative
 elections, but it has no powers of enforcement.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government did not always respect this right in prac-
 tice. The law requires organizers of public demonstrations to notify local authorities
 5 days in advance. Authorities sometimes banned demonstrations, despite being no-
 tified in advance as required by law. In March the Ministry of Interior prohibited
 eight human rights organizations from holding marches in N'Djamena to protest the
 human rights abuses that government security forces had recently committed in
 Moundou (see Section L.a.). In response the human rights organizations called on
 citizens to stay home on certain days in order to protest those human rights abuses
 (see Section 4).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association; however, at times the Gov-
 ernment restricted this right in practice.
 There are more than 60 registered political parties and several hundred NGO's.
 However, in March the Government suspended the eight human rights organiza-
 tions that had called on citizens to stay home on certain days in order to protest
 human rights violations by the security forces (see Section 4).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution states that the State is secular and also
 provides for freedom of religion. The Government respected this right in practice.
 Generally, all faiths worshipped without government constraint. Individuals were
 free to proselytize.
 In early June, customs agents beat a foreign missionary for no apparent reason
 (see Section 1.c.).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights; however, there were some
 limits on them in practice. The Government did not require special permission for
 travel in areas that it effectively controls. However, elements of the security forces,
 guerrillas, and bandits continued to maintain many roadblocks throughout the coun-
 try, extorting money from travelers. The Government did not officially condone such
 behavior on the part of security force members, but did not discourage it effectively.
 In addition, armed bandits operated on many roads, assaulting, robbing, and killing
 travelers; some bandits were identified as active duty soldiers or deserters.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations assisting refugees. There were no
 confirmed reports of the forced expulsion of persons with a valid claim to refugee
 status, but refugees complained about threats to their safety while waiting for their
 cases to be adjudicated. The country provides first asylum for refugees and has done
 so in past years. The Government has granted refugee and asylee status informally
 to persons and has allowed them to remain for resettlement. During the year, an
 estimated 17,500 persons fled interethnic violence in western Sudan and resettled
 as refugees in eastern Chad.
 The Government adheres to the principles and purposes of the 1951 U.N. Conven-
 tion Relating to the Status of Refugees and Its 1967 Protocol. However, because the
 National Assembly never ratified these accords, these principles are not incor-
 porated into the law. An official national structure is in place to deal with Chadian
 and foreign refugee affairs, called the National Committee for Welcoming and Re-
 insertion. Since August 1993, the Government has-registered refugees in N'Djamena
 and sent their applications for refugee status to the UNHCR Central African head-
 quarters in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo, or other regional UNHCR of-
 fices in Africa. A person whose application is accepted is eligible to enroll in a 6-
 month care maintenance program that includes a monthly subsistence allowance,
 medical care, and assistance in finding work. This program is funded by a local
 NGO.
 Chadian refugees are legally free to repatriate, but several thousand remain in
 the Central African Republic, Niger, Libya, Sudan, Nigeria, and Cameroon.
 A group of foreign individuals, mostly Sudanese claiming to be refugees, have
 charged that foreign officials often monitor refugees applying at the UNHCR branch
 office in N'Djamena and have stated that this intimidates some refugees.
 There were no known instances of persons being returned to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens' right to change their government peacefully remained limited. The 1996
 presidential election, which Deby won, and the 1997 National Assembly elections,
 in which Deby's MPS party won 65 of a total of 125 seats in the National Assembly,
 
 
 were the first multiparty elections in many years. However, both elections were
 compromised by widely reported fraud, including vote rigging and other irregular-
 ities, committed by election officers, government officials, members of the ruling
 party, and other parties.
 The Government is headed by a Prime Minister who is nominated by the Presi-
 dent and confirmed by the National Assembly. Prime Minister Nassour Ouaidou
 Guelengdouksia has held office since May 1997.
 The Constitution accords immunity to both the President and members of the Na-
 tional Assembly, and includes no provision for recall (removal from office by vote).
 However, opposition deputy Yorongar's immunity was lifted and he was convicted
 of libel and sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment and a fine for remarks he made in
 debate in-the Assembly (see Section 2.a.). At year's end, the case was before the
 Court of Appeals.
 The State remains highly centralized. The national Government appoints all sub-
 national government officials, who must also rely on the central Government for
 most of their revenues and their administrative personnel. During the year, the
 Government again postponed the country's first elections of local government offi-
 Cials, which the Government has promised repeatedly since 1996.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. Few women: hold senior
 leadership positions. There is 1 woman of cabinet rank, and 3 female members of
 the 125-seat National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations generally operate with few overt restrictions, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are often accessible to human rights advocates but generally unresponsive or hostile
 to their findings. On June 3, President Deby publicly denounced the "imperialism
 of international human rights associations" which made "serfs out of Third World
 peoples," and accused such organizations of imposing "prepackaged democracy" in-
 stead of "another form of organization of.society that would be better adapted to the
 context, reality, and outlook of our peoples." On March 26, the Prime Minister sus-
 pended eight human rights organizations who had called for "dead city" days (brief
 symbolic general strikes) in N'Djamena and Moundou to protest and mourn *abuses
 committed by the security forces in their recent counterinsurgency campaigns in the
 south. Members of the security-forces closed and occupied the groups' offices until
 the Government lifted its suspension of them on April-2 (see Section 2.b.).
 In June the National Security Agency dropped the slander charges that it had
 filed in 1997 against the human rights NGO Tchad Nonviolence.
 NGO's have gained recognition under the Deby regime and play a role in political
 events. Human rights groups have assisted the Government in mediation efforts to
 reconcile the ancient conflict between herders and farmers over land and water
 rights. Mediation by human rights groups was instrumental in the negotiation of
 the May peace accord between the Government and the FARF. Human rights
 groups are outspoken, if often partisan, in publicizing abuses through reports and
 press releases, but only occasionally are they able to intervene successfully with au-
 thorities. All are dominated'by opponents of the Government, which impairs their
 credibility not only with the G6verment but also with international organizations.
 On June 18, the European Parliament passed a strong resolution criticizing
 Chad's recent human rights record and demanding the release of jailed opposition
 deputy Yorongar (see Sections 2.a. and 3). The resolution also called for protection
 for human rights as one condition for financial assistance for the development of
 Chad's oil resources.
 The National Human Rights Commission '(CNDH) did not publish a government-
 sponsored human rights report as it had in 1997.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, regardless of origin,
 race, religion, political opinion, or social status. In practice, cultural traditions main-
 tain women in a subordinate status, and the Government favors its ethnic support-
 ers and allies.
 Women.-While no statistics are available, domestic violence against women is be-
 lieved to be common. By tradition wives are subject to the authority of their hus-
 bands, and have only limited legal recourse against abuse. Family or traditional au-
 thorities may act in such cases, but police rarely intervene.  -
 Neither the Government nor advocacy gups redressed discrimination against
 women. However, a number of women's advocacy groups are working to this end.
 
 
 In practice women do not have equal opportunities for education and training, mak-
 ing it difficult for them to compete for the few formal sector jobs. Property and in-
 heritance laws do not discriminate against women, but traditional practice favors
 men. Exploitation of women is especially pervasive in rural areas, where women do
 most of the agricultural labor and are discouraged from formal schooling.
 Children.-The Government has demonstrated little commitment to children's
 rights and welfare. It has not committed adequate funding to public education and
 medical care. Educational opportunities for girls are limited, mainly because of tra-
 dition. The Government does not enforce compulsory education. About as many girls
 as boys are enrolled in primary school, but the percentage of girls enrolled in sec-
 ondary school is extremely low, primarily because of early marriage. Although the
 law prohibits sexual relations with a girl under the age of 14, even if married, this
 law rarely is enforced, and families arrange marriages for girls as young as the age
 of 11 or 12, sometimes forcibly, for the financial gain of a dowry. Many wives are
 then obligated to work long hours of physical labor for their husbands in fields or
 homes.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is wide-
 spread, estimated at about 60 percent of all females, and deeply rooted in tradition.
 Advocated by women as well as by men, the practice is especially prevalent among
 ethnic groups in the east and south. It usually is performed prior to puberty as a
 rite of passage, an occasion that many families use to profit from gifts from their
 communities.
 Opposition to the elimination of FGM is strong. Both the Government and the
 NGO community have in recent years conducted active and sustained public edu-
 cation campaigns against this practice. An existing law makes FGM theoretically
 prosecutable as a form of assault. It is designed to protect young women and to pun-
 ish those responsible for FGM. It was adopted by the transitional legislature in 1995
 and was signed into law by the President. Anecdotal evidence suggests that these
 efforts may be starting to reduce the proportion of girls subjected to FGM.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. However, the Government operates only a few therapy, education, or employ-
 ment programs for persons with disabilities, and no laws mandate access to build-
 ings for the disabled. Several local NGO's provide skills training to the deaf and
 blind.
 Religious Minorities.-About half the population are Muslims, about one-third are
 Christians, and the remainder practice traditional indigenous religions or no reli-
 gion. Most northerners practice Islam; most southerners practice Christianity or a
 traditional religion. Consequently, tensions and conflicts between government sup-
 porters from the politically dominant northern region and rebels from the politically
 subordinate southern region occasionally have religious overtones.
 National IRacial/Ethnie Minorities.-The country's population of about 7 million
 comprises approximately 200 ethnic groups, many of which are concentrated region-
 ally and speak distinct primary languages. Most ethnic groups are affiliated with
 one of two regional and cultural traditions: Arab and Saharan/Sahelian zone Mus-
 lims in the north, center, and east; and Sudanian zone Christian or animist groups
 in the south.
 Societal discrimination continued to be practiced routinely by members of vir-
 tually all ethnic groups, and was evident in patterns of buying and employment, in
 patterns of de facto segregation in urban neighborhoods, and in the paucity of inter-
 ethnic marriages, especially across the north-south divide. Although the law pro-
 hibits state discrimination on the basis of ethnicity, in practice ethnicity continued
 to influence government appointments and political alliances. Northerners, and in
 particular members of President Deby's Zaghawa ethnic group, continued to domi-
 nate the public sector and were overrepresented in key institutions of state power,
 including the military officer corps, elite military units, and the presidential staff.
 Political parties and groups generally continued to have readily identifiable regional
 or ethnic bases. In response to longstanding northern dominance of the national
 government, leading southern political groups such as the FARF advocated a more
 decentralized or federal form of government.
 As has been the case for decades, ethnic and regional tensions continued to under-
 lie armed conflicts that resulted in many serious human rights abuses. During the
 year, the most conspicuous such conflict was the FARFVA rebellion in the south.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution recognizes freedom of association
 and union membership, as well as the right to strike. All employees, except mem-
 bers of the military forces, are free to join or form unions. Unions no longer need
 
 
 authorization from the Government in order to operate legally. However, few work-
 ers belong to unions, as most workers are unpaid subsistence cultivators or herders.
 The main labor organization is the Federation of Chadian Unions (UST). Its former
 major constituent union, the Teachers' Union of Chad, became independent of it
 during the year. Neither union has a tie to the Government. A number of minor
 federations and unions, including the Free Confederation of Chadian Workers, also
 operate, some with ties to government officials.
 The Government generally respected the right to organize and strike. However,
 the UST has filed legal actions against the Government in the courts for govern-
 ment attempts in _1993, 1995, 1996, and 1997 to suspend it and occupy its head-
 quarters.
 Labor unions have the right to affiliate internationally.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code contain only general provisions for the rights of the Government to set
 minimum wage standards and to permit unions to bargain collectively. The Labor
 Code empowers the Government to intervene in the bargaining process under cer-
 tain circumstances.
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, and there is no
 formal mechanism for resolving such complaints.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the new
 Labor Code prohibit slavery and forced or compulsory labor by adults and children.
 There is no evidence of forced labor practices in the formal economy. However, there
 have been reports of isolated instances of forced labor among rural farming or
 herding communities, and on military installations in the north.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code stipulate's that the minimum age for employment in the formal sector
 is 14 years. The Government does not enforce the law, but in practice children rare-
 ly are employed except in agriculture and herding. Many minors served in the
 armed forces at the beginning of the year, but during the year all were believed to
 have been mustered out in a demobilization program. The Government prohibits
 forced and bonded labor by children, but does not enforce this prohibition effectively
 (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code requires the Government to
 set minimum wages. The minimum wage at year's end was $50 (25,480 CFA francs)
 per month. Most wages, including the minimum wage, were insufficient to provide
 a decent standard of living for a worker and family. Nearly all private sector and
 state-owned firms paid at least the minimum wage, but the lowest public sector
 wages remained below the minimum wage.
 The State, which owns businesses that dominate many sectors of the small formal
 economy, remained the largest employer. The Government continued-to owe large
 arrears of pay to civil servants and military personnel. However, the rate at which
 the Government accumulated payroll arrears decreased, partly because the Govern-
 ment greatly reduced the number of central government employees, especially in the
 armed forces; this reduced the Government's personnel expenditure obligations and
 enabled it to receive structural adjustment loans from international financial insti-
 tutions and other external donors. Nevertheless, wages remained low, and many
 state employees continued to hold second jobs, raise their own food crops, or. rely
 on family for support.
 The law limits most nonagricultural -work to 48 hours per week, with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural work is limited to 2,400 hours per year.
 All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per week, although iprac-
 tice these rights rarely are enforced.
 The Labor Code mandates occupational health and safety standards and inspec-
 tors with th authority to enforce them. These standards rarely are respected in
 practice, and the UST has alleged before the International Labor Organization that
 the labor inspectonservices are not allocated the resources necessary to perform
 Aeir duties. In principle workers can remove themselves from dangerous working
 conditions, but in practice they cannot leave without jeopardizing their employment.
