 CHAD
 A Transitional Government headed by President Idriss Deby, who took power in
 a December 1990 coup, continues to govern Chad. A 1993 Sovereign National Con-
 ference confirmed Deby as Chief of State for the transition, established the Transi-
 tional Government now headed by Prime Minister Kassire Coumakoye, elected 57
 counselors to the quasi-legislative Higher Transitional Council (CST), and adopted
 the Transitional Charter as an interim constitutional document. The Charter pro-
 vided for a 1-year period of transition to establish a Constitution and hold elections,
 with the possibility of a one-time extension. Little having been achieved in the first
 year of the transition, the CST voted to extend the transition for a second year,
 through April 9, 1995, and established target dates for a constitutional referendum
 and presidential and legislative elections. Under the Charter, there is no provision
 for further extension of the transition.
 Security forces composed of the army, the gendarmerie, and police, are responsible
 for internal security. President Deby remained in control of the security forces
 which were responsible for serious human rights abuses, including acts of reprisal
 against the civilian population.
 Chad has a population of 6.3 million and an estimated annual per capita income
 of $180. Over 78 percent of the population is engaged in subsistence agriculture,
 fishing, and stock raising. The Government relies heavily on external financial as-
 sistance. Pervasive corruption at all levels and a heavy black market trade severely
 limited government customs receipts, discouraged local production and marketing,
 and restricted the cash economy. Little was done to reform the collection of customs
 duties, the major source of government revenues.
 Killings by security forces and the Government's failure to prosecute those respon-
 sible continued to be the major human rights abuses. Army units continued acts of
 reprisal against the civilian population, yet enjoyed de facto immunity from prosecu-
 tion. Security force personnel continue to physically abuse detainees. There were
 credible reports that at least one prisoner had been beaten to the point of uncon-
 sciousness by personnel acting under the authority of the Presidency. The criminal
 justice system remained largely nonfunctional. Nine persons who were arrested in
 October 1993 for allegedly plotting a coup were never brought to trial. They were
 held at a jail in the presidential compound, possibly with other political detainees,
 then granted amnesty by President Deby on December 1.
 Prison conditions were appalling, both at the main prison in the capital and else-
 where. Because of the breadown of the criminal justice system, persons arrested
 for crimes had little hope of a prompt trial. Additional human rights abuses in-
 cluded. abuse of civilians' rights in conflict situations; discrimination and mistreat-
 ment of women and children; and the inability of citizens to change their govern-
 ment.
 The Government did not interfere with freedom of expression. The state-run radio
 broadcast statements by opposition leaders, and an opposition press with limited cir-
 culation criticized the Government's actions. Labor unions operated freely.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The armed forces continued to com-
 mit extrajudicial killings with impunity in reprisals against civilians accused of com-
 plicity with rebels. Rebel groups were likewise responsible for killings and other se-
 rious human rights abuses.
 On January 23, personnel belonging to the National Front of Chad (FNT), a rebel
 group which had earlier come over to the government side, rebelled against govern-
 ment forces and attempted to take control of Abeche, the principal city in eastern
 Chad. FNT members attacked army and gendarmerie headquarters, singling out
 members of certain ethnic groups. The FNT rebels beat the mainly northern troops
 savagely, allowing southerners to leave. The revolt ended within a few hours, and
 the FNT rebels fled into the countryside. In the following days and weeks, the army
 carried out unrestrained reprisals against the local population in Abeche and sur-
 rounding villages, accusing the population of complicity with the FNT. Army person-
 nel engaged in the killing of unarmed civilians, looting, and rape. Subsequent thor-
 
 
 ough investigations by human rights organizations and a committee of the Transi-
 tional Parliament counted 201 dead, of which 124 were FNT, presumably combat-
 ants. This total is probably low; survivors were traumatized and often reluctant to
 talk freely to investigators. The Government took no action to punish the army per-
 sonnel responsible for the killings of noncombatants.
 On November 20, the criminal court meeting in Abeche handed down a verdict
 against nine persons involved in the August 4, 1993, massacre at the village of
 G-niguiim. In that attack, 82 persons were killed and 105 wounded by men armed
 with automatic weapons, following an ethnic quarrel. The court, in its first session
 in Abeche since 1987, handed down death sentences against five persons, four in
 absentia, and sentenced the remaining defendants to 12 years in prison.
 In the south, both government troops and rebels continued to terrorize the local
 population. One southern rebel group, the National Re-Awakening Committee for
 Peace and Democracy (CSNPD), led by former Lieutenant Moise Kette, negotiated
 an agreement with the Government in which the CSNPD agreed to lay down arms
 and operate as a legal political party.
 On June 26 a southern rebel group probably associated with Lieutenant Moise
 Kette attacked the market town of Ba-ili, which had no military garrison of any
 significance. Troops attacked and killed 24 people and looted the market. All the vic-
 tims but one were Muslims, targeted because of their religion.
 On August 11 near Moundou in southern Chad, a patrol of the army's first regi-
 ment sustained several casualties in a clash with rebels. The unit subsequently re-
 turned to the villa e of Mbalkabra and killed at least 31 villagers suspected of com-
 plicity with the regels. Army personnel burned several villages and tortured a local
 official. Although a ministerial delegation sent by the President established the
 facts, and authorities subsequently arrested officers reportedly responsible for the
 massacre, the Government did not acknowledge responsibility for the massacre.
 Moreover, its only public statement about the incident remains a denial by the Min-
 ister of Defense that it took place. The public prosecutor's office began an investiga-
 tion of the charges, but by year's end no trial had been held.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 Although the Transitional Charter specifically prohibits torture and degrading or
 humiliating treatment, the Government failed to stop incidents of brutality by secu-
 rity forces. In one case, there is a credible report that either the Republican Guards
 or the domestic intelligence service (Renseignements Generaux) used violence in in-
 terrogating a prisoner, causing him to become disoriented and lose consciousness.
 That prisoner, and others, suffered cruel mistreatment in extrajudicial custody at
 a prison in the presidency compound and at other places. One political detainee re-
 ported that he had been held in a "small, dark, nasty room filled with rats and in-
 sects," that he was given only water and a sandwich every 3 days, and that his
 hands were kept bound with wire for some 45 days. He reported that, at some sites,
 he smelled what he guessed to be "dead human bodies," and that a fellow prisoner
 suffered a paralyzed hand and hearing injury to both ears to the point of near deaf-
 ness, indicating his possible torture.
 Reports of a use in custody arose in connection with nine persons detained in the
 alleged Koty coup plot. Their families and lawyers were denied access to these de-
 tainees. Human rights groups and doctors were permitted visits, but the Koty 9
 have reprted to the Chadian League of Human Rights (LTDH) that 2 weeks prior
 to their May 14 interview some 19 persons were allegedly tortured overnight at the
 facility where they were held, then taken elsewhere.
 Prison conditions continued to be appalling and life-threatening, characterized by
 overcrowding, poor sanitation, lack of medic  facilities, inadequate food, and mixing
 of male and femaleprisners. In March and April, the International Committee of
 the Red Crss (ICRC) made its first visits to places of detention linked to the Min-
 istry of Justice, the National Police in N'Djamena and Abeche. Later on, the ICRC
 obtained authorization to process a second round of visits in places of detention al-
 ready visited, as well as ones linked to the Ministry of Justice and the National Po-
 lice at Moundou and Dubs, and finally the ones run by the Ministry of Defense in
 N'Djamena, Abeche and Moundou, and Doba.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Penal Code and the Transitional
 Charter prvide formal safeguards against arbitrary arrest, but in practice the au-
 thorities often do not respect these provisions. Military and security organizations
 retained and used the de facto authority to arrest or detain citizens without a war-
 rant and without remanding the detainee for a trial.
 Security forces reportedly engage in extrajudcial arrests and detentions. One de-
 tainee reported from personal observation that as many as 30 persons were held by
 the domestic intelligence service near the presidency.
 
 
 On July 15, soldiers abducted Mahamat Koty brother of President Deby's assas-
 sinated rival Colonel Abbas KOty, and Dr. Abdelaziz Kadouk of the Maternity Hos-
 pital in connection with the alleged coup plot of October 1993. On October 22, police
 conducted Dr. Kadouk to the Central Hospital with heart problems, where Chadian
 human rights organizations had access to him. Police never charged either Koty or
 Kadouk, and these 2 were among 11 political detainees granted amnesty by Presi-
 dent Deby on December I and subsequently released.
 The Government did not use exile as a political weapon.
 e. Denial of Fair Public ria2.-Breakdown of the criminal justice system ren-
 dered the courts generally inoperable. Special courts were inactive, as were courts-
 martial. Most rural areas do not have access to formal judicial institutions and rely
 on traditional courts presided over by village chiefs and chefs de canton or sultans
 in most civil cases. Citizens may appeal their decisions, which in most cases are re-
 spected by the population, to a formal court.
 Trials in civil cases continued, but the criminal justice system tried only one
 major case in 1994. Despite emphasis on reform of the justice system at the 1993
 National Conference, the Government did not implement any reforms. Government
 and military interference contributed to the breakdown of the judicial system, and
 members of the security and armed forces continued to have de facto immunity from
 prosecution.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Transitional Charter provides for citizens' rights to privacy of home and correspond-
 ence, freedom from arbitrary arrest and search, and liberties of association. The
 Penal Code further stipulates that police may search homes only during dayl t
 hours and only with a legal warrant. In practice, security forces conducted searches
 without legal warrant, day and night. In some cases, they mistreated and extorted
 money from their victims.
 The Government also engaged in telephone surveillance of its citizens without ju-
 dicial supervision.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Continuing conflict between rebel groups and the army led to serious human
 rights abuses by beth sides, victimizing the civilian population. Chadian armed
 forces, with impunity, routinely abused the rights of the civilian population. In addi-
 tion, customs personnel routinely used excessive and sometimes lethal force against
 the population, including one shooting in the N'Djamena market in October which
 led to a sympathy strike by all merchants.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Transitional Charter provides for freedom
 of speech and press, but in practice the Government controls access to radio, the
 most important medium, and to the sole television station, TVT, which it also runs.
 Although opposition statements are generally broadcast on beth radio and tele-
 vision, opposition politicians complained that in some instances their declarations
 were not broadcast on government radio. The independent press publishes articles
 openly criticizing the Government and political figures. Opposition tracts are distrib-
 uted without interference by the Government.
 The academic system is rimarily state supported. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Transitional Charter pro-
 vides for freedom of association and assembly, and in general these rights were re-
 spected.
 Authorities routinely granted permits for political and nongovernmental organiza-
 tion (NGO) meetings, and the Government generally did not interfere in meetings
 or press conferences. In one case, however, a former prime minister's party was de-
 nied the use of a government facility. The Minister of Interior barred human rights
 groups from presenting a series of preelection seminars in Sarh, Moundou, and
 other major population centers, despite the fact that the Prime Minister had author-
 ized the seminars. On December 23, the Minister of Interior prevented a meeting
 of opposition parties, despite the signing by the President a few days earlier of a
 law guaranteeing political parties the right to meet freely.
 There are now about 50 authorized political parties and several hundred NGO's.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Chad is a secular state, and all faiths worship without
 government constraint.
 d..Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government did not require special permission or rave within
 most areas of the country. Security forces, rebels and armed criminals continued to
 oerate illegal roadblocks in the countryside, in contravention of the orders of the
 Transitional Government.
 
 
 Chadians were free to emigrate. About 3,600 refugees remained in Niger, a con-
 sequence of the mid-1992 fighting between government forces and rebels in the Lake
 Chad region. Approximatel 21,000 refugees who fled after their villages were at-
 tacked by the Republican Guard in early 1993 remained in the Central-African Re-
 public. There are about 43,000 Chadian refugees in Cameroon, the majority of whom
 fled when Hissein Habre took power in 1982. These refugees are free to repatriate
 but have chosen not to do so, fearful of unsafe security conditions in their home re-
 gions.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have this right. By definition, the regime government is a transi-
 tional one, with the limited mandate to rule in accordance with the Transitional
 Charter. President Deby pledged free and fair elections before the end of the transi-
 tion in April 1995, but there was little progress in 1994 in creating the conditions
 for free and fair elections, making it unlikely that this goal can be met. The CST
 adopted a law creating an electoral commission which was signed by President Deby
 in December, but opposition parties are still negotiating with the Government over
 conditions for their participation in the commission.
 Although the law grants women political equality and protection, women are
 underrepresented in the Government. While women were active in the National
 Conference, cultural biases prevent their full integration into political life. There is
 only one female cabinet member, and only 4 of the 57 members of the Transitional
 Parliament are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights organizations including the Chadian Human Rights
 League continued to operate. These %ups published reports of human rights
 abuses without government constraint. The Transitional Parliament (CST) commis-
 sioned a special investigation and report on the January massacres at Abeche. The
 CST also denounced human rights abuses by security personnel in gathering fees
 from citizens, but its oversight of government conduct did not lead to effective action
 to punish those responsible.
 The United Nations Human Rights Commission's Special Rapporteur for Chad,
 Mrs. M'Ban Diarra N'Doure, President of the Human Rights League of Mali, inves-
 tigated human rights conditions in November. The ICRC visited Chad regularly and
 was allowed access to prisons. An international organization, the Association for
 Victims of Repression in Exile has been active in the rehabilitation of victims of tor-
 ture. A delegation of the International Human Rights Federation visited in October
 and met with President Deby.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Transitional Charter provides for equal rights for all citizens, regardless of
 sex, race, religion, or origin. In practice, however, women experience significant job
 discrimination and spousal abuse.
 Women.-Although the Transitional Charter provides that women have equal
 rights with men, culture and tradition among various ethnic groups perpetuate the
 de facto subordinate status of women, especially in rural areas where women do
 much of the heavy farm labor and have little opportunity for education or wage em-
 ployment. Women receive one-third of the education of men. The law does not dis-
 criminate against women in property and inheritance rights, but traditional practice
 favors men.
 Several women hold high positions in the Government as well as in commerce and
 the professions. There are many women's advocacy groups, such as the Association
 of Women in Distress in Chad and the Association of Women Jurists.
 Domestic violence against women, including wife beating, is common, and women
 have only limited recourse against abusive practices. Police rarely intervene; women
 usually rely on family or ethnic leaders to resolve such cases.
 Children.- Neither the Transitional Charter nor other laws provide explicitly for
 the rights of children, and there are few active programs that adres them.
 Female Genital mutilation (FGM) is widsprea  and   rformed on females at a
 young age. The practice is deeply rooted in tradition, bth in the north and the
 south. Despite its severe adverse consequences for women's physical and mental
 health, it is strongly advocated by many Chadians, women as much as men. The
 Government took no action to prohibit this practice.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The approximately 200 ethnic groups are
 roughly divided among Saharan/Sahelian and ab Muslim        in the nortern,
 
 
 50
 central, and eastern regions, and Sudanian zone ethnic groups, who practice Chris-
 tianity or animist religions, in the south. Much of the sustained civil conflict since
 1964 has revolved around ethnic differences. Currently, well-armed ethnic minori-
 ties close to the President, representing just over 1 percent of the population, exer-
 cise authority over military and civilian government decisions. Ethnicity also influ-
 ences ministerial appointments.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there is no official discrimination directed
 against the disabled, the Government has taken no action to improve conditions or
 access for disabled persons. The disabled have little opportunity for wage employ-
 ment, advanced therapy, or special education, although private associations for the
 disabled exist and are active.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Transitional Charter specifically recognizes la-
 bor's right to organize. Workers are free to join or form unions of their choice. Only
 the military are prohibited from joining unions, and government authorization is re-
 quired before unions can operate.
 The right to strike and organize was generally respected. An exception was an
 April 29 deree which attempted to regulate the right to strike, which was abro-
 gated after wide spread protests and a brief poice occupation of the labor union
 headquarters which ended without violence after a few days.
 Most Chadians work in subsistence agriculture or livestock rsising. Government
 employees, including teachers and workers in the few state-owned enterprises, con-
 stitute the majority of union members. The dominant union federation remained the
 Federation of Chadian Unions (UST), whose major component is the Teachers'
 Union of Chad. A second, smaller federation, the Free Federation of Chadian work-
 ers, continued to operate. Neither union had organizational, financial, or procedural
 ties to the Government.
 Although no information is available about the outcome of specific cases, Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO) bodies regularly reviewed complaints from the
 UST against the Government stemming from antiunion discrimination, firings
 forced retirements and other actions. The Government's labor relations suffered
 when it was not able to keep its side of a social pact with the unions, which pro-
 vided for a 10 percent wage increase.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not specifically
 protect collective bargaining. Both the Transitional Charter and the pre-Transition
 Labor Code still in effect contain only generalized provisions for the rights of labor.
 Under the current law, the Government sets minimum wage standards and unions
 may bargain collectively.
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination. Although no com-
 plaints of such discrimination were reported, there is no formal mechamsm for re-
 solving them should they arise.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although there is no specific legal
 prohibition on forced or compulsory labor, no evidence indicates forced or compul-
 sory labor occurs.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law stipulates that the mini-
 mum age for employment of children is 14 in the wage sector, but the Ministry of
 Civil Service and Labor does not effectively enforce this law. In practice, children
 are rarely employed except in agriculture. Several hundred young people between
 the ages of 14 and 17 reportedly serve in the armed forces.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government continued to review a draft
 labor and social welfare code conforming to international conventions. Wage stand-
 ards established under previous governments remain unchanged.
 Wages remain insufficient to support subsistence, much less maintain an ade-
 quate standard of living. For example, the minimum monthly professional wage in
 1994 was about $46 (24,000 CFA). In addition, salary arrears of 4 to 5 months in
 N'Djamena and up to 8 months in rural areas for civil servants, combined with no
 pay for some soldiers, have forced most employees to seek other employment, engage
 in subsistence agriculture, or rely on the extended family.
 The law limits most nonagricultural work to 48 hours per week, with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural workers are statutorily limited to 2,400
 workhours per year. All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per
 week. The Labor Code recognizes the need for occupational health and safety stand-
 ards, including labor inspectors with the authority to enforce them. There is, how-
 ever, no indication that such health and safety standards exist in practice, nor that
 inspectors have been appointed.
 
 
