 CHAD
 Chad is a republic with a transitional government headed by
 President Idriss Deby. President Deby and the Patriotic
 Salvation Movement (MPS) took power from Hissein Habre on
 December 1, 1990. He.immediately declared humai rights, and
 democratization to be the primary objectives of the new
 Government. On March 1, the National Charter was announced,
 setting up a 30-month transition period of government, with
 most power concentrated in the hands of President Deby. The
 Charter abolished the 1989 constitution. On October 4,. the
 Government introduced the Charter on Political Parties. By the
 end of the year no parties, apart from the MPS, had been
 authorized, but several parties had formally applied for
 official authorization, and others were in the process of being
 established.
 The Deby Government operates a large security and military
 apparatus that includes an army of about 50,000 personnel
 (Republican Guard, army, gendarmerie, and air force), the
 National Police, and the Center for Research and Coordination
 of Information (CRCR). The size of the security forces posed a
 serious drain on Chadian resources in 1991, and the Government
 had difficulty in financially supporting them and in
 maintaining, discipline. With French assistance; Chad began to
 reorganize, retrain, and reduce the size of the forces.
 Meanwhile, in 1991 there were numerous reports of human rights
 abuses committed by the military and security forces. Credible
 reports pointed to the Military Intelligence Branch (B-2) as
 the major offender. An alleged coup attempt on October 13 led
 to interethnic killing,, led by Zaghawa elements of the Chadian
 military loyalto President Deby. Interior Minister Maldoum, a
 Hadjerai, was removed from office for supposed complicity with
 the plot.
 Chad is one of the poorest countries in the world, with an
 estimated per capita income of $205 per annum. The literacy
 rate is estimated at 25 percent, and 80 percent of the
 population is engaged in subsistence agriculture, fishing, and
 livestock raising. Cotton is Chad's most important export.
 The Government relies heavily on external financial support,
 especially from France, to meet recurring budgetary costs and
 virtually 100 percent of government investment. "Habre
 exacerbated the financial crisis by fleeing the country with
 much of its liquid assets. In 1991 emergency food aid was
 necessary due to drought.
 In 1991, with strong public backing from President Deby, the
 human rights situation in Chad improved somewhat, including the
 right of workers to organize. There were still restrictions on
 freedom of the press and speech, although the situation had
 improved over 1990. The Government also permitted the
 establishment of several organizations devoted solely to human
 rights. However, like previous governments, the Deby
 Government, with its political and military base primarily in a
 regional ethnic grouping, faced serious problems in
 establishing a national'political consensus. It nevertheless
 made modest progress in 1991 in identifying the aspirations and
 priorities of the people, in permitting the formation of
 political parties late in the year, and in setting a timetable
 for national consultations in the form of a national conference
 for May 1992. On December 24, President Deby issued a decree
 forming an 80-person, ethnically and politically diverse,
 preparatory commission to organize the National Conference,
 which would be sovereign. At the-same time, a number bf
 serious human rights abuses occurred in 1991, notably
 
 
 * 72
 CHAD
 extrajudicial killings (mainly due to factions settling old
 scores and interethnic killing following the alleged coup
 attempt on October 13), the use of arbitrary arrest and
 detention, the denial of fair public trials, and the use of
 force to prevent assembly and association of people outside the
 MPS.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Killing
 Credible reports indicated that the Habre regime executed more
 than 300 political prisoners shortly before it collapsed.
 During the first months of the Deby regime, there were many
 credible reports of further extrajudicial killings, most of
 which involved the settling of scores between the new and old
 factions. Most of these killings had ceased by March, although
 reports of killings continued throughout 1991, usually
 attributed to armed bands currently or formerly associated with
 the Chadian army. Armed groups of loyalists to former
 President Habre survived by pillaging in the eastern part of
 the country. Some members of the Zaghawa, who accompanied the
 Deby forces, turned to banditry as did other groups of
 soldiers. The Government condemned these actions but was often
 several months behind in meeting its military payroll, and its
 ability to control offending units, particularly in provincial
 areas, remained limited. The Government established
 courts-martial in March to try military offenders, but these
 met with limited success. One early trial was disrupted by
 armed men who attempted to rescue the defendants. Subsequent
 sessions were heavily guarded by troops with heavy weapons.
 However, these events had an intimidating impact on the conduct
 of later trials.
 In the first days of the Deby administration, there were
 assassination attempts on the lives of several ministers. An
 army officer, Gabaroum Demtita, was arrested, and reliable
 reports indicate he was executed in late December 1990 by
 members of the security services.
 On October 13, government forces reacted with excessive force
 to suppress an alleged coup attempt by Minister of the Interior
 Maldoum and Hadjerai army officers. The Government failed to
 control its troops in subsequent days. Hadjerai military and
 civilians were particularly targeted by uncontrolled Zaghawa
 armed elements. Reliable reports indicate that approximately
 200 persons were killed in N'Djamena by Zaghawa soldiers and
 civilians during the week of October 13.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known allegations in 1991 of politically
 motivated disappearances. There were allegations of political
 prisoners being held incommunicado, though fewer than under the
 Habre regime.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In 1991 there were persistent uncorroborated reports that the
 B-2 Military Intelligence and the-MPS Security Branch engaged
 in torture which included: whippings, beatings, and forced
 
 
 CHAD. -
 ingestion of water and then dropping the detainee to the
 floor. These units also reportedly denied medical treatment to
 torture victims. The number of allegations increased in the
 latter part of-1991, indicating that these practices were not
 simply a function of the chaos of the first months of the Deby
 regime. Four-men were publicly executed by firing squad in
 October after being convicted under the special court-martial
 authority, one reportedly for attempted theft. The executions
 were carried out in a manner that prolonged the suffering of
 the men.- While the Government officially condemns the use of
 torture and.,the mistreatment of prisoners, it has not commented
 on these reports nor, as far as is known, conducted any
 investigation.of such incidents.
 Prison-conditions under the Deby regime continued to be harsh.
 They are characterized by overcrowding, poor sanitation, lack
 of medical .facilities, inadequate food, mixing of male and
 female prisoners, and detention of. children. .Deaths from
 malnutrition in common cells were frequent, with the bodies.not
 being- removed.rapidly after death. Prisoners are dependent on
 their families for food, medicines, and other necessities.
 Nonpolitical prisoners are allowed daily access by visitors.
 Some reports indicated that political and security prisoners
 were detained incommunicado. Military prisoners are detained
 in separate facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Deby Government abolished.the 1989 constitution which
 provided for certain safeguards for the citizen against
 arbitrary.arrest and gave detainees specific rights, such as
 the right to-counsel and to be presented with charges. The,
 Chadian penal code, which is still considered in effect,
 specifies these rights, but its provisions, like those of the
 1989 constitution, are not enforced. In practice, most
 individual military or security organizations were able to
 arrest or detain citizens without legal warrant, without
 presenting charges.- or without referring a detainee to an early
 trial.
 In June a group of 44 military officers and noncommissioned
 officers (NCO's),'all of..southern Chadian-origin, were arrested
 for circulating a signed-petition that complained of. unjust
 treatment. They were detained at the gendarmerie and the
 former presidential compound. The officers were held for
 several days and the NCO's for up to 11 days before being
 released without charge. Other allegations surfaced in the
 press that military and civilians were detained without
 charge. In contrast, there were numerous allegations that
 military and civilians of the Zaghawa ethnic group who were
 guilty of crimes were not incarcerated (see Section i.e.).
 Due to the secrecy of-the Government, the number of political
 detainees held in 1991, if any, wasnot known. High-level
 Chadian officials contend there were no political detainees or
 prisoners held-in 1991.
 The Deby Government actively engaged in a program for the
 return of Chadian exiles. There were no reports of returning
 exiles being detained or mistreated.  The Government had some
 difficulty absorbing several thousand Chadian citizens who were
 involuntarily returned from Libya with little or no preparation
 or notice during the year. Significant numbers of Chadians
 have chosen not to return to Chad and remain in Europe, Niger,
 Libya, and other African countries.
 
 
 74
 CHAD
 e. Denial of Fair Trial
 Chad's judicial system is at best rudimentary, in part due to
 decades of civil war creating serious staffing and training
 deficiencies. Three forms of courts existed in Chad in 1991:
 the regular judiciary, a traditional system presided over by
 village chiefs and sheiks, and the newly established special
 military court to try soldiers and civilians accused of
 criminal activity (see Section 1.a.). There are legal
 safeguards built into the court-martial system, including the
 right to be represented by an attorney and the right of appeal
 to a higher tribunal within the same system. In September a
 seven-person Special Court of Justice was established to look
 into the issue of funds which disappeared at the time of
 Habre's fall.
 The highest court in Chad is the Appellate Court in N'Djamena.
 It reviews the decisions of lower courts and judges all cases
 calling for more than a 2-year penalty. Due to the shortage of
 judges in the provinces, legal matters were often presided over
 by either traditional or other government authorities,
 frequently military commanders. The traditional or customary
 system of justice, common in the rural areas and used for civil
 matters, is not codified, but its judgments are generally
 respected by the population. Decisions rendered by a
 traditional court may be appealed to the regular civilian
 courts.
 There were no efforts at systemic overhaul of the judiciary in
 1991, although the MPS Conference in March cited judicial
 reform as a national goal, and President Deby indicated that
 judicial reform would be addressed in the national conference
 in 1992, Meanwhile, the judiciary remained subordinate to
 executive authority. The Government did make an effort to
 staff rural courts which had not functioned under the previous
 government.
 In 1991 there were credible reports that the civilian court
 system and the new court-martial system were unable to bring
 members of the Zaghawa ethnic group to trial. In August
 Zaghawa soldiers attacked the first court-martial session in an
 attempt to free Zaghawa prisoners. On October 13, Zaghawa
 soldiers attacked-the prison in order to free Zaghawa
 prisoners. There are reports that citizens proferring charges
 against Zaghawa were threatened by other Zaghawa in the
 military. Government actions to prevent these abuses have not
 been fully effective.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the penal code, homes may be searched only during
 daylight hours and only under the authority of a warrant. In
 practice, security personnel of various agencies searched homes
 and arrested occupants without a warrant from judicial
 authorities. In early 1991, several deaths occurred as a
 result of searches of homes by the army. There were numerous
 reports that thievery by soldiers occurred frequently during
 house and street searches.
 Membership in the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS) is not
 required for employment or appointment to high position.
 However, MPS membership reportedly has been solicited through
 coercive means in the rural areas.
 
 
 75
 CHAD
 It was widely assumed that surveillance of persons, monitoring
 of telephones, and checking of domestic and international
 correspondence occurred in 1991.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 President Deby lifted many restrictions on freedom of speech
 and press. Individual views were expressed openly, and there
 was no evidence of government interference with or-restriction
 on small private meetings (see Section 2.b.). The private "
 press developed rapidly after the change in government. Five
 private newspapers were published in 1991, sold openly, and
 often carried stories highly critical of the Government.
 Chadian television, radio, and the Chadian Press Agency
 continued-to be government controlled in 1991. In state-owned
 media journalists were allowed greater latitude in publishing
 and broadcasting than during the Habre regime. However, as the
 year progressed, the official media became increasingly
 restrained in the choice of topics and quoted sources,
 apparently under government pressure, and considerably less
 outspoken than the private press.
 Low-ranking soldiers attacked journalists on several occasions,
 and MPS officials intimidated newspaper staff. Additionally,
 there-were disturbing incidents aimed at intimidating the
 press. In mid-March soldiers burst into Radio Chad studios and
 roughed up journalists. Reporters went on strike until the
 Government promised such incidents would not happen again. On
 July 7, the Government warned the press about unspecified
 "excesses". Soldiers beat three Tele-Chad journalists on July
 28. In.early November, offices of the independentrweekly
 Contact were vandalized and the texts of articles were stolen.
 In late December,:the publisher of N'Djamena Hebdo was detained
 briefly by armed men and the newspaper offices were searched.
 Members of the private press have expressed the view that they
 are under frequent personal or electronic surveillance.
 Foreign publications were available in Chad, and there were no
 reports that foreign publications were censored or withdrawn
 from circulation during 1991.-
 The academic system is state supported but was free of
 government control of curriculum or course content. Class
 discussions of academic topics were unrestricted and
 uninhibited, but political commentary in and out of class
 tended to be restrained, unless discussions took place among
 close, trusted friends. Fear of government informants is
 pervasive at institutes of higher education.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms were tightly circumscribed in 1991. The
 Government prohibited assemblies or meetings with political
 objectives and, until October, declared any political activity
 and political party organizations outside the MPS illegal. A
 planned antigovernment demonstration on March 26 failed to
 materialize after the Government declared it.illegal. The
 Government used force to disperse striking students at the
 University of Chad in February, resulting in the death of at
 least one person and several wounded. The students were
 calling for the removal of two administrators, reinstatement of
 suspended students, payment of stipends, and better conditions.
 
 
 CHAD
 In 1991 the Government required organizations to have official
 authorization to function prior to beginning operations. While
 it authorized three private human rights organizations and two
 union federations to organize, it had not given permission by
 year's end to many cultural and social organizations with no
 stated political objective.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Chad is officially and in practice a secular state in which
 Islam, Christianity, and other religions are practiced without
 official constraint. Both Islamic and Christian holidays are
 given official status.   More than 50 percent of Chad's
 population is Muslim, and Chad is a member of the Islamic
 Conference. Christian and other missionaries may enter the
 country to proselytize and perform public assistance work.
 Christian missionaries are most active in the south. In 1991
 there were no reports of harassment for religious views, and
 religious publications are disseminated without government
 restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Chadiant enjoy freedom to move around the country, except
 within military zones. Clearance by internal security services
 is required for international travel, but this requirement did
 not appear to impede movement. Chadians are free to emigrate
 and have the right to return.
 From 1979 to 1982, as many as 185,000 Chadians fled drought and
 civil war to seek refuge in neighboring countries. Most of
 those who left during this time have since returned to Chad and
 have been resettled with the help of government organizations.
 Several thousand returned in 1991. About 24,000 still remain
 outside Chad, mainly in Sudan.
 In addition to this older population of refugees, Chad
 experienced a new outflow of about 10,000 persons following the
 December 1990 overthrow of the Habre government by Idriss
 Deby. Most of these recent refugees returned to Chad in early
 1991. About 3,000 remain in Niger, Nigeria, and Cameroon.
 There were no reports in 1991 of mistreatment of returnees.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1991 Chadians lacked the right to change their government by
 democratic means. President Deby governs through a Council of
 Ministers and the Prime Minister. The Provisional Council of
 the Republic, a consultative body comprised of regional
 representatives and political notables appointed by the
 President, serves some of the functions of a legislature but
 without authority to initiate or approve laws.
 Upon coming to power, Deby's provisional Government, through
 the National Charter, abolished the 1989 constitution and the
 national assembly but promised to install a multiparty system.
 A Charter of Political Parties.was adopted on October 4, and a
 national conference is scheduled for May 1992, one of its
 objectives being to draft a new constitution.  Municipal,
 legislative, and presidential elections were promised for 1993.
 
 
 77
 CHAD
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In a marked-departure from Habre's regime, the Deby Government
 allowed investigation into human rights abuses, particularly
 those committed by Habre. In the first months of 1991
 prominent press coverage, both foreign and domestic,
 documented abuses. Three Chadian human rights organizations
 were founded and authorized to operate in 1991. The Chadian
 League of Human Rights (LTDH) was established first, and it
 actively promoted human rights issues. The Convention for the
 Defense of Human and.Citizens Rights (CODHOC) and the Chadian
 Association for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights
 (ATCPH) were founded toward the end of the year to promote
 human rights. All three operated without government
 interference.
 The Government permitted Amnesty International and a French
 judge to conduct investigations in 1991.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are approximately..200 ethnic groups in Chad. They are
 roughly divided among Saharan and Arab. Muslims in'the northern,
 central, and eastern regions, and Bantu people, who practice
 Christianity or animist religions, in the south. Sustained
 civil war since 1965,--revolving around ethnic disputes, has
 badly-fractured any sense of national identity. Ethnic
 divisions-continued to be a major problem in Chad despite
 Deby's efforts to forge.national reconciliation and unity..
 While regional and ethnic representation in g6vernment was
 diverse, real power remained in the hands of a few minority
 ethnic groups from northern and eastern Chad, principally the
 Zaghawa, Bideyat, and Gorane.
 Officially the Deby Government opposes discrimination, and
 Chadian women have full political equality and protection under
 the law. However, culture and tradition among many of Chad's,
 various ethnic groups perpetuate the de facto subordinate
 status of women. Much of the agricultural work on subsistence
 farms is, done by women. Neither traditional law nor the penal
 code specifically protects women's rights. The literacy rate
 for women is significantly lower than for men, and a 1991
 United Nations.Development Program study stated that on average
 females receive one-third of the education of males. A few
 women are found in higher positions in the Government as well
 as in commerce, the professions, and the military. The
 Ministry of Public Health and Social Affairs actively promoted
 women's rights, sponsoring a national women's week and seminars
 on women's issues. A-private women's advocacy group was
 authorized and was active in promoting women's rights.
 Household violence directed against women, including wife
 beating, is believed tobe common, and women have only limited
 legal recourse against abusive spouses. Female genital
 mutilation (circumcision) is widespread in Chad. This practice
 is deeply rooted in tradition, both in the'north and the south,
 and strongly advocated by many Chadians, including women,
 despite its severe consequences for women's physical and mental
 health. The Deby Government took no action to prohibit the
 practice.
 
 
 78
 CHAD
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Given the level of economic development, Chad's labor movement
 is still in its infancy. Over 80 percent of all Chadian
 workers are involved in subsistence agriculture, animal
 husbandry, or fishing. Involvement in labor organizations
 centers mostly on the public sector and the small, private
 commercial sector.
 The National Charter of March 1991 specifically recognized the
 right of labor to organize, and workers are free to join or
 form unions of their own choosing. However, government
 authorization is required before unions can commence
 operations. There was no indication in 1991 that the
 Government interfered wih the right of workers to organize,
 although it refused authorization to the National Federation of
 Chadian Trade Unions (UNST) to function under the name of UNST
 because of its association with the Habre regime. It granted
 approval once the name was altered to the Federation of Chadian
 Unions (UST). A second federation of unions, the Federation of
 Chadian Workers (CLTT), was formed in 1991. Both new
 federations are independent of the Government. Both
 federations held congresses in 1991 and freely affiliate with
 international and regional labor organizations.
 The Deby Government considers the current Labor Code still in
 effect. It permits the right to strike but mandates that
 certain steps are to be taken to resolve disagreements prior to
 striking. The 1989 constitution implicitly repealed the 1975
 ordinance which suspended the right to strike. However,
 strikes did not take place under the Habre government. A new
 labor code is nearing completion, according to government and
 union officials.
 In 1991 five strikes were staged without evidence of government
 interference or restrictions. Hospital workers, airport
 employees, government-employed journalists, and textile workers
 in southern Chad went on strike during the year over wage and
 benefit issues and for improved working conditions. In
 December primary and secondary teachers, with sympathy support
 from higher education institutions, led a strike for better pay
 and benefits. In each of these instances, the Government
 negotiated mutually satisfactory resolutions to the strikes.
 In April, however, when the former UNST called for a general
 strike to protest the Government's refusal to allow it to
 function under the name UNST, the Government deemed the strike
 illegal because it was called by an unauthorized organization,
 and the strike failed to take place.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The National Charter specifically recognizes the right; of trade
 unions to organize and bargain collectively, and in 1991 there
 was no abridgement of this right as there had been under the
 previous government. However, the International Labor
 Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts in 1991 again asked
 the Government to amend a section of the Labor Code which
 empowers the State to intervene in the collective bargaining
 process. In practice, few collective agreements exist given
 the small size of the private sector. Chadian law does not
 specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, but this was
 not an issue in 1991. There are no export processing zones in
 Chad.
 
 
 CHAD
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 while there is no specific prohibition on forced or compulsory
 labor in.Chadian law, such labor did not occur in 1991.
 d. Minimum Age for 'Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of children is 14 in the wage
 sector, but there is only limited enforcement of this law by
 the Ministry of Civil Service and Labor. In practice,
 employment of children was almost nonexistent, except on family
 farms.
 Approximately 600 minors,, between'the ages of 12 and 17, were
 reported-to be in the army. One objective of the Deby
 GovezrnMnt was to reorganize the army andrelease minors from
 the ranks. This process was under way at year's end with the
 Government coordlnating closely with the United Nations
 International Children's Fund to provide reintegration of the
 children into civilian society.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A minintim wage scale established in 1978 remained-valid under
 the Deby Government. This nationwide minimum wage scale
 applied to all categories of work, but higher grade levels
 existed for.specialized functions.  Minimum wages were
 insufficient to support subsistence, much less an acceptable
 standard of living. Most workers relied on -second jobs,
 subsistence agriculture, or assistance from the extended family.
 Most nonaqricultural work is limited by law to 48 hours per
 week with overtime paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural
 workers were statutorily limited to 2,400 work hours per year.
 All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours-of rest per
 week. In practice, issues involving working conditions were
 still in their infancy. Some occupational health and safety
 standards exist for the work environment, but enforcement by
 the Ministry of Civil Service and Labor is rare.
 
 
 80
