 CHAD
 A country emerging from 17 years of civil war, Chad has a new
 Government dominated by the personal authority of President
 Hissene Habre, who took the capital on June 7, 1982 and extended
 his control to the whole of the country by October.
 During 1982 Chad experienced two very different political
 and governmental situations. The large number (7-10,000)
 of Libyan troops which had been deployed in Chad during most of
 1981 were withdrawn at President Goukouni's request in November
 1981 and replaced by an Inter-African Peacekeeping Force composed
 of Nigerian, Zairian, and Senegalese troops. From January to
 June a weak coalition government led by President Goukouni
 Oueddei ruled the capital, N'Djamena, and exerted tenuous control
 over the central part of the country. The southern provinces,
 which possess the bulk of Chad's economic and agricultural
 resources, were nominally under government control but in fact
 enjoyed virtual autonomy under the forces of Vice President
 Kamougue. Nevertheless, civil war conditions raged over much of
 Chad in these months. Goukouni rejected OAU calls for negotiations
 and instead undertook several military campaigns against Habre's
 forces. Habre, who had agreed to negotiate under OAU auspices,
 fought Goukouni when attacked, and delivered several crushing
 defeats. From February to May 1982, Habre's Forces Armees
 du Nord (FAN) gained strength and began a sweep across eastern
 and northern Chad which eventually brought victory in June. The
 coalition forces, representing the three major factions in
 Goukouni's Government, were poorly organized and wracked by
 internal divisions, and lost successive major battles against the
 FAN despite sizeable amounts of external military assistance.
 The Peacekeeping Force refused to intervene in the fighting and
 withdrew from Chad at the end of its predetermined mandate in
 June 1982.
 When the victorious FAN seized N'Djamena on June 7, Goukouni
 and most of his ministers fled to neighboring countries. Habre
 began a process of negotiation with the remaining factional
 leaders, particularly Kamouque, with the aim of unifying the
 country and effecting political reconciliation. But serious
 negotiations never got under way and in early October 1982,
 Kamougue was driven Out of Chad by a combined force of FAN troops
 and disaffected members of Kamougue's own southern-based army.
 Thus Habre was able to extend his control into southern Chad,
 unifying the entire Chadian nation under one government for the
 first time in several years.
 Once the south had been secured, Habre, who had been serving as
 head of a provisional "Council of State", moved to establish a
 more permanent government. On October 21, President Habre was
 formally installed as Chief of State and a new Council of Ministers
 and National Consultative Council were created. Members of the
 Government were chosen by the FAN with Habre's personal approval.
 Though Habre has de-emphasized the former factions in his efforts
 to promote political reconciliation, the new Government includes
 members of all the major factions and representatives of all
 regions of Chad. None of the factional leaders who opposed Habre
 in 1982 are included in the Government. In late 1982, Goukouni
 and Kamouque announced a "government in exile" and launched a new
 insurgency, with Libyan backing, based in northern Chad.
 The prolonged fighting and a serious drought combined to create a
 food supply crisis during the summer of 1982, which was overcome
 only by a major effort of the international community. Other
 aspects of the economy remained in desperate condition through
 much of 1982, although there were signs of an upturn in the
 closing months.
 
 
 An international donors conference organized by the UN in Geneva
 November 29-30 raised substantial pledges of international
 assistance for reconstruction of Chad's devastated economy. Over
 the next several years, such assistance will be an essential
 element in the Chadian Government's efforts to get the country
 back on its feet.
 During this tumultuous year, human rights concerns did not
 receive adequate attention in Chad. The civil war occasioned
 considerable summary justice and retribution on both sides.
 During the takeover of N'Djamena many Chadians had feared a
 massacre or at a minimum extensive looting by the victorious
 forces, according to the unfortunate precedents of Chadian
 history. But this did not happen: Habre enforced effective
 discipline among his troops, avoided large-scale killings, and
 kept looting and other exactions to a minimum. The new Government
 has pledged an eventual return to democratic procedures in Chad
 (at a time and under conditions as yet unspecified), and has
 allowed courts and trade unions to resume their functions.
 In short, there is a trend developing away from the chaos
 and total breakdown of authority of the civil war period toward
 an era of stability and control, and President Rabre appears to
 be more sensitive than he had previously appeared to human rights
 concerns. Whether this trend will continue will depend to a
 great extent on the continued provision of foreign assistance and
 on the control of externally sponsored subversion, which could
 plunge the country back into renewed civil war. Historically,
 there has been considerable tension and struggle for control
 between northerners and southerners, a struggle which also
 includes religious overtones, as the majority of the northerners
 are Muslim while the southerners are Christians and animists.
 This tension can be expected to persist in the future.
 The US Embassy, which was closed during the fighting in March
 1980, was reopened in January 1982. During most of 1982, Embassy
 personnel had virtually no access to large parts of the country
 because of the poor security situation and lack of transport
 capabilities. This necessarily limits our knowledge of the
 workings of the governmental system within Chad.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 In the civil war conditions and breakdown of law and order
 prevailing during much of 1982, killing for a variety of motives,
 both political and personal, was widespread and practiced by all
 the competing factions. The Habre Government has greatly curbed
 the recourse of individuals to armed violence. Nevertheless,
 there were several reports of summary killings particularly when
 the southern provinces switched allegiance to government forces
 in September.
 b. Disappearance
 The category of disappearances intentionally caused by the
 Government is not readily applicable to the disorganized situa-
 tion in Chad during the civil war, but many people disappeared in
 this period. We have no information on changes that might have
 occurred since the transition from the Goukouni period to the
 Habre Government.
 
 
 68
 c. Torture
 There is no evidence that torture has been practiced, although it
 is not unlikely given the turbulent conditions prevailing in Chad
 during the civil war period. we have no information on changes
 that might have occurred since the transition from the Goukouni
 period to the Habre Government.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Throughout 1982 there were undoubtedly cases of cruel treatment
 of.prisoners inherent in the stresses of civil war. Most recently,
 the ousted southern leader, Colonel Kamougue, was widely believed
 to have resorted to harsh measures against his opponents in the
 south, including killings, and indeed there remain a number of
 purported victims yet to be accounted for. The Department of State
 has been unable to obtain verified information on this subject.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Perhaps 1,000 prisoners of war, some dating back to 1978, are
 being held in various parts of the country, often under lenient
 conditions. A smaller number of "political detainees" are also
 being held under harsher conditions. After Habre's forces took
 power, a number of prisoners held by the previous government were
 released.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 During the first half of the year, under Goukouni, a special
 military tribunal exerted a summary justice at least in N'Djamena.
 There are currently few functioning courts within the country
 beyond the neighborhood level, but the planned resumption
 of judicial activities is slowly beginning to take place.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 undisciplined "combatants" and even private individuals took
 advantage of the civil strife to loot and illegally occupy
 private homes. However, invasion of homes as a governmental
 practice is not known, and the Habre government is seeking to
 control through exhortation the excesses of these "combatants."
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The effective standoff among the various factions during early
 1982 permitted considerable freedom of speech and scope for
 Chad's embryonic, government-controlled media. During this time a
 Chadian stringer for a major U.S. news service, who had been
 jailed in late 1981 by the previous government, was released.
 mince the takeover by Hissein Habre, a combination of prudence
 and relief at the end of the civil war appears to have precluded
 strong criticism of the Government, even though President Habre
 himself announced the guarantee of free speech on September 28.
 There is no organized mechanism for censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 There are no known constraints, other than the curfews imposed
 during much of the year, on peaceful assembly and association.
 However, there are few active institutions other than those
 related to the Government and religion. The previous union and
 
 
 69
 professional groups are largely in a state of suspense, with
 pressing labor problems handled by the Ministry of Labor, though
 trade unions are beginning to resume their activities. Various
 categories of individuals, particularly truckers, taxi drivers,
 and store owners are grouped in trade associations that have some
 mutually protective aspects. There has been little change in
 this regard since Habre came to power.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The civil war has been mistakenly characterized as primarily
 a conflict between northern Muslims and southern Christians
 and animists; in fact, religious differences have been but one
 aspect of complex regional and historical animosities. Neverthe-
 less, some sensivity on religious issues persists. All religions
 are permitted full freedom within a secular state, although
 travel controls were briefly imposed in September on some Christian
 missionaries in at least one southern area. The major Christian
 and Muslim holy days are observed as national holidays, and there
 are both Christian and Koranic schools. A number of other
 faiths, e.g., Bahai, flourish in Chad. This level of tolerance
 has remained constant throughout the year.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although civil strife and the absence of transport severely
 circumscribed routine travel within the country during most
 of 1982, the fighting and drought occasioned considerable
 movement among the population both within Chad and across
 national borders. On September 28 President Habre announced
 the guarantee of free movement, but there continued for security
 reasons to be roadblocks and other controls throughout much of
 the country. There are no restrictions in principle on foreign
 travel nor on residence in various parts of the country. However,
 Chadians are currently required to have a laissez-passer to leave
 the country. Immigration, mostly from other African countries,
 takes place routinely. During 1982 many thousands of refugees
 moved into and out of Chad in response to the changing fortunes
 of civil strife. By year's end the number of refugees residing
 abroad had markedly diminished, and repatriates were free from
 discriminatory treatment. The Government has announced on many
 occasions that even the leaders of the defeated forces in Chad
 could return freely, provided they came back as "genuine national-
 ists" and did not cause further foreign interference in the
 country's affairs.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Under Goukouni, there was no functioning political structure
 within which political participation could be meaningfully
 assessed; political questions were most often resolved by force
 of arms or the threat of it. The new Government is dominated by
 the personal authority of Hissein Habre. Although President
 Sabre has announced that Chadians will have the right in the
 future to choose their institutions democratically, the Government
 established by the PAN was appointed on the basis of rather
 vaguely described "broad consultations with the national social-
 political forces." This Government reflects a number of different
 ethnic, religious, and demographic groupings. Work is expected
 to begin soon on the elaboration of a constitution.
 
 
 70
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 There have been no known investigations conducted by national or
 non-governmental organizations, although in October 1982, Amnesty
 International reportedly cabled the Government to express
 pleasure at the release of certain political figures incarcerated
 by Colonel Kamougue.
 The Government has invited the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) to send delegations to visit prisoners and assess
 nutritional needs in remote areas of the country. The ICRC,
 which returned to Chad in February 1982, has been able to pursue
 its tasks even in sensitive areas with the cooperation of the
 Chadian authorities. To date, no other internal or non-governmen-
 tal agenciep are known to have been active within the country in
 matters pertaining to the human rights situation in Chad.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 After 17 years of strife, frequent drought, and encroaching
 desertification, the economic situation in Chad is one of
 the worst in the world. Both the small monetized economy
 and the predominantly subsistence economy have suffered badly.
 The per capita Gross National Product estimated at $118.2 in 1980
 has undoubtedly dropped, as has the life expectancy at birth
 estimated for the same year at 40.6 years. Much of the population
 is kept alive only by emergency international assistance. As the
 end of 1982 approached, renewed confidence in political stability
 was eliciting small but growing local private investment to
 complement the Government's emphasis on reconstruction. There
 appears to have been little recent discrimination in this country
 of immensely varied cultural and ethnic groups except insofar as
 partisan situations presented themselves during the civil
 strife. The position of women is subordinate, although girls do
 have an opportunity for education where facilities exist. There
 is an active women's auxiliary of the Coordinating Council
 of the PAN, and a woman junior minister was named in October
 1982.
 The population of 4,591,000 estimated in 1981 is growing at
 2.3 percent despite an infant mortality rate of over 148 per
 1000 births. The closure of virtually all schools for several
 years has adversely affected the 15 percent literacy rate noted
 in 1975. The schools and one of the divisions of the university
 reopened in the fall of 1982. Widespread famine and malnutrition
 led to an undetermined number of deaths, as the ratio of caloric
 supply available for consumption relative to nutritional require-
 ments, considered in 1977 at 74 percent, slipped even lower in
 1982.
 
 
 71
 U.3.OERSEA3--LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTNORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: CHAD
 1980.    1981     1962
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         3.8      0.0      6.2
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS    ............    3.8      0.0      6.2
 A.AIO .......... .......0.2          0.0      3.7
 LOANS ..............    ... . 0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS........ .            0..... .2  0.0    3.?
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.),,.         0.0      0.0      2.8
 &.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        3.6      0.0      2.5
 LOANS..'. ........ .0.0             0.0'     0.0
 GRANTS..... .........       3.6      0.0      2.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN 3-LOANS...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL    ....          3.6      0.0      2.5
 E.RELZEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         2.9      0.0      1.2
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY; ..0.                0.,0     1.3
 C.OTHER tCON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS.... ..............   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..*  ..  ..........   0.0      0.0      0.0
 .PEACE CORPS ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS,,...,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ...........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS   NT....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 d.CREOIT SALES-PMS ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.eD.TRNG,...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 U.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.,,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. 9 NIL...         3.8      0.0      6.2
 LOANS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS. ..........          3.8      0.0      6.2
 ------------------------- ;i  ------------  -----------el
 OTHER US LOANS .........0.0               0.0      0.0
 tX'IM BANK LOANS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER.............         .0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 19sU     1931     198Z     1946-S2
 TOTAL1........     1.5      4.1     15.1    245.2
 15RD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     59.9
 1D                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0       .0    0.0,0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0     15.1      49.1
 UNOP               1.5      0.0      0.0     19.8
 OTHER-UN           O.p      4.1      0.0      9.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0    106.8
 
 
 72
