 CHAD
 The Chadian Government is led by President Hissein Habre who
 took power in 1982 in the course of a protracted civil war.
 Relying upon the armed forces as his power base, Mr. Habre
 heads the Council of Ministers which, along with an appointed
 National Consultative Council, comprise the executive and
 legislative branches of the Government. The multiethnic
 National Union for Independence and Revolution (UNIR) was
 created in 1984 to broaden Habre's political base, and in 1986
 it remained the only officially recognized political movement.
 In 1986 President Habre vigorously pursued with increasing
 success a policy of national reconciliation, which by the end
 of the year had rallied all but a small remnant of the former
 armed opposition to his leadership, including in late October
 most of the followers of ex-President Goukouni Oueddei's
 so-called Transitional Government of National Union (GUNT).
 Earlier in 1986, calm returned to the south when the rebel
 commandos ("CODO's") rallied to the Government. Despite these
 important achievements, Libya continued to occupy 40 percent
 of Chad with an estimated 7,000 troops and in December was
 engaged in heavy fighting with its ex-allies, the GUNT forces
 in northern Chad. Thus, at the end of 1986, the Chadian
 conflict had turned from a civil war, in which Libya was
 backing one side, into an international confrontation between
 two states, Chad and Libya. In this transformation, Habre's
 Chadian National Armed Forces (FANT), supported by increased
 French military and economic assistance, played a major role.
 The arrival of the French military "Operation Epervier" in
 mid-February 1986, for example, helped the FANT deter the then
 combined Libyan/GUNT offensive south of the 16th parallel. A
 major effort is currently under way to reintegrate the former
 CODO's into the FANT or into civilian occupations.
 Against this background, Chad remains desperately poor, and
 its estimated population of 5 million has perhaps the lowest
 annual per capita income in the world ($80). Cotton
 production is the major source of government revenues and
 provides employment for 40 percent of the wage work force.
 However, world cotton prices plunged by 60 percent in 1986,
 and production costs rose to the point where Chad's
 state-owned cotton firm lost money with every purchase of the
 crop, threatening, inter alia, to undermine the Chadian
 banking system. This difficult situation was expected to
 continue at least until the early 1990's. The Government
 relies heavily on foreign donor assistance, especially from
 France, to make up for lost government revenues.
 Throughout its long history of civil war, Chad had been the
 scene of human rights abuses stemming from rebel activities
 and reprisals by government forces. In recent years in
 unoccupied Chad, most human rights violations occurred in
 southern Chad. The virtual end of civil strife in the south
 and the end of drought conditions have prompted many of the
 thousands of Chadians who had previously sought refuge in
 neighboring countries to return to Chad. Libyan-occupied
 northern Chad remains closed to outside observers. At the end
 of 1986, the Chadian Government accused the Libyans of
 extensive human rights violations in the north, including the
 charge of genocide against the population, and sought U.N.
 assistance in countering Libya's intensified military
 activities.
 
 
 63
 CHAD
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were many credible reports of political killings in
 1985. In marked contrast, there were no new reports of such
 killings in 1986 in the area under Chadian government
 control. The switching of numerous CODO's to the government
 cause, strict and sometimes harsh punishment imposed upon
 undisciplined soldiers, the establishment of a military code
 of justice, and a general amnesty for all political exiles,
 combined to produce an environment in 1.986 which decidedly
 discouraged political kiling. Also the threat of further
 invasion by the Libyan forces below the 16th parallel helped
 to reduce political dissension and foster a unified war effort
 in the unoccupied part of the country.
 b. Disappearance
 There were also no reported disappearances in unoccupied Chad
 in 1986. However, a number of persons believed to be in
 detention did not appear among the 119 political detainees
 released by the Government on January 19, 1986, thereby
 arousing suspicions that they had either died in custody or
 were still being held. The Government stated that 119 was the
 total number of such detainees. Amnesty International
 expressed concern in its 1986 Report (covering 1985) about the
 "disappearance" of hundreds of people who were reportedly
 detained by government forces, many of whom were believed to
 have been the victims of extrajudicial executions.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In the long history of civil strife, there have been many
 reported incidents of torture and degrading treatment by
 governmental and many oppositional forces. In 1986 there was
 concern for the humane treatment of prisoners of war. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has regular
 access to several hundred prisoners of war held in Chad from
 fighting predating 1986 but not to those taken in 1986,
 including an estimated several hundred GU14T and Libyan
 prisoners captured in the fighting in February and March
 1986. In addition, there may be other prisoners of war taken
 before 1986 who do not benefit from ICRC visits. The
 Government has indicated that it will probably deny access to
 Libyan prisoners as long as the Libyans deny the ICRC access
 to FANT prisoners held in the north or in Libya.
 Prison conditions in Chad are generally poor, largely because
 of the country's poverty rather than a policy of abusive
 treatment. There are reports of frequent beatings. Adequate
 food is largely dependent upon outside visitors, especially
 family. There are government detention centers where, because
 they are not accessible to outside observers, decidedly worse
 conditions may prevail.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The judicial system and criminal code in unoccupied Chad have
 evolved primarily from the body of law inherited from the
 former colonial power, France. In theory, this law
 incorporates safeguards against arbitrary arrests and
 
 
 64
 CHAD
 specifies detainee rights, including the right to counsel and
 the right to be promptly informed of charges. However, in
 practice, civil strife over more than 21 years has severely
 disrupted the legal system, especially the operation of the
 courts. Persons who express views critical of or different
 from those of the Government are often thought to endanger the
 security of the State and may be detained without trial.
 There are very few lawyers in Chad, and there is no
 functioning system of bail. The new Director of the National
 Security Police announced in Octobee that detainees would not
 be held more than 48 hours without charge.
 Amnesty International has been concerned about the detention
 without trial of dozens of alleged opponents of the
 Government. At the end of 1986, the number of persons
 remaining in detention without charge, as distinct from
 prisoners of war, was not known, but as noted above, the
 Government claimed all political detainees had been released
 in January.
 The Government reports that there have been large-scale
 deportations of Chadians from the northern portion of the
 country to Libya for indoctrination, assimilation, forced
 labor, or military service in the "Islamic Legion," an
 anti-Chadian government force in the north under Libyan
 control. Ex-President Goukouni Oueddei is reportedly under
 arrest in Tripoli.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has been critical
 of Chad in the past for the use of forced labor. The Chadian
 Government continued discussions with the ILO in 1986 on
 revising outdated labor laws which do not meet ILO norms,
 including the ILO's convention on forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Chadian judiciary has been weakened through years of civil
 war and extrajudicial actions. The President appoints judges
 and other judicial officials. Since 1982 the Government has
 been attempting to rebuild the regular judicial system which
 includes, 1 appeal court, 14 district courts, 4 labor
 tribunals, and 1 special court of justice established in 1985
 for processing cases involving embezzlement of public funds
 and abuse of public office. There are only 2 defense
 attorneys and 36 justices of the peace, which highlights the
 shortage of trained judicial personnel. Judicial authorities
 complain of a heavy backlog of approximately 400 cases.
 There is also a traditional system of law presided over by
 sultans and chiefs. This traditional system is generally
 effective and fair in resolving property and other civil
 disputes and in dealing with cases involving petty local
 crime. In theory, decisions in customary courts may be
 appealed to the regular courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Chadian law, homes may be searched only during the day
 and under authority of a warrant. In practice, however, there
 are many instances where this law has not been respected.
 There have been occasional reports of soldiers, deserters, and
 bandits seizing private property.
 
 
 65
 CHAD
 Correspondence carried by people traveling overland in Chad is
 often checked by authorities at various points along the way.
 Correspondence sent through the Chadian postal system,
 however, is less likely to be subject to such controls.
 In Libyan-occupied northern Chad, there have reportedly been
 forced resettlements of Chadians and forced marriages between
 Chadian women and Libyan soldiers/colonizers. Also, reports
 indicate that sizable quantities of livestock have been taken
 to Libya from northern Chad without proper compensation to
 their Chadian owners, and that Libyans use food distribution
 as a means of keeping the local populations under control.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Temporary detention is a likely penalty for publishing or
 spreading information considered damaging to the Government's
 interests. The radio stations and the only daily news
 bulletin are operated by the Government's information
 secretariat. A weekly news magazine is published by UNIR.
 The editors, journalists, and media technicians are employed
 by the Government and do not write or publish anything which
 is critical of the Government.
 In late December, based on military considerations, the
 Government imposed censorship on all foreign news dispatches
 coming from Chad. However, it ended this censorship system at
 the beginning of January 1987.
 Chadian law enforcement officials have been known to
 "discourage" Chadians from listening to Radio Bardai, the
 Chadian opposition radio station in the north, which is
 actually located in Libya. Private groups (religious and
 otherwise) publish nonpolitical information freely. Major
 French dailies and weekly news and feature magazines are sold
 in Chad, and ideologically hostile foreign magazines are
 sometimes available. The ban on the sale of the Paris-based
 journal Afrique Asie, imposed in 1985 following the
 publication of an article critical of the Chadian Government,
 remains in effect. In 1986 a local Catholic publication,
 L'Espoir, was suppressed for having published political
 commentary. In 1986 an Agence France Presse correspondent was
 expelled for writing "false information aimed at discrediting
 Chad."
 Freedoms of speech and press are tightly controlled in the
 Libyan-occupied north where the use of French, one of the two
 official languages of Chad, has been largely proscribed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In unoccupied Chad there is no forced membership in any
 political organization. However, voluntary membership is
 limited to the National Union for Independence and Revolution
 (UNIR) and its subgroups. UNIR is working to strengthen and
 extend its organization but has encountered resistance from
 several ex-opposition political organizations which have
 recently rallied to the Government. These political groups
 vow to maintain, and have so far maintained, their individual
 identities, but the Government has severely criticized
 meetings of members of these political organizations in the
 government-controlled press. Thus far, no other action has
 
 
 66
 CHAD
 been taken against these groups. Reports from the Libyan-
 occupied northern part of Chad indicate that the free assembly
 of indigenous Chadians there is prohibited, including in labor
 unions.
 Chad's labor laws provide for freedom of association for
 workers, for confederation of unions, and for the right to
 bargain collectively. The right to strike exists only after
 arbitration at three levels in two ministries (Labor and
 Justice) fails. There are two labor union confederations in
 Chad, both of which are only marginally effective and are in
 large part constrained by the Government. These unions are
 too weak and the economy too undeveloped for organized labor
 to be a significant political force.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Chad professes to be a secular state. Islam, Christianity,
 and other religions are freely practiced. Both Islamic and
 Christian holidays are given official status. More than 50
 percent of Chad's population is Muslim, and Chad is a member
 of the Organization of the Islamic Conference. Christian
 missionaries may, nevertheless, enter the country,
 proselytize, and provide assistance to local populations.
 They are particularly active in the south. Religious
 publications are allowed to circulate freely, provided they do
 not engage in political commentary. There is no evidence the
 Government either favors or disfavors members of particular
 religions. In Libyan-occupied northern Chad, only the Muslim
 religion can be practiced openly.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Travel in Chad is sharply curtailed by the presence of hostile
 forces north of the 16th parallel and by bandits and residual
 rebel groups in certain southern and eastern parts of the
 country. Travelers within Chad require proper documentation
 and government travel authorization, which can usually be
 obtained.
 International travel is permitted. Chadians may obtain
 regular passports for a fee of about $60, provided they have
 been cleared by Chad's internal security services, a process
 which normally takes less than 1 week.
 Chadians are free to emigrate. In previous years, thousands
 of Chadians fled to neighboring countries because of drought
 and civil strife. As conditions improved in 1986, thousands
 of these displaced Chadians returned from the Central African
 Republic, Sudan, Cameroon, Niger, and Nigeria. Despite Chad's
 limited material means, these repatriates, as well as those
 Chadians who fled the occupied northern zone, have been well
 received. There have been no known reprisals against members
 of former opposition groups who have returned to Chad.
 The movement of Chadians in the occupied north is reported to
 be tightly controlled and severely restricted. There were
 reports that occupying forces fired upon civilians fleeing
 south to government-controlled areas.
 
 
 CHAD
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The present political system makes no provision for democratic
 change of government. Chad has been in a state of civil
 strife since 1965, with various factions and as many as 11
 armies contending at times for control of the country.
 Since June 1982, Chad has been governed by President Hissein
 Habre, who heads a French-style Council of Ministers
 complemented by an appointed National Consultative Council
 (legislature). Both Councils are carefully balanced to
 promote ethnic and regional harmony. The source of President
 Habre's authority is the allegiance he commands from the armed
 forces, the security services, and the country's only
 authorized political movement, the National Union for
 Independence and Revolution (UNIR). UNIR's bylaws mandate the
 popular election of lower-level officials, but, as yet, no
 elections have been scheduled.
 At present, laws, decrees, and ordinances are proposed by the
 President and the Council of Ministers and occasionally
 "discussed" by the National Consultative Council prior to
 promulgation. Agreements signed in late 1985 in Gabon by the
 Government and the rallying opposition parties, known as the
 "Libreville Accords," provide for the drafting of a new
 constitution by the National Consultative Council, to be voted
 on by referendum within 4 years. The new constitution is to
 provide a timeframe for free and democratic elections.
 Sometimes, traditional leaders (cantonal or village chiefs for
 example) are popularly elected or chosen by subordinate
 members of the traditional hierarchy (village chiefs or family
 heads, for example).
 In the occupied northern zone, Chadians must establish
 Libyan-style "Peoples' Committees." The alliance of armed
 Chadian opposition groups known as the Transitional Government
 of National Union (GUNT) collapsed by late 1986 due to
 disillusionment with Libyan control, military defeat, and
 Habre's successful policy of national reconciliation. The
 GUNT had previously served as a front for the Libyan
 occupation of northern Chad.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 As noted above, the Chadian Government permits the ICRC to
 visit many prisoners of war captured before 1986. It does
 not, however, permit ICRC visits to prisoners captured during
 the fighting of 1986. The Libyans do not permit ICRC visits
 to Chadian prisoners of war in the north.
 The Government has carried on a "dialogue" with Amnesty
 International and permitted Amnesty to send a mission to Chad
 in 1985 to discuss human rights, including status and
 conditions of prisoners of war, which the Government maintains
 are held in recognized detention centers.
 Chad has no internal human rights organizations, either
 official or nongovernmental. Chad ratified the Organization
 of African Unity's African Charter for Human and Peoples'
 Rights in July 1986.
 
 
 68
 CHAD
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are some 200 ethnic groups in Chad, which can be divided
 roughly between Saharan and Arab Muslim in the northern and
 central regions, and negroid peoples in the south. Over 21
 years of conflict have brought out the complexity of ethnic
 divisions beyond simple north-south formulations. Habre has
 made a serious effort to expand the ethnic and geographic
 representation of his administration and to create a truly
 national government by appointing ministers, deputy ministers
 (secretaries of state), and administrators from all parts of
 the country.
 In the public domain, at least, women are generally
 subordinate to men. Women contribute greatly to Chad's
 agricultural productivity in virtually all aspects of
 farming. They also engage in commerce, ranging from simple
 market stalls to the ownership of some larger businesses. The
 titular members of agricultural cooperatives still tend to be
 men. Women may serve voluntarily in the armed forces,
 although they are excluded from officer training programs. In
 1984 a Ministry of Social and Women's Affairs was created and
 has always had a woman minister. Only 1 of the 15 members of
 the executive bureau of UNIR's central committee is a woman.
 UNIR has a fairly active women's organization. Many women,
 especially war widows and their children, have inadequate
 means of support.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The minimum age for employment is 14. Many exceptions abound,
 however, as Chad is a predominantly labor-intensive agrarian
 society, with 95 percent of the population engaged in
 subsistence agriculture. The statutory minimum for wage labor
 is approximately $25 per month. With the Government extremely
 short of funds, civil servants below the executive level
 receive only 60 percent of salaries on the scale established
 in 1977. Nonagricultural work is limited to 48 hours per week
 with overtime to be paid for any excess. Agricultural work is
 supposedly limited to 2,400 hours per year. All workers must
 have at least 24 consecutive hours of rest each week, usually
 on Sunday. Occupational health and safety standards are
 established by law and ministerial decree but, as with most
 social legislation, enforcement is weak.
 
 
 69
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: CHAO
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...       16.0     35.4     15.5
 LOANS ..............     .. 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   16.0     35.4     15.5
 AAO......................  11.0     15.5     15.5
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   11.0     15.5     15.5
 (SEC.SUOP.ASSIST,)...         3.0      5.0     9.8
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        5.0     19.9      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     5.0     19.9      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR.....      0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE rI-TOTAL                  5 0     19.9      0.0
 ERELIEF.EC.DEV S WFP.         3.8     13.6     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         1.2      6.3      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............... .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.         2.2      5.2     5.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     2.2      5.2      5.9
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       2.0      5.0      5.7
 3.CREOIT FINANCIN   G ....     0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL mrL.EO.TRNG....         0.2      0.2      0.2
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & ML...        18.2     40.6     21.4
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   18.2     40.6     21.4
 OTiER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........     5.2     11.0    .15.0    306.6
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IF'                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0     15.0    .95.4
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0     .0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0     49.1
 UNDP               5.2      4.8      0.0     39.5
 OTAR-UN           0.0     '6.2      0.0     15.8
 EEC                3.0      0.0      0.0    106.8
 
 
