 CHAD
 Chad is governed by a transitional regime in which effective power is held bry
 President Idriss Deby and his party, the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS). Presi-
 dent Deby took power in a December 1990 coup and was confirmed as Chief of State
 by the Sovereign National Conference (CNS) of 1993. He won election against 14
 other candidates in July under a Constitution adopted in a March 31 referendum
 and was inaugurated for a 5-year term on August 8. Elections for the Legislative
 
 
 52
 Assembly were scheduled for January 1997 to replace a provisional parliament, the
 Higher Transitional Council (CST), created by the CNS. The Government is headed
 by a prime minister appointed by the President. Prime Minister Djimasta Koibla
 has held office since Mrch 1995. An ineffective and overburdened judicial system
 is subject to official interference.
 The army, gendarmerie, police, and intelligence services are responsible for inter-
 nal security. Officers of the ethnic group of President Deby dominate the Rapid
 Intervention Force, formerly known as the Republican Guard, and the National Se-
 curity Agency (ANS), a counterintelligence organization that has acted as an inter-
 nal political police force. The security forces were more subject to effective control
 by the Government. The security forces continued to commit human rights abuses.
 The economy is based on subsistence agriculture, herding and fishing. Annual per
 capita income is an estimated $130 to $190. Chad has little industry; the chief ex-
 port is cotton. The Government relies heavily on external financial and technical as-
 sistance.
 The human rights situation improved in several respects during the year, al-
 though serious problems remain in certain areas. There were reports of continued
 abuses of human rights by both government and rebel forces. However, there were
 no reports of the massacres and terror campaigns that occurred in previous years.
 The security forces continued to abuse both suspects and detainees and use arbi-
 trary arrest, detention, and illegal searches. However, after major reforms by the
 Minister of the Armies, reports of major violations by the security forces decreased
 significantly. The Government did not prosecute security personnel reportedly re-
 sponsible in earlier years for murder, rape, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention,
 and illegal search and seizure. Prison conditions remained harsh. The presidential
 election was marred by widespread and credible reports of fraud, vote-rigging, and
 irregularities by local officials, although no major incidents of violence were re-
 ported. These actions were contrary to internationally accepted standards for free
 and fair elections. The irregularities apparently did not alter the overall outcome.
 The Government at times also imposed illegal limits on freedom of assembly and
 association, particularly on opponents meeting to advocate a boycott of the second
 round of the presidential vote, and on occasion limited the freedom of movement of
 opposition presidential candidates. The judicial system remained ineffective and
 subjct to government interferene, unable to provide citizens with prompt trials.
 Detainees occasionally spend years in pretrial detention. The Government engages
 in telephone surveillance without judicial authority. Discrimination against women
 is common; violence against women is also believed to be common. There were in-
 fringements on worker rights, including reported instances of forced labor in agricul-
 tural communities and the military forces.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On August 16, Bichara Digui, a
 businessmen and former political prisoner with ties to both the political and armed
 op osition, was shot to death in what appeared to be a premeditated execution-style
 killing. There were reports that his opponents in the Government ordered his death;
 other reports claimed that he had received death threats from a fellow businessman
 who had lost a court case to him. The killing is under investigation by the police,
 but the motive for the shooting remained unclear at year's end. The Government
 made no effort to prosecute members of the security forces for killings committed
 in previous years. At least 20 extrajudicial killings of petty criminals by police oc-
 curred in November and December after adoption of a new law aimed at reducing
 street crime. The Government denied that it had ordered a shoot-to-kill policy aimed
 specifically at unarmed thieves but indicated that police would protect themselves
 when confronting armed criminals at crime scenes.
 Two local human rights organizations reported, with credible supporting evidence,
 the public execution in Fianga on December 24 by security forces of nine criminal
 suspects, following a roundup of alleged thieves and highwaymen.
 b. Disappearance.-There were credible reports that several opposition party offi-
 cials were abducted during the first round of the presidential campaign and later
 released.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution specifically prohibits torture and degrading or humiliating treat-
 ment; however, members of the security forces continued to commit some abuses.
 The Government took steps to halt acts of brutality by its security forces when
 President Deby appointed former Justice Minister Youssouf Togoimi Minister of the
 Armies in December 1995 in an effort to reform the military services. Deby and
 
 
 Togoimi made significant efforts to end military corruption and abuse. Human
 rights advocacy groups reported only scattered abuses by the military in 1996, and
 credit Togoimi s reform actions. These abuses included harassment illegal searches,
 and seizures of cattle, crops, and food. The Government took no efrective measures
 to punish perpetrators of abuses from previous years.
 On July 3 in Bebedjia in Eastern Logone province, security forces arrested former
 p residential candidate Ngarlejy Yorongar without a warrant, took him to the
 Bebedjia jail, and beat him (see Section Ed.).
 The army sometimes harassed residents of villages for their supposed collabora-
 tion with rebels, including unauthorized searches. Soldiers in army garrisons in cer-
 tain towns often do not speak the local language, and this at times resulted in fric-
 tion with the local population.
 Prison conditions are harsh throughout the country, characterized by appalling
 overcrowding, poor sanitation, inadequate food, shelter, and medical facilities, and
 mixing of male and female prisoners. The Government took no effective action to
 improve these conditions. Prisoners are almost totally dependent on their families
 for food and clothing. All prisons are in need of major repairs, and escapes are fre-
 quent.
 The Government permits some prison visits by human rights monitors such as the
 International Committee of the Red Crss.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution and the Penal Code
 prohibit arbitrary arrest. Arrest warrants must usually be signed by a judicial offi-
 cial. However, the Government did not always respect these requirements.
 Ngarlejy Yorongar, for example, was arrested in July without a warrant, by a
 locaI official. He was charged--only after being detained beyond the legal limit-
 with illegal campaigning for opposition candidate Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue and
 with arms trafficking with guerrilla forces. He was later transferred to N'Djamena
 where the Prosecutor General and the Justice Minister ruled that the charges were
 groundless and ordered him released.
 The Government did not use exile as a political weapon.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution mandates an independent judici-
 ary; however, the judiciary did not operate effectively, being underfunded, overbur-
 dened, and subject to official interference.
 The national judicial system operates with courts located in provincial capitals.
 The N'Djamena Court of Appeals, the country's highest court, is supposed to conduct
 regular sessions in the provinces, but rarely does so. Applicable law can be confus-
 ing, as courts often tend to blend the formal French-derived legal code with tradi-
 tional practices.
 Official inaction and interference continued to plague the judiciary. Persons ac-
 cused of crimes may have to endure up to several years of incarceration before being
 charged or tried, especially persons arrested for felonies in the provinces who often
 must await remand to the overcrowded and dangerous house of detention in
 N'Djamena. Salaries for justice officials are often low and in arrears. The Govern-
 ment has made reform of the judiciary a top priority.
 The Military Code of Justice has not been enforced since the 1979-1980 Civil
 War, and courts-martial instituted early in the Deby Regime to try security person-
 nel for crimes against civilians no longer operate. The remaining military mag-
 istrates now sit as civilian judges on the N'Djamena Court of Appeals.
 People in rural areas usually do not have access to formal judicial institutions.
 In most civil cases they rely on traditional courts presided over by village chiefs,
 chefs de canton, or sultans. Decisions may be appealed to a formal court.
 There are no reliable figures on political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of home, correspondence, and other
 communications, as well as free dom from arbitrary search. The Penal Code requires
 that authorities conduct searches of homes only during daylight hours and with a
 legal warrant. In practice, security forces ignored these provisions and conducted
 extrajudicial searches at any time.
 The Government engages in wiretapping without judicial authority.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution and Transitional Charter pro-
 vide for freedom of speech and the press, and the Government generally respected
 these rights. The official media, consisting of a national radio network, a press agen-
 cy, and an N'Djamena television station, are subject to both official and informal
 censorship. The official media also tend to give priority to government officials and
 events while providing lesser coverage of the opposition. The Higher Council on
 Communications, an independent institution mandated by the CNS, acts as an arbi-
 
 
 54
 ter whose main function is to promote free access to the media. It has no power of
 enforcement but successfully promulgated rules for equal access for official political
 statements broadcast during the constitutional referendum and the presidential
 election.
 There are a number of limited-circulation independent newspapers published in
 the capital, some of which are vociferously critical of government policies and lead-
 ers. The Government did not censor these newspapers. It likewise did not interfere
 with the distribution of opposition tracts and press releases, but state radio officials
 sometimes refused to broadcast opposition political statements, even when the can-
 didates had bought and paid for radio broadcast rights.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of association and assembly, and the Government generally respected these
 rights in practice. Authorities routinely granted permits for political and nongovern-
 mental oranization (NGO) meetings and usually did not interfere with meetings or
 press cenerences.
 However, government forces were responsible for two serious abridgements of
 freedom of assembly. On June 28 and 29, forces directed by Secretary of State for
 Security Noudjalbaye Ngaryan prevented meetings of opposition political parties
 who were advocating a boycott of the second round of presidential elections. Police
 and gendarmes commanded by Secretary Noudjabaye also occupied the head-
 quarters of the principal labor union in order to prevent a meeting called to discuss
 the boycott and revoked its legal charter for several weeks (see also Section 6.a.).
 Party and union officials reported that the security forces presented no court order
 authorizing them to prevent the meetings.
 Opposition political parties also reported incidents of harassment by local officials
 during the election campaign. In one of the most violent incidents, a rally of presi-
 dentia candidate Saleh Kebzabo in Kelo resulted in a riot allegedly instigated by
 the local officials. Several party members and officials were hospitalized as a results
 of injuries inflicted by the rioters, who also damaged or destroyed vehicles and
 equipment.
 T here are more than 60 registered political parties and several hundred NGO's.
 However, a confusion of laws governing NGO's enabled the Interior Ministry to
 threaten unions and human rights organizations with dissolution for alleged politi-
 cal activities during the election campaign (see Section 6.a.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution states that the state is secular. It also
 provides for freedom of religion. All faiths worship without government constraint.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights. However, several opposition
 prsidentia candidates reported that they were the object of government orders pre-
 venting them from travelhn"g or leaving the country after the first round of presi-
 dentialelections. In addition, Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue and Saleh Kebzabo, who
 finished second and third in the presidential vote, were both detained for several
 hours by security personnel at the N'Djamena airport at different times during the
 campaign and before being allowed to leave the country.
 The Government does not require special permission for travel in most areas.
 However, armed bandits operate on many roads, exposing travelers to assault, rob-
 bery, and murder; many bandits have been identified as soldiers and deserters. De-
 spite government efforts to clear the countrys main routes of illegal roadblocks, ele-
 ments of the security forces, guerrillas, and bandits continue to maintain them, ex-
 torting money from travelers.
 Chadian refugees are free to repatriate, although several thousand remain in the
 Central African Republic, Niger, Nigeria, and Cameroon.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations assisting refugees. There were no
 reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. The coun-
 try currently provides first asylum for refugees and has done so-in past years. The
 Government has informally granted refugee and asylee status to persons and has
 allowed them to remain for resettlement.
 The Government adheres to the 1951 U.N. Convention on Refugees and the 1967
 protocol relating to their status. However, these accords were never ratified by Par-
 liament and therefore do not carry force in local law. No official national structure
 has been created to deal with refugee affairs other than the repatriation commit-
 tees, which focus solely on citizens returning from other countries. Since August
 1993, however, the Government has registered refugees in N'djamena and sent their
 apPlications for refugee status to the UNHCR Central African Headquarters in
 nshasa, Zaire. If the application is accepted, then in principle the refugee will be
 enrolled in a 6-month care maintenance program, which includes a monthly subsist-
 
 
 ence allowance, medical care, and assistance in finding work. This program is fund-
 ed by a local NGO.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The March constitutional referendum and the July presidential election, both au-
 thorized by the Constitution, were the first national votes held in many years and
 the first under President Deby. The presidential election was marred by widespread
 and credible reports of fraud, vote-rigging, and irregularities by local officials, al-
 though no major incidents of violence were reported. These actions were contrary
 to internationally accepted standards for free and fair elections. The irregularities
 apparently did not alter the overall outcome.
 The Constitution accords immunity to both the President and members of the Na-
 tional Assembly and includes no provision for recall. Local officials will continue to
 be appointed by the national Government until local elections in 1997.
 Few women held senior leadership positions, although several served as Cabinet
 ministers; there were 4 women in the 52-member CST, which was disbanded late
 in the year.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations operate with few overt restrictions, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are often ac-
 cessible but generally unresponsive or hostile to the findings of these organizations.
 Human rights NGO's gained recognition under the Deby regime and participate
 in ke governmental institutions. They are courageous, if often partisan, in publiciz-
 ing abuses through reports and press releases but only occasionally are able to in-
 tervene successfully with authorities. All are dominated by opponents of the Govern-
 ment, impairing their credibility. Two governmental bodies, the National Human
 Rights Commission and the Human Rights Committee of the CST, are also active.
 The Government did not prohibit investigations by international human rights or-
 ganizations. In April the United Nations Human Rig hts Commission considered a
 case against Chad under the confidential 1503 Procedure. The Commission voted to
 consider moving the case to the public process next year if there was no improve-
 ment in the human rights situation.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, regardless of origin,
 race, religion, political opinion, or social status. In practice, cultural traditions main-
 tain women in a subordinate status, and the Government favors its ethnic support-
 ers and allies.
 Women.-While no statistics are available, domestic violence against women is be-
 lieved to be common. By tradition, wives are subject to the authority of their hus-
 bands and have only limited legal recourse against abuse. Family or traditional au-
 thorities may act in such cases, but police rarely intervene.
 Neither government nor advocacy groups have been able to redress discrimination
 against women. There are, however, a number of women's advocacy groups that are
 working to this end. Women do not have equal opportunities for education and
 training, making it difficult for them to compte for the few formal sector jobs. Prop-
 erty and inheritance laws do not discriminate against women, but traditional prac-
 tice favors men. Exploitation of women is especially pervasive in roral areas, where
 women do most of the agricultural labor and are discouraged from formal schooling.
 Children.-0The Government has demonstrated little ommitment to childrena
 rights and welfare. It has not committed adequate funding to public education and
 medical care. Educational opportunities for girls are limited. About as many girls
 as boys are enrolled in primary school, but the percentage of girls enrolled in sec-
 ondary school is extremely low, primarily because of early marriage. Although the
 law prohibits sex with a girl under the age of 14, even if married, this law is rarely
 enforced and families arrange marriages forgirls as young as 11 or 12 years of age,
 sometimes forcibly, for the financial gain of a dowry. Many are then obligated to
 work long hours of physical labor for their husbands in fields or homes.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widespread
 and deepy rooted in tradition. Advocated by women as well as by men, the practice
 is strongest among ethnic groups in the east and south. It is usually performed prior
 to puberty as a rite of passage, an occasion many families use to profit from gifts
 from their communities. Opposition to its elimination is strong. Several female offi-
 cials of the Health Ministry have unsuccessfully attempted to develop a public edu-
 
 
 56
 cation program to change attitudes toward FGM. A number of women's groups are
 active in promoting change, but few are effective.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. However, the Government operates few therapy, education, or employment
 programs for people with disabilities, and no laws mandate access to buildings for
 them.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnicity continues to influence government
 appointments and political alliances. There are approximately 200 ethnic groups
 from two general traditions: Arab and Saharana/Sahelian zone Muslims in the
 north, center and east, and Sudanian zone Christian or animist peoples in the
 south. Rivalries among these many groups have caused civil tensions and conflicts
 for decades.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution recognizes freedom of association
 and union membership as well as the right to strike. All employees, except members
 of the military, are free to join or form unions. Unions must receive authorization
 from the Government in order to operate legally. However, few workers belong to
 unions: most are subsistence cultivators or herders. The main labor organization is
 the Federation of Chadian Unions (UST), and its major constituent union is the
 Teachers' Union of Chad (SET). Neither has ties to the Government. A number of
 minor federations and unions, including the Free Confederation of Chadian Work-
 ers, also operate, some with ties to government officials.
 The Government generally respected the right to organize and strike. However,
 armed police and gendarmes occupied UST offices for 2 days to prevent a meeting
 called to discuss a boycott of the second-round presidential vote. The Government
 revoked the union's charter on July 2 for alleged illegal political activity, but it rein-
 stated it on July 31 following an international outcry, including a complaint filed
 with the International Labor Organization (ILO) by the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions, protesting suspension on that basis. The UST also had filed
 legal actions against the Government in the courts for similar attempts in 1993 and
 1995 to suspend it and occupy its headquarters.
 Isolated strikes over unpaid salaries by teachers and health workers occurred in
 several areas of the country, a marked improvement from previous years which
 were characterized by widespread strikes.
 Unions may affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code contain only general provisions on the rights of labor and do not specifi-
 cally protect collective bargaining. The Labor Code requires the Government to set
 minimum-wage standards and permits unions to bargain collectively, but it empow-
 ers the Government to intervene in the bargaining process under certain cir-
 cumstances. The Government again failed to submit a draft labor code prepared in
 1988 with ILO assistance for consideration by the CST.
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, and there is no
 formal mechanism for resolving such complaints. Three top union officials in Biltine
 Prefecture, Bakari Aoudou and Nadjingar Djimodundoudje of UST and Lokal
 Yokassi of SET were suspended from their jobs and expelled from the province at
 the behest of government officials in 1995, and have not been reinstated nor per-
 mitted to return.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Corpulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery
 and forced labor. However, the ILO maintained that several provisions of both pre-
 and post-independence legislation may permit forced labor under certain cir-
 cumstances and has urged the government to take actions to repeal them. There is
 no evidence of the practice in the formal economy, but there have been reports of
 isolated instances among rural farming or herding communities and in military in-
 stallations in the north. Human rights associations also indicate that the military
 routinely compels soldiers to perform forced labor at isolated outposts as punish-
 ment.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code stipulates that
 the minimum age for employment in the formal sector is 14 years. The Government
 does not enforce the law, but in practice children are rarely employed except in agri-
 culture and herding. The Minister of the Armies stated publicly that the Govern-
 ment is attempting to muster out the approximately 600 underage soldiers currently
 serving in the armed forces.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code requires the Government to
 set minimum wages. Although a 1994 Social Pact set the minimum wage at a range
 of $42 to $50 (ca 21,000 to cfa 25,000)per month, most wages are insufficient to
 
 
 support a worker and family. Nearly all private sector and state-owned firms had
 applied the new standards by the end of 1995, but public sector wages remain below
 standard since the Government failed to submit legislation to implement them for
 its employees.
 The Government record on salary payments improved significantly. Structural ad-
 justment assistance from international institutions enabled it to pay most of its em-
 ployees regularly and usually on time. Salary arrears to civil servants outside the
 capital, a problem in a country with few financial institutions, have been reduced
 to approximately 2 months from the previous 6 months. However, arrears to govern-
 ment employees from previous years remain unpaid. Moreover, some members of
 the military received only subsistence payments for most of the year. Many state
 employees must work second jobs, raise their own food crops, or rely on family for
 support.
 The law limits most nonagricultural work to 48 hours per week, with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours, and agricultural work limited to 2,400 hours per
 year. All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per week, although
 in practice this is rarely enforced.
 The Labor Code mandates occupational health and safety standards and inspec-
 tors with the authority to enforce them. These standards are rarely respected in
 practice, and the UST has alleged before the ILO that the labor inspection services
 are not allocated the funds necessary to perform their duties. In principle, workers
 can remove themselves from dangerous working conditions, but in practice they can-
 not without endangering their employment.
