 CHAD
 Chad is ruled by a military government. The armed
 forces seized power in April 1975 claiming that the
 previous regime had mismanaged the economy and failed to
 unite the country and end the guerrilla war which has
 been going on for more than a decade. While certain
 rebel groups have reconciled their differences with the
 new government, the main insurgency continues. Following
 the military coup, a number of political prisoners were
 released. However, since the government considers
 itself to be in a state of war, it believes that certain
 political rights, such as free speech, must be restricted
 for the time being.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from
 a. Torture
 There are no reports that the current governmenthas
 practiced torture.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The present provisional government put an end to forced
 participation in physically grueling tribal initiation
 rites when it assumed power in April 1975. There are no
 reports that cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment are now practiced, nor do we have any evidence
 of arbitrary deprivation of life.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 When it assumed power the provisional government released
 a number of political prisoners detained by the previous
 government, but placed several members of the previous
 regime under arrest. The current government has not
 been able to end the longstanding rebellion in northern
 and eastern Chad. As a result, the government has felt
 obliged to curtail personal liberties in the primary
 regions of conflict. Arbitrary arrests of suspected
 guerrillas have occurred.
 (25)
 
 22-145 0 - 78 - 3
 
 
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is generally observed
 in civil and criminal cases not involving political
 acts. Most political detainees have been tried by
 military courts or by special tribunals of the Ministry
 of Interior, some public and some closed. Other de-
 tainees have been released without trial because of
 lack of evidence.
 The coup plotters who attempted to assassinate the
 President in April 1976 were tried before a public
 military tribunal. A variety of sentences, from
 exculpation to execution, were handed down by the
 tribunal, after a full hearing of the available
 evidence. In April 1977 several military officers
 who attempted to assassinate the President were
 convicted of armed insurrection by the Supreme
 Military Council in a closed court-martial and
 subsequently executed.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 This does not appear to be generally practiced,
 although it could be authorized in accordance with.
 security measures to cope with the guerrilla insurgency.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care and Education
 As a very poor country, Chad has actively sought
 foreign aid to improve the living standards of its
 nationals. The provisional government has publicly
 committed itself to improving the standards of
 living of its citizens by raising the per capita
 income, promoting development of its agricultural
 sector and improving social services and educational
 programs. It has been relatively successful in its
 efforts to obtain external aid for these social
 programs. Most of the current programs concentrate
 on basic institutional development, and it is still
 too early to measure their impact on Chad's national
 development.
 
 
 27
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Including
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedoms of thought, speech, religion or assembly
 are not specifically guaranteed by law. The government
 makes no attempt to foster intellectual or ideological
 conformity, but the freedoms of speech and assembly
 are restricted for security reasons. The Press is
 state-controlled in Chad. Chadian nationals and
 foreigners in Chad are free to practice the religion
 of their choice. The provisional government is
 reportedly drafting a new judicial code which is to
 guarantee a measure of civil and political rights to
 Chadian nationals. Although a former French colony,
 traditional law continues to be highly influential
 throughout Chad. Trade unions are prohibited from
 engaging in any political activity, and the right to
 strike exists only within the private sector because
 of the national emergency.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Voreiqn
 Travel and Emigration
 Since there is an active insurrection in parts of Chad,
 freedom of movement is restricted. Emigration and
 foreign travel are occasionally controlled for security
 reasons due to the insurgency.
 c. Freedom to participate in the Political Process
 Only those individuals designated and appointed by
 Chad's governing military leaders are free to partici-
 pate in the political process. The military has post-
 poned plans to return the country to civilian rule
 until the internal security situation has improved.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Viblations of Human Rights
 Under the previous regime, various international and
 religious organizations proposed that Chad be investi-
 gated for serious government violations of human
 
 
 28
 rights, particularly in the area of political and
 religious freedoms. Since the new regime has been in
 power, there have been no proposals for outside in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights violations in Chad.
 We do not know how receptive the government would be to
 such an investigation.
 
 
