 CHD*
 Chad is beset by serious fundamental problems and profound
 socio-economic conflicts which must be taken into account
 when assessing the human rights situation in the country.
 Historically, no nation remotely resembling present day Chad
 existed, and it was only in the late 1930s that the French
 colonial administration began to cover what is now the
 national territory. Moreover, Chad developed few political
 and economic institutions during the colonial era. It is
 unable to feed its population, and remains among the world's
 10 poorest countries. Chad is beset by profound social,
 ethnic, regional and religious divisions. There are the
 nomads of the desert north versus the semi-nomadic peoples of
 the Sahel, versus the sedentary farmers of the south; the
 Arabs and others of Arabized culture versus the more tradi-
 tional black African groups, the northern ex-slavers versus
 the southern ex-slaves; the Muslims versus the animists and
 Christians. The differences are further exacerbated by
 external interference.
 These problems resulted in a civil war which has been
 festering since 1965. In February 1979, the war erupted in
 the streets of N'Djamena, the capital, and the old southern-
 dominated order was overthrown. The victors, however, were
 so ill-equipped to govern, and so divided among themselves
 that it proved impossible to constitute or operate a viable
 national government. In August 1979, the leaders of the
 various factions signed an agreement providing for demil-
 itarization of the capital and formation of an interim
 coalition government pending national elections.
 Efforts to implement this agreement were repeatedly
 frustrated amidst heightening tensions. Finally on the
 night of March 21, 1980, fighting between two factions-the
 Popular Armed Forces of President Weddeye Goukouni and the
 Armed Forces of the North of former Defense Minister Hissein
 Habre--erupted. Four days later, most embassies and foreign
 residents evacuated the city; none has been able to return.
 Chadian refugees streamed across the Chari River to the
 northern Cameroon city of Kousseri and to northern Nigeria.
 Requested attempts to establish a ceasefire were undertaken
 by a number of concerned parties in the first few weeks. As
 tensions mounted and no ceasefire was achieved, the French,
 who had maintained a garrison at N'Djamena, announced their
 withdrawal from Chad by May 31. The warring parties were
 left to shoot it out while the Organization of African Unity
 (OAU) tried to bring them to a conference table. As recently
 as October 18, 1980, Goukouni and Habre met at a negotiating
 table in Lome but were unable to conclude an accord. Both
 men left negotiators who drafted an agreement, but by early
 November the war had intensified. Libyan influence, always
 in the background, became increasingly active at that time
 in support of Goukouni and his governmental coalition which
 included other northerners as well as southerners represented
 by Vice President Abdelkader Kamougue. The OAU was able to
 persuade Goukouni and Habre to sign a redrafted ceasefire
 *The United States Embassy in Chad was closed March 24, 1980
 because of the outbreak of fighting in N'Djamena.
 
 
 54
 agreement: Goukouni on November 28 and Habre, December 16
 just after his forces were forced to withdraw from N'Djamena.
 As of the present writing, the fate of the ceasefire is
 unknown.
 In brief, Chad is in the throes of civil war. The bureau-
 cracy has largely ceased to function. The treasury is empty
 except perhaps in the south where the sale of cotton and the
 payment of veterans pensions from France provide some revenue.
 Law and order are subordinate to military exigencies. The
 limited modern section of the economy has been shattered.
 The southern part of the country, ruled by a "Permanent
 Committee," has few real ties to the Provisional Government
 (GUNT). Social, ethnic and religious divisions have been
 further intensified by war-engendered deaths, thus deepening
 animosities on all sides. Such government authority as
 exists emanates from the armed political factions that rule
 their respective sections of the country.
 Under these conditions, it is difficult to speak of civil
 rights or respect for them. There is no country-wide author-
 ity in Chad which can be held accountable for conditions.
 Many of the questions normally asked in assessing human
 rights are meaningless or irrelevant. No constitution or
 fundamental legal system exists against which to evaluate or
 measure performance in human rights.'
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a. Torture
 In 1979 there were reports that some prisoners had been tortured
 by various armed factions during interrogation, particularly
 during periods of intense combat. The Red Cross ceased
 operation in Chad in April 1980 and there are no independent
 means of verifying these reports.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are no means of confirming reports that all jails have
 been closed and civilian prisoners released. While jails are
 primitive, mistreatment has not normally been a problem during
 confinement. There have been reports of summary executions
 of prisoners during combat. Although these reports are
 credible, under current conditions,, they cannot be documented.
 Before it left Chad, the Red Cross, which felt it was given
 access to most prisoners of war, reported that abuse and
 executions were in the nature of isolated incidents. There
 are reports that about 1,000 southern prisoners captured by
 the Armed Forces of the North (FAN) in February 1979 were
 recently freed when government coalition forces regained
 control of Faya Largeau. These freed prisoners are now being
 rearmed to fight with the government.
 c. Disappearances
 There is no evidence of official responsibility for, or an
 official policy condoning, disappearances. Until April 1980,
 the- Red Cross was active in seeking to locate missing persons
 
 
 55
 and apparently had the cooperation of all factions in doing
 so.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrests and imprisonment for indeterminate periods
 were daily occurrences with the breakdown of government in
 February 1979 until the renewed outbreak of civil war
 in March 1980. Armed combatants of the various factions,
 many of whom were illiterate or untrained, made arrests on
 grounds such as suspicion of spying or on simple whim.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Since the judicial system no longer functions, there are
 no trials in the normal sense of the term. The various
 factions sometimes establish "revolutionary courts" but the
 standards of justice in them are not known.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Since February 1979, widespread looting of homes by armed
 combatants of various factions has been a serious problem.
 Following the outbreak of fighting in March 1980, all homes
 and offices in the European and administrative sections of
 N'Djamena were reportedly looted by government combatants.
 Although this looting is not explicitly condoned by the
 leaders of the various coalition factions, neither have they
 been willing to take the kind of action which would be
 necessary to suppress it. Habre, however, reportedly
 forbade looting and enforced this prohibition sufficiently
 well to encourage Chadians to return to the African neighbor-
 hoods under his control. Offices and homes in these neighbor-
 hoods were supposedly still intact when Habre's FAN left
 N'Djamena.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 In an area over twice the size of Texas, 4.3 million Chadians
 live unevenly dispersed between the northern desert zone and
 a southern Sahelian zone. An estimated 87 percent of the
 population is located in the rural areas outside the four
 main cities of N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh and Abeche. Poverty
 is widespread, with virtually the entire rural population
 living near the subsistence level. Overall per capita income
 is estimated to be only $120 per year. Paradoxically, Chad
 possesses sufficient land and water resources to feed and
 employ its people and provide a surplus for export if develop-
 ment opportunities are pursued.
 Beginning with the Sahel-wide drought in the early 1970s, the
 state of the economy of Chad had been worsening for the last
 decade recording negative growth rates of per capita income,
 capital investment and gross domestic product (GDP) Since
 February 1979, however, all development activities and most
 government services, such as education and health care, have
 been almost totally disrupted. The leaders of the various
 factions have expressed an apparently genuine desire to
 restore these services and proceed with economic development.
 For example, President Goukouni has requested United States
 
 
 56
 assistance in providing medical supplies for dispensaries
 and a cattle inoculation program. In the south, French
 technicians continue to work on projects, and missionaries
 and former civil servants try to make schools and medical
 facilities function. Realistically, however, economic
 normalization and provision of social services will depend
 on progress toward a ceasefire, a durable political settle-
 ment and reconcilation and establishment of an effective
 government.
 Historically, Chadian women have played an important role
 in the society. Wives generally help their husbands with
 millet cultivation but also cultivate their own crops which
 are a source of income. Women control the consumption
 and sale of all milk products and generally owe a major part
 of their income to fresh milk, butter and curdled milk sales.
 Few women have been educated and fewer still have begun
 professional careers. Today, women are concentrated in the
 subsistence economy.
 Before the outbreak of the civil war, the Government of
 Chad had taken steps to improve the situation of Chadian
 women. The government practiced the principles of equal
 opportunity in employment throughout the civil service.
 The United States Agency for International Development had
 begun several women-in-development projects with Peace Corps
 assistance. Chadian women were receptive to new ideas.
 With the outbreak of fighting, these projects ended. Some
 women, notably the sister of Hissein Habre, leader of the
 Armed Forces of the North, have taken an active role in
 events, but most have been forced to retreat to their tra-
 ditional home areas or refugee camps.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Rights Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Assembly and Religion
 There are several radio stations and a mimeographed news
 sheet operated by armed factions in N'Djamena or ad hoc
 groups in the south. Vice President Kamougue closed two
 news sheets which published articles critical of, and
 threatening, Frenchmen living in the south after the open-
 ing of a French consulate in Moundou, the south's principal
 city. Foreign publications apparently circulate when they
 can be obtained. When invited in by one of the factions,
 foreign correspondents are able to function (although they
 are regarded with suspicion and at times have been subjected
 to arbitrary actions such as confiscation of notes and film).
 In spite of tribal problems which erupt from time to time,
 no serious problems have been reported regarding freedom of
 religion, and all faction leaders profess support of the
 principle. Since it was not permitted before March 24, 1980,
 it is doubtful that freedom of assembly for political purposes
 could be exercised under military rule.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Domestic travel is not prohibited in principle, but it is
 severely circumscribed by the serious danger involved in
 
 
 57
 trying to move between zones controlled by the various
 factions. Emigration and foreign travel are controlled
 in the areas where Chadian authority exists, but not in
 repressive fashion. A passport office still operates in
 N'Djamena. Members of all factions seem able to travel
 freely outside of Chad.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 At this time, the "political process" in Chad consists
 largely of armed combat. However, efforts--peaceful and
 otherwise--are continuing in the hope of reconciling differ-
 ences among the various armed factions and personalities
 in the 15 year-old civil war. Individuals participate in
 this process by joining one of the factions. There are no
 electoral procedures or political parties in the usual sense
 of the term. The status of women is circumscribed by Muslim
 and tribal traditions.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no reports of any attempts by international or
 non-governmental groups to investigate alleged human rights
 violations in Chad. It is important to note, however, that
 the International Red Cross was active in Chad from March
 1978 to April 1980 with the approval of all the. factions
 concerned. During that period, it facilitated the release of
 several thousand family members of war prisoners held by
 various factions; it provided food and medicine to the war
 prisoners still being held; it helped protect, feed and
 move refugees; and it passed thousands of family messages
 across hostile lines. The Red Cross reports that it was
 accorded good cooperation by all the armed factions. The Red
 Cross remains active in refugee relief efforts in Cameroon
 and is prepared to return to Chad when security conditions
 permit. Because of domestic preoccupations, Chad has not
 been active in regional or international human rights groups.
 
 
 58
 U.SoOVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: CHAD
 1978     1979     1980
 -----      -------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTALo..         19.4     10.0      3.8
 LOANS.......o...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............          19.4     10.0      3.8
 A.AID .............            11.2      3.1      0.2
 LOANS.......  .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS........             11.2      3.1      0.2
 (SECoSUPPASSIST.)*..         0.0      0.0       0.0
 BeFOOD FOR PEACEE....           6.8      6.2      3.6
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          6.8      6.?      3.6
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........          0.0      0.0      00
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.,.,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL..oo .            6.8      6.2      3.6
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV L wFP,          6.1      5.4      2.9
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY...            0.7      0.8      0.7
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST .           1.4      0.7      0.0
 LOANS.............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         1.4      0.7      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          1.4      0.7      0.0
 OTHER .........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANSo....oo.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.HAP GRANTS ......             0.0      0.0     .0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS.--.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNGe.,,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER RANTS.S....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL..          19.4     10.0      3.8
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..........           19.4     10.0      3.a
 --------    -------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS .......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 --------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........     40.8       8.4      1.5    244.6
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA               27.4      0.0       0.0     78.5
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               5.8      6.4       0.0     34.0
 UNDP               7.6       0.5      1.5     19.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0       1.5      0.0      5.5
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0    106.8
 
 
 59
