Chad
A rapprochement agreement between Chad and Sudan, signed January 15, 2010,
marked the end of a five-year proxy war. The normalization of relations led to the
repatriation of Chadian rebels from Sudan, the opening of the border between the
two countries in April after seven years of closure, and the deployment of a joint
force to secure the border, though attacks on civilians in the area continue.
President Idriss Déby visited Khartoum, Sudan’s capital, in February for the first
time in six years; and in July Chad, a state party to the International Criminal
Court, hosted Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, earning the dubious distinction
of being the first ICC member state to harbor a suspect from the court. The
Chadian government clashed with rebel forces in eastern Chad in January and
April. Criminality, banditry, kidnappings, carjackings, and armed robbery targeting
humanitarian agencies led to the withdrawal and temporary suspension of some
humanitarian operations.
In January the government of Chad requested that the United Nations begin the
process of withdrawing the peacekeeping mission in eastern Chad. The government
cited the mission’s slow deployment, uneven record of success, and
improvements in the security situation as reasons for its decision. In May the UN
revised the mission’s mandate and authorized its gradual drawdown and closure
by the end of the year, and effectively shifted full responsibility for the protection
of civilians, including displaced populations and refugees from Darfur, to the
Chadian security forces.
The implementation of the reforms promised in an August 2007 agreement with
opposition parties has been slow and uneven. President Déby, one of Africa’s
longest-serving heads of state, has failed to make adequate funding available
and has instead tightened his grip on power. Despite a new media law passed in
August, the government continues to suppress free speech.
Throughout the country, government forces continue to arbitrarily arrest and
detain civilians and suspected rebels, often on the basis of ethnicity, and subject
them to ill-treatment and torture, sometimes in unofficial places of detention.
Chad’s prison conditions are among the harshest on the African continent.
Weak institutions of justice contributed to a culture of impunity. The government
has not investigated or prosecuted serious abuses against civilians, such as
killings and rapes by government security forces and rebels following clashes at
Am Dam in May 2009. The disappearance of opposition leader Ibni Oumar
Mahamat Saleh during the February 2008 attack on N’Djamena, the capital,
remains unresolved.
Drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Chad
Peacekeepers from the UN Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
have been in eastern Chad and northeastern Central African Republic
since mid-2008 with a mandate to protect refugees and displaced populations,
facilitate humanitarian assistance, and promote human rights.
Following the UN decision to draw down the mission by the end of 2010, representatives
of UN agencies formed a working group with the Chadian government
to improve security for humanitarian groups in eastern Chad. The plan includes
consolidation of the Chadian Integrated Security Detachment (DIS), a component
of MINURCAT comprised of Chadian police forces trained by the UN, which provide
security in and around the refugee camps. However, the plans do not clearly
address the security concerns of refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), or
the local population.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
More than 250,000 Sudanese refugees and 168,000 Chadian displaced people
live in camps and elsewhere in eastern Chad. In April approximately 5,000 new
Sudanese refugees arrived from West Darfur, following renewed fighting there
between the Sudanese rebel group Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and
Sudanese government forces.
The security situation of refugees and IDPs in camps remains precarious, with
continued reports of human rights abuses and other crimes. The militarization of
camps, unexploded landmines, and the proliferation of arms in eastern Chad continue
to put civilians at risk. Humanitarian needs were greatly exacerbated by food shortages and pockets of famine. Severe flooding destroyed the infrastructure
of some refugee camps and left 4,000 refugees completely without shelter.
In May the prime minister encouraged IDPs to return to their areas of origin. An
estimated 20,000 people returned in the Dar Sila and Ouaddai regions between
April and July, but the sustainability of these movements is uncertain. Returnees
continue to report cases of unlawful killings, attacks, and theft. The lack of basic
infrastructure, such as access to drinking water, health centers, or schools also
stops many IDPs from returning home. Inequity in the justice system and violations
perpetrated by the Chadian Armed Forces further add to this climate of fear.
Sexual Violence
Sexual and gender-based violence, including rape, early and forced marriages,
and female genital mutilation, was reported frequently to UN human rights monitors
in eastern Chad; in the first half of 2010 DIS registered over 250 complaints
in this area. Most victims are children. The high levels of violence are exacerbated
by an entrenched culture of impunity and structural gender inequality. Rapes
occur in domestic settings, near victims’ residences, and outside villages, refugee
camps, and IDP sites; perpetrators include members of the Chadian National
Army (ANT). Women and girls do not have adequate access to health and legal
services.
Child Soldiers
Various Chadian security forces, including the ANT and JEM, continued to recruit
and employ children in eastern Chad. In January and February six children recruited
to JEM between 2007 and 2008 deserted and returned to the Iridimi refugee
camp. In September the special representative of the secretary-general for children
and armed conflict presented a report to the UN Human Rights Council listing
both the ANT and JEM as parties that recruit and use children. In 2007 the
Chadian government signed an agreement with the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
to release all children from its armed forces.
On September 14, 2010, the Chadian government arrested four Sudanese rebels
who were allegedly recruiting child soldiers in the Goz Amir refugee camp. UNICEF has demobilized over 800 child soldiers in Chad over the past three years; more
than 90 percent of these children were affiliated with Chadian armed opposition
groups.
In June the government hosted a regional conference on child soldiers with five
other Central African nations, leading to the adoption of the “N’Djamena
Declaration,” which pledges to stop the use of children in armed conflict and to
release and reintegrate child soldiers.
Hissène Habré Trial
The Senegalese government continues to delay judicial proceedings against former
Chadian president Hissène Habré, who stands accused of crimes against
humanity and torture during his 1982-1990 rule. In 2006 Senegal accepted an
African Union “mandate” to prosecute Habré “on behalf of Africa,” but then stated
that the prosecution would not move forward unless international donors
assumed the full expense of organizing a trial, which Senegal estimated at US$40
million.
In July 2010 a joint African Union-European Union team, with the support of the
United States, presented Senegal with a proposed budget of $9 million for the
trial. Senegal has accepted the proposed budget and a donors’ conference is
scheduled to take place in Dakar, the Senegalese capital, by the end of 2010.
Meanwhile thousands of victims of torture and killings under Habré’s rule have
never received compensation or recognition from Chad’s current government, and
many of Habré’s henchmen still hold key positions of power, including state security
jobs.
International Actors
Despite solid evidence of widespread and serious human rights abuses in Chad,
the country’s key international partners have refrained from pressing the Chadian
government on its human rights commitments. By lodging a formal request to the
UN for the non-renewal of the mission’s mandate, Chad succeeded in diverting
international attention from its election and domestic human rights problems.
The government of Chad received ongoing military support from both France and
the US. France has had troops stationed in Chad since 1986; currently they number
1,000 soldiers. Yet the Chadian government has started to question the justification
of the French deployment and, during celebrations of Chad’s 50th anniversary
of independence, President Déby said that France must “pay a price” if it
“wants to stay in Chad, to use its airplanes, and train its soldiers there.” It is not
clear yet how France’s stated plan to reorganize troops stationed in its former
colonies and negotiate new defense agreements will affect its military cooperation
with Chad.
As one of the key US allies on the African continent, Chad received US military
assistance under the Trans-Saharan Counterterrorism Partnership, a scheme
through which the US sends Special Forces instructors to train antiterrorist commandos
in Chad. US President Barak Obama issued a waiver allowing US military
assistance to continue to flow to Chad, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan,
and Yemen, despite State Department findings that these countries violate the US
Child Soldiers Prevention Act.
China is becoming an increasingly important international player in Chad.
Attracted by the growing petroleum industry in the Sahel region of Africa, Chinese
companies have increased their presence there. In June 2010 the China National
Petroleum Corporation—one of China’s largest oil and gas companies, which is
also present in Sudan—began working on an oil pipeline in southwestern Chad.
The pipeline is expected to be operational in 2011 and will facilitate the transport
of crude oil from the Koudalwa field (300 kilometers, or 186 miles, south of
N’Djamena) to the Djarmaya refinery (north of N’Djamena).
In early February 2010 Chad won reelection onto the Peace and Security Council
of the AU, the AU’s most important organ in charge of the day-to-day management
of peace and security issues on the continent.