 CHAD
 Chad continued its transition from an authoritarian system to a constitutional de-
 mocracy. Effective power is held by President Idriss Deby and his party, the Patri-
 otic Salvation Movement (MPS).  resident Deby took power in a December 1990
 coup and was confirmed as Chief of State by the Sovereign National Conference
 CS of 1993. He was elected President in mid-1996 under a Constitution adopted
 in a referendum earlier that year. Elections for a National Legislative Assembly
 were held in early 1997 and resulted in the replacement of the provisional par-
 liament known as the Higher Transitional Council (CST). General Wadal
 Abdelkader Kamouge, the runner-up to Idriss Deby in the 1996 presidential elec-
 tions, was elected Pesident of the new Assembly. The Government is headed by a
 Prime Minister nominated by the President and confirmed by the National Assem-
 bly. Prime Minister Nassour Guelengdouksia Ouaidou has held office since May. In-
 surgent groups opposed to the Government did not mount any serious campaigns,
 and a number of rebels changed their support to the Government. An important
 peacacycord was signed in Moundou on April 18 between the Government and the
 rebel group known as the Armed Forces or the Federal Republic (FARF), led by
 Laoken Bard Frisson. However, fighting broke out between the Government and
 FARF in Moundu in October, resulting in the breakdown of the accord and arrest-
 
 
 ing the downward trend of Government-rebel confrontation. The judicial system con-
 tinued to be ineffective, overburdened and subject to outside, including official, in-
 terference, notably in the handling by the Court of Appeals of the results of the leg-
 islative elections.
 The army, gendarmerie, police, National and Nomadic Guard (GNNT), and intel-
 ligence services are responsible for internal security. Officers from the ethnic group
 of President Deby dominate the Rapid Intervention Force (FIR), and the National
 Security Agency (ANS), a counterintelligence organization that has acted as an in-
 ternal political police force. The security forces continued to commit serious human
 rights abuses, with the army remaining an essentially undisciplined force.
 The economy is mainly based on subsistence agriculture, herding, and fishing. Per
 capita income is estimated at $190 per year. The country has little industry; its
 chief expert is cotton. The Government relies heavily on external financial and tech-
 nical assistance, but has substantial undeveloped oil reserves.
 The human rights situation improved in several respects; however, serious prob-
 lems remain. According to local human rights groups, the security forces committed
 scores of extrajudicial kllings. There were reports of disappearances. Members of
 the security forces also beat and reportedly raped citizens. Prison conditions are
 harsh and life threatening. Security forces continued to use arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion illegal searches and wiretaps. The Government did not prosecute security per-
 sonnel accused in previous years of killings, rape, torture, and arbitrary arrest and
 detention. The judiciary remained subject to government interference. It was unable
 to provide citizens wit prompt trials, and lengthy pretrial detention remained a
 problen. Citizens' right to change their government remained in doubt. The second
 round of the legislative elections was marred by widespread reports of fraud, vote-
 rigging, and irregularities committed by local officials, although no major incidents
 ofviolence were reported. The Court of Appeals succumbed to government pressure
 to ensure that a majority of parliamentary seats was held by the ruling party. There
 was infringement on worker rights, including reported instances of forced labor in
 agricultural communities and the military forces. Discrimination against women is
 common; violence against women is also believed to be common. Female genital mu-
 tilation is widespread.
 FARF rebels reportedly committed serious abuses, including killings of civilians
 in the area of Moundou in November and December.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The security forces committed scores
 of extrajudicial killings, according to local human rights groups. Reports of officially
 - sanctioned extrajudicial killings of accused criminals by police and gendarmes began
 to appear in November 1996, in the aftermath of a severe crime wave. The press
 provided further evidence by publishing an official telegram signed by the com-
 mander of a special unit of the Gendarmerie Nationale. This telegram contained an
 order that instructed security forces to kill any person caught in the act of theft,
 under penalty of severe sanction if they did not comply. The implementation of the
 so-called "New Law" enjoyed a large measure of popular support. The authorities
 cited public support and the breakdown of the judicial and prison systems as jus-
 tification for the use of lethal force until the policy was finally disavowed by the
 Government largely due to international pressure on March 14.
 A Cabinet minister in January indicated in a newspaper interview that the policy
 of lethal force has worked but that there were no statistics. However, the minister
 did not directly dispute local human rights groups' charges that scores of citizens
 were killed or that security forces killed nine persons in a public square in Fianga
 on Christmas Eve 1996.
 In February the independent newspaper N'Djamena Hebdo reported the experi-
 ences of Adoum Godi, who said that he and two companions had been arrested in
 late January on charges of stealing a carpet. Godi said that after a few days in de-
 tention the three were taken out by gendarmes at night, bound, and thrown into
 the Chari river. Godi said that he was able to escape, while the others drowned.
 Security forces maintained that the story was a fabrication and that Godi was "a
 thief who was let go." However, independent eyewitnesses reported seeing Godi
 being pulled out of the river by fishermen.
 Other instances of extrajudicial killings by security forces reportedly occurred
 even after the issuance of the March 14 order. On June 1 and June 12, Gendarme
 Commander Ouardougou reportedly killed five persons in the town of Dourbali who
 were accused of theft. The victims were: Hissein Fadil Hamid; Omar Ahmat; Yaya
 Moursal; Cheick Abakar Ahmat; and Mahamat Abakar. Persistent reports from
 
 
 Koumra, Bongor, and N'Djamena indicated that extrajudicial killings continued to
 occur until August, although it is unclear whether the killings were ordered by the
 Government or whether local authorities acted independently. Many of the killings
 apparently were clandestine, at night, or in remote locations.
 Police, gendarmes, and soldiers used excessive force in attempting to quell a pro-
 test in Gounou-Gaya in January. After knife wounds inflicted by a retired gendarme
 caused the death of a village chief, peasants from the hamlet demonstrated noisily
 outside the hospital where he had been taken. Police used tear gas and warning
 shots to disperse the protesters. However, a crowd of about 500 villagers later car-
 ried the chief's corpse to the office of the provincial administrator. Security forces
 then fired a rocket-propelled grenade toward the crowd. The grenade exploded, kill-
 ing one person and wounding eight others. The authorities took no action to punish
 those responsible.
 In October in Moundou government forces committed extrajudicial killings that
 included summary executions in their confrontations with FARF elements. An esti-
 mated 100 persons were killed, including those killed by rebels; a large number of
 those killed were noncombatants.
 Fighting broke out between government and FARF troops during a period of con-
 siderable tension over accusations of noncompliance by both sides with the April
 peace accords intended to end the FARF insurgency in the south of the country.
 Most observers believe that government troops sought the confrontation. Although
 open fighting between the two forces ceased within hours, government troops con-
 ducted brutal house-to-house searches for FARF personnel, in the process commit-
 ting executions and torture of civilians. Following a lengby questioning of the Gov-
 ernment by Members of Parliament during an extraordinary session of Parliament
 on live television on November 4, a joint Parliamentary-overnment team traveled
 to the region to restore calm and gather information on the incident. The Govern-
 ment also announced several initiatives to renew reconciliation with the FARF, in-
 cluding integrating FARF forces into the army without retribution. The joint team
 produced a report that acknowledged a much higher death toll than the Government
 had originally announced, blamed the FARF for the tensions leading to the incident,
 and assignedno blame for the civilian deaths. Local human rights groups also sent
 a team to the area, and published a report detailing numerous serious human rights
 violations by government troops. The human rights groups reported a lack of co-
 operation by authorities during their investigation.
 In December human rights organizations reported that the military forces contin-
 ued to commit human rights abuses, including the killing of villagers in the prefec-
 tures of Eastern and Western Logone during November and December. Some of
 these killings appearred to have been executions of targeted persons, while other
 deaths and woundings appeared to be random.
 The Chadian contingent of the Inter-African Peacekeeping force (MISAB) in the
 Central African Republic reportedly committed serious rights abuses during its op-
 erations, including the killing of many civilians and looting of residences. The Gov-
 ernment did not punish the Chadian contingent of MISAB for its abuses and undis-
 ciplined behavior.
 in response to the October incident in Moundou, FARF rebels reportedly retali-
 ated against the army in November, and followed this action with a number of al-
 leged attacks on civilian targets in the region around Moundou in November and
 December, reportedly killing and abusing civilians.
 b. Disappearance.-There were credible reports of disappearances. Although it
 was difficult to establish the facts and to assign responsibility, there were reports
 of security force involvement. For example, Djiadoumgue Guemingar, allegedly a
 former agent and an informant for the ANS, was arrested on May 22 by a "Brigade
 Mixte" (a unit composed of elements from different branches of the armed services)
 on a charge of possessing a stolen motorbike. Since Guemingar's arrest, his location
 remains unknown; however, the motorbike is reportedly being used at the Chadian
 National Nomadic Guard (GNNT) base at Ngueli, near N'Djamena.
 Amnesty International and other human rights organizations have made inquiries
 to the Government concerning persons missing prior to 1997, often to no avail. For
 example, Valentin Nedoumdingam was reportedly arrested in 1995 in the south,
 then transferred to the prison in Faya Largeau, but he has since disappeared.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment, or Punishment.-
 The Constitution specifically prohibits torture and degrading or humiliating treat-
 ment. However, members of the security forces beat and raped citizens. No one was
 prosecuted for these abuses. The April 22 edition of the independent newspaper
 Contact reported a series of abusive incidents, including beatings and rapes, per-
 petrated against the citizens of Koundoul by soldiers from the nearby army camp.
 The soldiers reportedly behaved violently because they often were not paid. Since
 
 
 60
 then the Government has restricted soldiers to their bases, and the incidents ceased.
 After a clash with FARF forces in Moundou on October 30, soldiers and gendarmes
 reportedly tortured dozens of civilians (see Section L.a.).
 The GNNT, which by presidential decree is responsible for combating smuggling,
 frequently used excessive force in its operations. The July 3 issue of N'Dajnena
 Hebdo reported in detail the action of GNNT forces in killing Ali Farris Abdallah
 for smuggling a small quantity of gasoline. Additional credible sources reported bru-
 tal beatings of citizens by this unit.
 The GNNT supplemented the duties of the Customs Brigade early in the year, in
 part because of the Brigade's reputation for reckless driving. In one egregous in-
 stance, World Bank resident Representative David Jones was struck and illed on
 Easter Sunday while customs officials chased an alleged smuggler.
 FARF rebels reportedly abused civilians after the Moundou incident (see Section
 L.a.).
 Prison conditions are harsh and life threatening. Prisons are characterized by se-
 rious overcrowding; poor sanitation; inadequate food, shelter and medical facilities;
 and mixing of adult male, female, and minor prisoners. The Government took no
 effective action to improve these conditions, and some inmates may have died due
 to the poor conditions. Prisoners are almost totally dependent on their families for
 food and clothing. All prisons are in need of ma or repairs, and escapes are frequent.
 The Government permits some prison visits by human rights rups such as the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). The [CRC reported that it
 planned to reduce its monitoring visits, citing improvements in the areas of abuse
 and mistreatment of prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Rxile.-The Constitution and the Penal Code
 prohibit arbitrary arrest. Arrest warrants must usually be signed by a judicial offi-
 cial. However, the Government often does not respect these requirements.
 After a clash with FARF forces on October 30, army units arrested dozens of civil-
 ians. None were brought to trial; their status is unknown.
 The Government did not use exile as a political weapon.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution mandates an independent judici-
 ary. However, the judiciary did not operate effectively, being underfunded, overbur-
 dened, and subject to official interference. In practice, officials and influential indi-
 viduals often enjoy immunity from judicial sanction.
 The national judicial system operates with courts located in provincial capitals.
 The N'Djamena Court of Appeals, the country's highest court, is supposed to conduct
 regular sessions in the provinces, but rarely does so. Applicable law can be confus-
 ing, as courts often tend to blend the formal French-derived legal code with tradi-
 tional practices.
 Official inaction and interference continue to plague the judiciary. Persons ac-
 cused of crimes may endure up to several years of incarceration before being
 charged or tried, especially those arrested for felonies in the provinces who must
 await remand to the overcrowded and dangerous house of detention in N'Djamena.
 Salaries for justice officials are often low and in arrears. Although the Government
 has stated that the strengthening and reform of the judiciary are top priorities,
 progress has been slow.
 The Military Code of Justice has not been enforced since the 1979-1980 Civil
 War, and courts-martial instituted early in the Deby Regime to try security person-
 nel for crimes against civilians no longer operate.
 People in rural areas usually do not have access to formal judicial institutions.
 In most civil cases, they rely on traditional courts presided over by village chiefs,
 chefs de canton, or sultans. Decisions may be appealed to a formal court.
 There are no reliable figures concerning the number of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of home, correspondence, and other
 communications, as well as freedom from arbitrary search. The Penal Code requires
 that authorities conduct searches of homes only during daylight hours and with a
 legal warrant. In practice, security forces ignored these provisions and conducted
 extrajudicial searches at any time.
 The Government engages in wiretapping without judicial authority.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press. The Government generally respected these rights. The official
 media, consisting of a national radio network, a press agency, and an N'Djamena
 television station, are subject to both official and informal censorship. At times they
 are critical of the Government. The official media also give priority to government
 officials and events while providing lesser attention to the opposition. The Higher
 
 
 Council on Communications (HCC), an independent institution, acts as an arbiter
 whose main function is to promote free access to the media. It has no power of en-
 forcement, but successfully promulgated rules for equal access for official political
 statements broadcast during the constitutional referendum and the presidential and
 legislative elections, resulting in greater access for opposition parties.
 There are a number of limited-circulation, independent newspapers published in
 the capital, some of which are vociferously critical of government policies and lead-
 ers. The Government did not censor these newspapers, but issued warnings to the
 independent press on occasion. On August 15, President Deby said that he "will no
 longer tolerate personal attacks and unfounded accusations," a reference to an arti-
 cle critical of his own clan in the independent weekly Le Temps. The Government
 did not interfere with the distribution of opposition tracts and press releases, but
 state radio officials sometimes refused to broadcast opposition statements, even
 when radio broadcast rights had been purchased in advance. On November 13, po-
 lice arrested Balla Bombebe, the editor of the independent weekly Contact for alleg-
 edly attempting to publish false information. He was not formally charged and was
 released the foIlowing day.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government generally respected these rights in prac-
 tice. Authorities routinely granted permits for political and nongovernmental organi-
 zation (NGO) meetings, and did not interfere with meetings or ress conferences.
 However, in at least one instance in the town of Abeche in July, the authorities de-
 nied permission to the Chadian League of Human Rights (LTDH) to hold con-
 ferences or debates, citing the "discretionary power of the Administration."
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government gen-
 erally res peted this right in practie. There are more than 60 registered political
 parties and several hundred NGO's.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution states that the State is secular. It also
 provides for freedom of religion. All faiths worship without government constraint.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights. The Government does not
 require special permission for travel in most areas. However, armed bandits operate
 on many roads, exposing travelers to assault, robbery, and murder; many bandits
 have been identified as active duty soldiers and deserters. Despite Government ef-
 forts to clear the country's main routes of illegal roadblocks, elements of the security
 forces, guerrillas, and bandits continue to maintain them, extorting money from
 travelers.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations assisting refugees. There were no
 reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. The coun-
 try provides first asylum for refugees and has done so in past years. The Govern-
 ment has informally granted refugee and asylee status to persons and has allowed
 them to remain for resettlement.
 The Government adheres to the 1951 U.N. Convention on Refugees and the 1967
 Protocol relating to their status. Although these accords were never ratified by the
 Government and therefore do not carry force in local law, the Government neverthe-
 less adheres to the principles and purposes of these instruments. An official national
 structure, the National Committee for Welcoming and Reintegration, has been cre-
 ated to deal with refugee affairs. Since August 1993, however, the Government has
 registered refugees in N'Djamena and sent their applications for refugee status to
 the UNHCR Central African Headquarters in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of
 Congo. If the application is accepted, then in principle the refugee will be enrolled
 in a 6-month care maintenance program that includes a monthly subsistence allow-
 ance, medical care, and assistance in finding work. This program is funded by a
 local NGO.
 Chadian refugees are free to repatriate, although several thousand remain in the
 Central African Republic, Niger, Libya, Sudan, Nigeria and Cameroon. A group of
 foreign individuals, mostly Sudanese claiming to be refugees, have charged Govern-
 ment complicity with the government in Sudan. They assert that the UNHCR
 branch office in N'Djamena is unable to protect them from deportation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The right of citizens to change their government peacefully is in doubt, given the
 apparent unwillingness of-the Government to accept minority status in Parliament,
 as evidenced in the 1997 legislative elections, and the Court of Appeals' inability
 to resist Government pressure in reviewing election results.
 
 
 The elections were the first national vote for a parliament in many years and the
 first under President Deby. The vote was orderly and took place without major inci-
 dent. However, the process was compromised by persistent reports of fraud, includ-
 ing vote-rigging and other irregularities committed by election officers, government
 officials, members of the ruling party, and other parties, particularly in the second
 round. In the final results as announced by the Court of Appeals, the ruling MPS
 party won 65 of the 125 seats in the National Assembly.
 The Constitution accords immunity to both the President and members of the Na-
 tional Assembly, and includes no provision for recall. The national government ap-
 points local officials and is expected to continue to do so until local elections, sched-
 uled for 1998.
 Few women hold senior leadership positions. There is one woman of cabinet rank
 and three female deputies in the National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations operate with few overt restrictions, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are often ac-
 cessible but enerally unresponsive or hostile to their findings. The human rights
 NGO Tchad Non-Violence has been the target of a formal complaint resulting in a
 court action for slander by the ANS, arising from an incident in which the NGO
 alleged that one of its members had been assaulted in May by an ANS agent. The
 charge is still pending.
 NGO's have gained recognition under the Deby regime and participate in key gov-
 ernmental institutions. Human rights groups have assisted the Government in me-
 diating longstanding conflicts between herders and farmers over land and water
 rights. Human rights groups also acted as interlocutors in the April Peace Accords
 between the Government and FARF. They are courageous, if often partisan, in pub-
 licizing abuses through reports and press releases, but only occasionally are ab e to
 intervene successfully with authorities. All are dominated by opponents of the Gov-
 ernment, impairing their credibility. The Government's National Human Rights
 Commission (CNDH), which published a report in March, reported an improvement
 in conditions over the predecessor regime of Hissein Habre.
 Local human rights groups investigating the Moundou clash between government
 and FARF troops reported a lack of cooperation by authorities (see Section L.a.). The
 Government did not prohibit investigations by international human rights organiza-
 tions. Over the past 6 years the United Nations Human Rights Commission has con-
 sidered a case against Chad under the confidential 1503 Procedure. The Commission
 voted in 1996 to consider moving the case to the public procedures process during
 the following year if there was no response from the Government. However, the case
 remained confidential and had not moved to the public process by year's end.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, regardless of origin,
 race, religion, political opinion, or social status. In practice, cultural traditions main-
 tain women in a subordinate status, and the Government favors its ethnic support-
 ers and allies.
 Women.-While no statistics are available, domestic violence against women is be-
 lieved to be common. By tradition, wives are subject to the authority of their hus-
 bands, and have only limited legal recourse against abuse. Family or traditional au-
 thorities may act in such cases, but police rarely intervene.
 Neither government nor advocacy groups have been able to redress discrimination
 against women. However, a number of women's advocacy groups are working to this
 end. In practice, women do not have equal opportunities or education and training,
 making it difficult for them to compete for the few formal sector jobs. Property and
 inheritane laws do not discriminate against women, but traditional practice favors
 men. Exploitation of women is especially pervasive in rural areas, where women do
 most of the agricultural laber and are discouraged from formal schooling.
 Children.-The Government has demonstrated little commitment to children's
 rights and welfare. It has not committed adequate funding to public education and
 medical care. Educational opportunities for girls are limited, mainly because of tra-
 dition. There are no provisions for compulsory education. About as many girls as
 boys are enrolled in primary school, but the percentage of girls enrolled in secondary
 school is extremely low, primarily because of early marriage. Although the law pro-
 hibits sexual relations with a girl under the age of 14, even if married, this law is
 rarely enforced, and families arrange marriages for girls as young as age 11 or 12,
 
 
 sometimes forcibly, for the financial gain of a dowry. Many wives are then obligated
 to work long hours of physical labor for their husbands in fields or homes.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is wide-
 spread, estimated at about 60 percent of all females, and deeply rooted in tradition.
 Advocated by women as well as by men, the practice is strongest among ethnic
 groups in the east and south. It is usually performed prior to puberty as a rite of
 passage, an occasion many families use to profit from gifts from their communities.
 Opposition to its elimination is strong. Both the Government and the NGO commu-
 nity have in recent years initiated a process intended to eliminate this practice.
 They have been markedly more active, especially in conducting public awareness
 campaigns and seminars, and believe that their efforts are effective. FGM is theo-
 retically prosecutable as a form of assault. A new family code, not yet ratified, con-
 tains language that specifically addresses FGM and condemns its practice.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. However, the Government operates few therapy, education, or employment
 programs for people with disabilities, and no laws mandate access to buildings for
 them. One association for the disabled was fiven 15 minutes of free broadcast time
 to devote to its problems. Several local NGO s provide skills training to the deaf and
 blind.
 National lRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnicity continues to influence government
 appointments and political alliances. There are approximately 200 ethnic groups
 from two general traditions: Arab and Saharan/Sahelian zone Muslims in the north,
 center, and east, and Sudanian zone Christian or animist peoples in the south. Ri-
 valries among these many groups have caused civil tensions and conflicts for dec-
 ades.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution recognizes freedom of association
 and union membership as well as the right to strike. All employees, except members
 of the military forces, are free to join or form unions. Unions must receive authoriza-
 tion from the Government in order to operate legally. However, few workers belong
 to unions: Most workers are unpaid subsistence cultivators or herders. The main
 labor organization is the Federation of Chadian Unions (UST). Its former major con-
 stituent union, the Teachers' Union of Chad (SET), became independent of it during
 the year. Neither has ties to the Government. A number of minor federations and
 unions, including the Free Confederation of Chadian Workers (CLT), also operate,
 some with ties to government officials.
 The Government generally respected the right to organize and strike. However,
 the UST has filed legal actions against the Government in the courts for attempts
 in 1993, 1995, and 1996 to suspend it and occupy its headquarters.
 Isolated strikes over unpaid salaries by teachers and health workers occurred in
 several areas of the country, and there was a short lived strike at CotonTchad.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution and the
 Labor Code contain only general provisions on the rights of labor and do not specifi-
 cally protect collective bargaining. The Labor Code requires the Government to set
 minimum wage standards and permits unions to bargain collectively, but empowers
 the Government to intervene in the bargaining process under certain circumstances.
 Of the three top union officials expelled from Biltine Prefecture and suspended
 from their jobs at the Government's behest in 1995, two have been reinstated; one
 remains suspended.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery
 and forced or compulsory labor, including such labor by children. However, the
 International Labour Organization (ILO) maintains that several provisions of both
 pre- and post-independence legislation may permit forced labor under certain cir-
 cumstances, and has urged the Government to take action to repeal them. There
 is no evidence of the practice in the formal economy. There have been reports of iso-
 lated instances of forced labor among rural farming or herding communities, and in
 military installations in the north. Human rights associations also indicate that the
 military forces routinely compel soldiers to perform forced labor at isolated outposts
 aspunishment.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, but does not enforce this
 prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.). The Labor Code stipulates that the mini-
 mum age for employment in the formal sector is 14 years. The Government does
 not enforce the law, but in practice children are rarely employed except in agri-
 
 
 culture and herding. Most of the 600 minors in the armed forces at the beginning
 of the year are believed to have been mustered out in a demobilization program.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code requires the Government to
 set minimum wages. The minimum wage is $50 (25,480 cfa) per month. Most wages
 are insufficient to provide a worker and family a decent standard of living. Nearly
 all private sector and state-owned firms had applied the new standards by the end
 of 1995, ut public sector wages remain below standard since the Government failed
 to submit legislation to implement them for its employees.
 The Government's record on salaiy payments improved. Structural adjustment as-
 sistance from international institutions enabled it to pay most of its employees regu-
 larly and usually on time. Salary arrears to civil servants and teachers outside the
 capital, a problem in a country with few financial institutions, remains at approxi-
 mately 3 months. However, arrears to government employees from previous years
 remain unpaid. Moreover, some members of the military forces received only sub-
 sistence payments for most of the year. Many state employees must work second
 jobs, raise their own food crops, or rely on family for support.
 The law limits most nonagricultural work to 48 hours per week, with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours,_ and agricultural work limited to 2,400 hours per
 year. All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per week, although
 in practice theserights are rarely enforced.
 The Labor Code mandates occupational health and safety standards and provides
 inspectors with the authority to enforce them. These standards are rarely respected
 in practice, and the UST has alleged before the ILO that the labor inspection serv-
 ices are not allocated the resources necessary to perform their duties. In principle,
 workers can remove themselves from dangerous working conditions, but in practice
 they cannot without jeopardizing their employment.
