 CHAD
 The Chadian Government is led by President Hissein Habre, who
 came to power in 1982 in the course of a protracted civil
 war. Relying upon the armed forces as his power base, Mr.
 Habre heads the Council of Ministers which, along with an
 appointed National Consultative Council, comprises the
 executive and legislative branches of the Government. The
 multiethnic National Union for Independence and Revolution
 (UNIR) was created in 1984 to broaden Habre's political base,
 and in 1987 it remained the only officially recognized
 political party. At present, there is no constitution. Laws,
 decrees, and ordinances are proposed, in accordance with the
 Fundamental Act of 1982, by the President and the Council of
 Ministers and discussed by the National Consultative Council
 prior tb promulgation.
 In 1987 President Habre continued a policy of national
 reconciliation under which exiled members of former opposition
 groups have been encouraged to return to the country and those
 who remained in Chad persuaded to return to legality. Many of
 these former opponents, including some who were in armed
 conflict with the Government as recently as 2 years ago, have
 been brought into the civil service and army, several at the
 ministerial level. However, a number of exiles who returned
 to Chad in 1986 and 1987 were arrested or disappeared.
 In October 1986, the bulk of the GUNT (Transitional Government
 of National Unity) forces, which previously had been loyal to
 GUNT leader Goukouni Oueddei, rallied to President Habre's
 banner, following Goukouni's break with Libya's Mu'ammar
 Qadhafi, and were integrated into the national army. In a
 series of battles beginning in early January 1987, the Chadian
 army defeated its Libyan and few remaining dissident enemies.
 By September the army had liberated over 90 percept of the
 northern Chadian territory formerly under Libyan military
 occupation. At the end of 1987, Libyan forces remained only
 in the so-called Aozou Strip, and an OAU-sponsored cease-fire
 had been in effect for over 3 months. The OAU Ad Hoc
 Committee on The Border Dispute Between Libya and Chad
 continued to seek a peaceful resolution of the conflict, but
 prospects for success were not high.
 Chad is desperately poor, and its estimated population of 4.5
 million has one of the lowest per capita annual incomes ($178)
 in the world. Cotton is the major source of Chad's export
 earnings and in the past has produced most of the Government's
 revenues. Approximately 40 percent of Chadians who work for
 wages are employed in the cotton sector. Since 1985 world
 cotton prices have been disastrously low, and in 1987 price
 support costs for cotton far exceeded income from export
 sales. The Government relies heavily on foreign aid,
 especially from France, to finance current government
 operations and to fund development projects.
 Chad's 22-year-long civil war and now its war against Libya
 produced conditions in which human rights often have been
 violated by the forces in conflict. Chad remains on a war
 footing, and tight governmental controls restrict basic
 freedoms, e.g., press and assembly. However, with almost all
 of inhabited Chad now free of Libyan forces, violence has
 subsided; violation of human rights due to war largely ended
 in 1987. The occasional excesses of uncontrolled, marauding
 soldiers are now the exception rather than the rule.
 
 
 58
 CHAD
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Precise information on possible extrajudicial executions by
 government and Libyan/dissident forces was not available.
 There were no verified instances of government-instigated
 political killings in 1987.
 Seven political killings that reportedly occurred in 1986
 first came to light in 1987. According to Amnesty
 International, the victims included two members of armed
 opposition groups, two persons with ties to an opposition
 group called the Democratic Revolutionary Council, and three
 former supporters of opposition groups who had voluntarily
 returned to Chad. Most were allegedly arrested by members of
 the Chadian Security Service (DDS) or the Presidential
 Security Service (SP), and were summarily executed.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported disappearances during 1987. In its
 1987 Report (covering 1986), Amnesty International, however,
 expressed concern that the Government had failed in 1986 to
 account for a number of people who "disappeared" after being
 detained in previous years, and who were reported mostly to
 have been executed extrajudicially by government security
 forces. One case, that of Felix Ekeh, a Nigerian citizen,
 became the subject of Chadian-Nigerian discussions.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no confirmed reports of torture of prisoners in
 Chad during 1987, although Amnesty International reported the
 probable torture and death of Abdoulaye Awidjeli Bichara in
 1986. According to eyewitness testimony, Bichara was left
 unattended in the courtyard of DDS headquarters in serious
 physical condition, apparently as the result of torture, and
 died. Chadian authorities have not confirmed his death.
 There were also allegations in 1987 that the Presidential
 guards used beatings, detentions, and other forms of
 intimidation as a means of maintaining security in parts of
 Guera prefecture; an armed Hadjerai insurrection movement
 there has ambushed and killed numbers of these Presidential
 guards.
 Prison conditions in Chad are generally poor. Most Chadian
 prison personnel have had no professional training, and abuses
 in handling prisoners are not uncommon.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Individuals who express views critical of or different from
 those of the Government are often regarded as endangering the
 security of the State and may be subject to indefinite
 detention without trial. The total number of detainees, as
 distinct from prisoners of war, is not known. However, a
 number of people, primarily members of a clan of the Hadjerai
 tribe, were arrested on security grounds in 1987 and remained
 in detention without charge or prospects of trial. The
 Government frequently holds such detainees incommunicado.
 
 
 59
 CHAD
 Saleh Gaba, a Chadian journalist and part-time reporter for
 the Associated Press and a local Roman Catholic radio station,
 was arrested in mid-July. After calls for his release by
 Amnesty International, the Governhent announced in late August
 that Gaba had been accused of killing two peasants. In
 December President Habre told reporters that Gaba had been
 captured with arms in his possession and that he would be
 tried for illegal possession of arms. At the end of the year
 Gaba was still being held incommunicado in an undisclosed
 location, and no trial date had been set.
 Despite President Habre's national reconciliation efforts,
 Amnesty International reported in September 1987 that it
 cotitinued to receive reports of the detention by government
 security forces of former Chadian exiles upon their return to
 Chad. Three who weie arrested in 1986, Hadja Merami, her
 daughter Azzina, and Mahamat Abdelbaqui, were believed to be
 still detained without charge at the end of 1987. Amnesty
 International also received reports of the detention without
 charge of relatives of government opponents. Two of them,
 Moussa Konate and Abdellatif Tidjani, may still have been in
 detention at the end of 1987. Habre's principal rival,
 ex-President Goukouni Oueddei, remained in exile in 1987,
 demanding a restructuring of the Chadian army and of the sole
 legal political party, UNIR.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has been critical
 of Chad in the past for the use of forced labor. The
 Government is continuing discussions with the ILO on revising
 outdated labor laws which do not meet ILO norms, including the
 ILO's conventions on forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The regular Chadian judicial system (the Supreme Court and-
 several lower courts) and criminal code have evolved from the
 body of law (Napoleonic Code) inherited from the former
 colonial power, France. In theory, this law incorporates
 safeguards against arbitrary arrests and provides for
 specified detainee rights, including the right to counsel and
 the right to be promptly informed of charges. In practice,
 armed conflict over more than 21 years has severely disrupted
 the legal system, but the Government has made efforts to
 reestablish civilian law enforcement in liberated areas,
 especially the operation of the regular courts.
 Whether accused of crimes or security offenses, most Chadians
 do not get speedy trials. Many are held for extended periods
 and then released without having come to trial, in part
 because of the rudimentary nature of the Chadian judicial
 system. There are only a few trained lawyers, judges, and
 other court personnel. Most of Chad's tribunals do not even
 have law books. The few trained judicial officials complain
 of a heavy backlog of cases.
 There is also a traditional system of law presided over by
 sultans and chiefs. This traditional system is generally
 effective and fair in resolving property and other civil
 disputes and in dealing with cases involving petty local
 crime. In theory, decisions in customary courts may be
 appealed to the regular courts.
 
 
 60
 CHAD
 f. Arbitary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Chadian law, homes may be searched only during the day
 and under authority of a warrant. In practice, however, there
 are many instances where this law has not been respected.
 Correspondence carried by people traveling overland in Chad is
 often checked by authorities at various points, but
 correspondence sent through the Chadian postal system is less
 likely to be subject to such controls.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 Over the years, there have been numerous reports of human
 rights abuses by all sides in the conflict, including reports
 of summary executions of prisoners and suspected opponents,
 kidnapings, and burning of villages and crops. The extent of
 Libyan human rights violations is unkown but is reported to be
 extensive. The Chadian Government has made repeated charges
 of Libyan human rights abuses, including poisoning wells and
 mistreating Chadian prisoners of war (POW's). In a public
 statement November 6, the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) cited Libya for violating the 3rd Geneva
 Convention concerning treatment of prisoners of war. Earlier
 in 1987, the ICRC had cited Chad for showing Libyan POW's in
 public in violation of Article 13 of the Geneva Convention.
 There were reports that at least one Libyan soldier was
 executed by the Libyans after Chadian forces overran Libyan
 positions in northern Chad.
 Chad currently holds several hundred former members of armed
 factions opposed to the Government, as well as a large number
 of Libyan POW's. The Government considers them to be POW's
 rather than "political detainees." The Government permits
 representatives of the ICRC to visit regularly about 600 POW's
 captured before early 1986 who are mostly Chadian, but it
 steadfastly refuses to permit ICRC access to POW's who have
 been captured since 1986. Estimates of the number of recent
 captives range from 600 to 2,000. The Chadian Government
 states it will permit ICRC visits to Libyan POW's if Libya
 reciprocates. So far, Libya has refused ICRC access to any
 Chadian POW's held in Libya.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under Chadian law, freedom of speech is assured, but in
 practice public or private statements that the authorities
 consider seditious may lead to arrest. There is no prior
 restraint on the publication or broadcast of information in
 Chad, but the few Chadian journalists, most of whom work for
 the government-controlled media, are careful not to criticize
 the Government or its policies. However, criticism of
 individual ministries or agencies of government and-officials
 does appear from time to time. The government press also has
 criticized severely the continued existence of political
 groups loyal to leaders who rallied to the Government in 1986
 and 1987.
 The Government's treatment of foreign correspondents has been
 uneven. At times the foreign press was given free access to
 officials and, despite the conflict, correspondents were
 allowed to file their stories with no prior censorship. At
 other times, foreign correspondents were denied visas for
 
 
 61
 CHAD
 entry into Chad or expelled from the country for no apparent
 reason and, on a few occasions, have had to submit their
 stories for government approval.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly and association is restricted. Chadians
 may assemble peacefully only as long as the purpose of the
 meeting is not opposed to government policies. Membership in
 UNIR is voluntary. Although President Habre is intent on
 having a single mass political movement to which all Chadians
 will belong, he refrained in 1987 from forcing the dissolution
 of a number of former opposition political groupings, such as
 those associated with southern factions.
 Chad's labor laws provide for freedom of association for
 workers, for confederation of unions, and for the right of
 labor to bargain collectively. The right to strike exists
 only after arbitration at three levels in two ministries
 (labor and justice) fails. There are two labor union
 confederations in Chad, both of which are only marginally
 effective and are in large part constrained by the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Chad is officially a secular state. Islam, Christianity, and
 other religions are practiced freely. Both Islamic and
 Christian holidays are given official status. More than 50
 percent of Chad's population is Muslim, and Chad is a member
 of the Organization of Islamic Conferences. Christian
 missionaries may, nevertheless, enter the country,
 proselytize, and provide assistance to local populations.
 They are particularly active in the South. Strictly religious
 publications are allowed to circulate freely. The Government
 neither favors nor disfavors members of particular religions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Chadians enjoy complete freedom to move around the country
 except within military zones or areas of recent or potential
 combat. These restrictions generally pertain only to the
 northern one-third of the country and are not enforced for the
 sparse population of that large desert region. In the North,
 the retreating Libyans left thousands of landmines under the
 sand, which have claimed some civilian victims. International
 travel is permitted, but regular passports are expensive
 (about $60), and travelers must be cleared by Chad's internal
 security services, a process which normally takes less than 1
 week. Chadians are free to emigrate.
 In previous years, many Chadians fled to neighboring countries
 because of drought and civil strife. As conditions improved
 in 1986, thousands of these displaced Chadians returned from
 the Central. African Republic, Sudan, Cameroon, Niger, and
 Nigeria. Despite Chad's limited material means, these
 repatriates, as well as those Chadians who fled the occupied
 northern zone, have generally been well received.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The present political system does not provide for democratic
 change of government. Chad has been in a-state of civil
 strife since 1965, with various factions and as many as
 
 
 62
 CHAD
 11 factional armies contending at times for control of the
 country. Since June 1982, Chad has been governed by President
 Habre, who heads a French-style Council of Ministers
 complemented by an appointed National Consultative Council
 (protolegislature). Both councils are carefully balanced to
 promote ethnic and regional harmony. The source of President
 Habre's authority is the allegiance he commands from the armed
 forces, the security services, and the country's only
 authorized political movement, the National Union for
 Independence and Revolution (UNIR). UNIR's bylaws mandate the
 popular election of lower-level officials, but no elections
 have been scheduled. In some areas, traditional leaders
 (e.g., cantonal or village chiefs) are popularly elected or
 chosen by the subordinate members of the traditional hierarchy
 (village chiefs or family heads, for example).
 Habre's success on the battlefield has been concomitant with
 efforts at national reconciliation on the political front.
 The "Libreville accords," signed in late 1985 in Gabon by the
 Government and the rallying opposition parties, provide for
 the drafting of a new constitution by the National
 Consultative Council, to be voted on by referendum within 4
 years. The new constitution is to provide a time frame for
 free elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has carried on a "dialog" with Amnesty
 International and permitted Amnesty to send a mission to Chad
 in 1985 to discuss human rights, including the status and
 conditions of prisoners of war, which the Government maintains
 are held in recognized detention centers. However, it did not
 respond to several Amnesty International requests for
 information, including a request in 1986 for details on
 alleged human rights abuses committed by Libyan troops in
 northern Chad.
 Chad has no internal human rights organizations, either
 official or nongovernmental. Chad ratified the African
 Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights in July 1986.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are some 200 ethnic groups in Chad. The population can
 be divided roughly between Saharan and Arab Muslims in the
 northern and eastern regions, and Bantu-speaking peoples in
 the south. The latter group includes both those who have
 retained traditional animistic practices and those who have
 adopted Christianity. Over 22 years of conflict have
 transformed the complexity of ethnic divisions beyond simple
 north-south formulations. In an effort to build a national
 government, President Habre has expanded ethnic and geographic
 representation by appointing ministers, deputy ministers, and
 administrators from all parts of the country.
 Officially, Chadian women enjoy full political equality. In
 practice, neither Chadian traditional law nor the inherited
 French code fully protects women's rights. Women contribute
 the bulk of labor in virtually all aspects of farming. They
 also engage in commerce ranging from simple market stalls to
 the ownership of some larger businesses. The titular members
 of agricultural cooperatives still tend to be men. Women
 
 
 63
 CHAD
 serve voluntarily in the armed forces, although they are
 excluded from officer training programs. In 1984 a Ministry
 of Social and Women's Affairs was created and has since been
 headed by a woman. Only 1 of the 15 members of the Executive
 *Bureau of UNIR's Central Committee is a woman. UNIR has a
 fairly active women's organization. Many women, especially
 war widows and their children, have inadequate means of
 upport.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The minimum age for employment is 14. Many exceptions abound,
 however, as Chad is predominantly a labor-intensive agrarian
 society, with 95 'percent of the population engaged in
 subsistdnce agriculture. The stakutory minimum wage for wage
 labor is approximately $25 per month. Given the Government's
 budgetary shortfall, civil servants below the executive level
 receive only 60 perdent of their salaries on the scale
 establithbed'ir 1977. Nonagricultural work is limited to 48
 hours per weel'with, overtime to be paid foe any excess.
 Agricultural work is supposedly limited to 2,400 hours per
 year. All workers must have at least 24 consecutive hours of
 rest each week,* usually on Sunday. Occupational health and
 safety standards are established by law and ministerial decree
 but, as with most social legislation, enforcement is weak.
 
 
 64
