 CHAD
 A new Chadian Government of National Union, combining
 elements from the old military government and from the
 National Liberation Front for Chad (FROLINAT), was
 formed in August 1978. It seeks to end the decade-old
 civil war. According to the provisions of Chad's new
 interim constitution, or Fundamental Charter, introduced
 in August 1978, the government of national unity will
 rule until a permanent constitution is adopted and an
 elected civilian regime takes over. The Fundamental
 Charter calls for the protection of individual rights,
 a secular state and a participatory democracy. Some
 rebel factions have joined in the new Government, but
 the main insurgency, backed by Libya, continues to shun
 participation and controls the northern half of the
 country. Despite the war, both the new Chadian Govern-
 ment and its predecessor showed a concern for certain
 human rights in 1978. All members of the former
 Tombalbaye regime, which was overthrown by the military
 in 1975, have been released or tried in fair and open
 hearings. However, as long as the active rebellion
 continues, political rights as free speech will probably
 remain impaired.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Prisoners are occasionally abused at the time of arrest
 and mistreated during interrogation, but torture is not
 systematically practiced in Chad.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are no reports that cruel, inhuman or degrading
 punishments are practiced by the Chadian Government,
 although prison conditions are primitive.
 
 
 38
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Arbitrary arrest is permitted under existing security
 laws and has occurred in the case of suspected rebels.
 Moreover, under Chad's pre-independence French legal
 system and procedures, which have been left largely
 intact, suspects, including those arrested under
 ordinary criminal procedures, may be held for long
 periods of pre-trial investigation. In February 1978,
 the former military government amnestied 147 rebel
 prisoners. Under the terms of agreement for the new
 unity government formed in August 1978, virtually all
 pre-1978 FROLINAT rebel detainees have been released.
 However, a small number of political prisoners rounded
 up during the anti-terrorism campaign in late spring
 and fall, including a former Secretary of State for
 Agriculture, continue to be held for investigation.
 The Department of State estimates the number of such
 detainees at less than fifty.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Public trials in civil and criminal cases are held in
 common courts. Members of the Tombalbaye regime
 overthrown in 1975 have been tried in fair and open
 hearings. However, cases involving security and
 military matters are tried before closed military
 tribunals.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Under existing anti-terrorist security measures,
 searches of the home can and do occur commonly. The
 Department of State has no information on the frequency
 of this practice.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Government of Chad is committed to fulfilling
 such vital human needs as food, shelter, health care
 and education. Because of the exhausting war, the
 Government has made only limited progress in improving
 
 
 39
 the overall standard of living. Food policy has
 concentrated on coordinating famine relief, but the
 Government is also working on plans for a grain stabi-
 lization fund and an agricultural extension service.
 Health care is provided without charge at public health
 centers which, however, are located only in urban areas
 and major villages. The scarcity of resources and the
 continuing war prevent the establishment of a universal
 primary education system, but the Government is committed
 to reform and extension of the education system.
 Chad's tax system is moderately regressive, but most of
 the population lives at the subsistence level and is
 not affected. Some corruption exists but it is not
 significant.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed in the new Fundamental
 Charter and was also a basic tenet of the former
 military government. It is observed in practice.
 Freedom of speech, press and assembly are also guaranteed,
 and the Government of Chad does not foster ideological
 or intellectual conformity. Nonetheless, students have
 been arrested for distributing anti-government tracts
 and other individuals have been criticized for publicly
 dissenting from official policies.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration.
 Freedom of movement within Chad is restricted because
 of armed rebellion and banditry in several regions.
 The Government of Chad controls emigration and foreign
 travel through exit visas, primarily to control illicit
 trade and criminal activities.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Fundamental Charter sets as a goal universal
 participation in the political process. To date,
 
 
 40
 however, there are no electoral procedures, political
 parties, trade unions or other mechanisms for partici-
 pation. A council of national union with representatives
 from all of Chad's regions has been designated to draft
 a new constitution. There is no discrimination on the
 basis of sex, religion, race, tribal group or caste.
 At the same time, strong traditions and customs have
 restricted most women to the home or to agricultural
 tasks, thereby limiting their role in the political and
 economic process. Probably no more than a few thousand
 women are active as skilled workers, traders or
 workers in nonagricultural occupations.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Department of State is not aware of any attempts by
 non-governmental organizations to investigate alleged
 human rights violations in Chad.
 
 
