 CHAD
 Chad continued to be governed by a transitional Government headed by President
 Idriss Deby, who in a 1990 coup overthrew dictator Hussein Habre. President Deby
 and his Patriotic Salvation Movement (MIPS) are supported by a large military es-
 tablishment. A sovereign National Conference was convened between January and
 April, bringing together a diverse group of government, political, economic, military,
 and special interest representatives from Chadian society. The National Conference
 confirmed Deby as Chief of State, established a new transitional Government under
 Prime Minister Fidel Moungar (later Kassire Coumakoye) with a Cabinet of 16 Min-
 isters, elected 57 counselors to a quasi-legislative body, the Transitional Council
 (CST) and adopted the Transitional Charter as an interim constitutional document.
 The donference gave the transitional Government a 1-year mandate, i.e., until April
 6, 1994, but the CST may extend this mandate once, for a period left unspecified,
 before elections for a new Government take place.
 The 31,800 person army, gendarmerie, and police are responsible for internal se-
 curity. The National Conference recognized the need to reduce and reorganize the
 army and it dissolved the Center for Research and Intelligence Coordination
 (CRCR), the intelligence organization, which had continued to employ persons
 known to have committed serious abuses under the Habre regime. The Government
 announced its replacement by a National Security Agency (ANS) the staffing and
 oversight of which fall under the purview of the Presidency. With financial and mili-
 tary assistance from France, the Government demobilized thousands of soldiers.
 Nevertheless, military forces, principally Republican Guard units, were responsible
 for serious human rights abuses, including massacres of civilians in southern Chad
 and in N'Djamena, the capital.
 Chad, with a population of 6.3 million, has an estimated per capita income of only
 $190 per annum. Over 78 percent of the population is engaged in subsistence agn-
 culture, fishing, and stock raising. Cotton is the most important export. The Govern-
 ment relies heavily on external financial support, especially from France, to meet
 recurring budgetary costs and almost all government investment. Pervasive corrup-
 tion at all levels and a heavy black-market trade in fuel, sugar, oil, cloth, and soap
 served to limit severely government customs receipts, discourage local production
 and marketing, and restrict the cash economy.
 While the National Conference held out the hope of a real transition to a deno-u-
 cratic system, the transitional Government stalled and implemented few Conference
 decisions. As of year's end, it had set no dates for promised 1994 elections. However,
 a technical con!mission of jurists constituted at the end of the year began work on
 drafts of a constitution, electoral code and charter of political parties. The Deby
 Government continued to be responsible for serious human rights abuses, particu-
 larly those committed by Republican Guard units in the south and in N'Djamena
 and other cities. At times, the security forces operated independently of the Govern-
 ment, and certain units, particularly those from President Deby s ethnic group,
 seemed immune from prosecution. Combined with military threats against the judi-
 ciary and a magistrates' strike, there was a breakdown in the criminal justice sys-
 tem. The Government by year's end had prosecuted none of those responsible for
 such abuses. A number of killings remained unexplained and were not investigated,
 including those of several labor leaders. Domestic violence and discrimination
 against women remained widespread.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The President's Republican Guard
 and other units of the National Army (ANT) carried out a series of massacres of
 civilians and other killings. Despite assurances by the President, there was no real
 progress in investigating and punishing those responsible (see Section 1.g.).
 On October 22, security forces shot and killed dissident leader Abbas Koty, who
 fled Chad in 1992 after attempting a coup. Koty had returned under a trilateral
 agreement between Chad, Libya, and Sudan guaranteeing his safety. He was mur-
 
 
 53
 dered in October by security forces in broad daylight in front of witnesses. There
 is strong evidence that this was a political killing and not incident to resisting ar-
 rest for coup plotting as reported by the Government. The Government arrested at
 least eight persons in connection with the alleged coup attempt.
 There were several unexplained and uninvestigated murders of labor leaders, in-
 cluding Mbailao Mianbe, head of a civil service union (see Section 6.a.).
 b. Disappearance.-The status of approximately 100 followers of former rebel lead-
 er Abbas Koty, who were allegedly captured following a June 1992 coup attempt,
 was not known by year's end. A number of close associates of Abbas Koty were ar-
 rested following his assassination on October 22, 1993. Three persons believed to
 have been arrested at that time have not been accounted for: Adoum Acyl, Yacoub
 Isak Koty, and Isak Kochi.
 According to reliable observers, there were credible reports of a small number of
 politically motivated, incommunicado detentions in unidentified places of detention.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Transition Charter specifically prohibits the practice of torture and degrading
 or humiliating treatment, but the Government did not or could not intervene effec-
 tively to stop torture practices by security forces. Reliable reports indicated that
 military personnel engaged in torture and other cruel mistreatment of prisoners, ci-
 vilian and military, in government custody, most commonly by severe beatings, but
 also by immersion in water to the point of near drowning. Interrogators also report-
 edly used mock executions to intimidate detainees. There was no indication that in-
 vestigations were conducted or arrests made as a result of the many reports, includ-
 ing in the media, of torture.
 Pson conditions continued to be abysmal and life threatening, characterized by
 overcrowding, poor sanitation, lack of medical facilities, inadequate food, and mixing
 of male and female prisoners. Prisoners were almost totally dependent on their fam-
 ilies for food. The authorities allowed nonpolitical prisoners to have visitors. In a
 departure from previous practice, the authorities allowed prisoners arrested for ap-
 parent political reasons subsequent to the August killings to have visitors. The Gov-
 ernment authorized independent human rights groups access to selected prisons and
 prisoners and allowed private physicians to examine and treat prisoners. It granted
 the International Committee ofthe Red Cross (ICRC) permission to visit detainees,
 but for administrative reasons this had not taken place by year's end.
 On October 23, the Foreign Minister convoked the diplomatic corps and promised
 that the eight persons arrested in connection with the alleged Koty coup plot would
 not be mistreated and would be given a fair trial. The Government denied the eight
 persons visits by their families and lawyers but permitted human rights groups and
 doctors access on two occasions. There was no evidence of their physical mistreat-
 ment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Penal Code and the Transitional
 Charter provide formal safeguards against arbitrary arrest, but in practice these
 prvisions were not uniformly respected, notably after the August demonstrations
 and killings (see Section L.a.). Most military or security organizations had the de
 facto authority to arrest or detain citizens without warrant and without remanding
 the detainee for an early trial. As a result, large-scale arbitrary arrests took place
 on orders of senior members of the Government subsequent to the August violence.
 The authorities released all detainees after protests by legal groups. No charges
 were made nor trials conducted.
 There were credible reports of arbitrary arrests and detentions of political activ-
 ists in rural areas. These arrests were in some cases attributed to local leaders of
 the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MS) and were directed against opposition party
 leaders. No investigations or judicial action was taken.
 At year's end, best estimates indicated that the Government held approximately
 eight political or security detainees. Arrested the day of his assassination, the eight
 members of Abbas Koty's group (see Section L.a.), remained in prison at year's end,
 without formal charge and without any indication when they would be brought to
 trial.
 The Government did not use exile as a political weapon in 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system was unable to contend with
 more than civil actions due to a breakdown of law and judicial process. Significant
 interference by the Government and the military in the judicial system contributed
 to the breakdown. Even major incidents of mass murder, as in the case of atrocities
 in the south during April, did not go to trial. As in 1991 and 1992, there were strong
 indications that members of the security forces, particularly those belonging to
 northern ethnic groups and those in the Republican Guard, had de facto immunity
 from prosecution.
 
 
 In June armed troops physically threatened the principal judicial offices in the
 capital when there were rumors that soldiers involved in kiflings at the Customs
 Administration headquarters might be charged. Subsequently, magistrates went on
 strike in July to protest threats from the military after the judicial system adju-
 dicated in favor of a southern official who killed several northern soldiers during
 violence in June at the Customs Administration. None of those responsible for the
 violence was tried. Legal professionals complained that threats of violence and inter-
 ference prevented adequate and fair administration of justice.
 Other factors also affected the judiciary. In November and December, magistrates
 again went on strike along with most members of the Ministry of Justice to protest
 nonpayment of salaries. Magistrates, as well as other legal professionals, were not
 paid for at least half of the year, and there was a shortage of trained personnel,
 the most basic supplies, equipment, and courtroom space.
 In civil cases, in which the judiciary still operatedt a limited extent, there were
 a number of suits for libel and slander. The Government, most notably the Repub-
 lican Guard, along with individual members of the Government took advantage of
 the court system to defend their records.
 Despite substantial emphasis placed on the justice system by the National Con-
 ference, there was no overhaul of the justice system in 1993, although legal profes-
 sionals created three private, indepen ent associations to study reform. Chad's high-
 est court is the Appellate Court of N'Djamena which, under the Transitional Char-
 ter, assumes in theory constitutional review responsibilities in the absence of a Su-
 preme Court. It also reviews decisions of lower courts and adjudicates all cases call-
 ing for more than a 20-year penalty. District courts exist in major cities, and jus-
 tices of the peace preside in larger townships. Special courts were inactive, including
 the military courts-martial system, instituted in 1991 to try soldiers and civilians
 for crimes of violence committed in uniform or with military weapons.
 Most rural areas do not have access to formal judicial institutions and rely on tra-
 ditional courts presided over by village chiefs and sheikhs in most civil cases. Their
 decisions, which in most cases are respected by the population, may be appealed to
 a formal court.
 At year's end, the number of political and security prisoners (as distinct from pre-
 trial political and security detainees) was unknown.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Transitional Charter precisely states citizens' rights to privacy of home and cor-
 respondence, freedom from arbitrary arrest and search, and liberties of association.
 The Penal Code stipulates that searches of homes will be conducted only during
 daylight hours and only under legal warrant. In practice, security forces conducted
 frequent searches for weapons without legal warrant, day or night, especially during
 the second half of 1993. In some cases these searches resulted in mistreatment of
 individuals and extortion of money.
 The National Conference's Letters of Instruction to the transitional Government
 stipulated that roadblocks manned by government forces, often responsible for extor-
 tion of travelers and an impediment to free travel, would be removed. This was suc-
 cessfully accomplished in midyear for most of the country.
 Membership in the MPS is not required for employment or appointment to high
 position. However, MPS membership has been solicited by coercive means in rural
 areas, and members of other political parties have been detained and mistreated by
 MPS and government officials.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The ANT in late January and early February launched a military campaign
 in the south to neutralize the rebel force of the National Awakening Committee or
 Peace and Democracy (CSNPD) of Lieutenant Moise Kette. The ANT attacked more
 than 13 villages between the towns of Doba and Gore, burning and looting villages,
 destroying crops, and driving over 12,000 refugees into the Central African Repub-
 lic. The ANT killed at least 29 civilians in its initial attacks. Though rebels had at-
 tacked and killed government forces in the region, government claims to the effect
 that the civilian deaths occurred as a result of fighting between government forces
 and rebels were unconvincing. The ANT, principally units of the Republican Guard,
 cordoned off the region, restricted travel, and prevented independent investigations
 from taking place. No credible government inquiry of any value was conducted, nor
 were there arrests or punishments of those responsible for the excessive use of force.
 The ANT committed further excesses in February and March, with deaths and in-
 juries reported. Republican Guard units committed atrocities in a number of villages
 in the region of Kou-Mouabe. A government investigating committee, which included
 members of human rights groups, went to the region and reoorted that, within the
 space of a few days in April, the Republican Guard summarily executed over 200
 
 
 persons. According to the commission, over 300 civilians in the region had been
 illed by the Republican Guard since the beginning of 1993.
 The committee identified six Republican Guard officers and one former member
 of the CSNPD rebels, who acted as a guide to the villages, as responsible for the
 killings and other abuses. As of years end the authorities had arested only two
 persons, and one was allowed full freedom ot movement to and from the prison, even
 though there was no indication of a pretrial hearing or setting of bail. The status
 of the other prisoner, a southerner, was unknown. He allegedly was tortured by the
 Republican Guard and forced to guide units to the villages. The remaining five offi-
 cers escaped arrest. None had been brought to trial by year's end.
 The armed opposition group, the CSNPD, said the massacres were perpetrated
 against civilians suspected of collusion or sympathy with the opposition. However,
 the Government alleged that the CSNPD committed abuses against civilians in the
 region, including killing and robbery. Credible sources reported that rebels stole
 goods and extorted money from villagers in the region.
 In June Republican Guard army units fired inaiscriminately during a clash over
 control of the Customs Administration in N'Djamena, killing at least two innocent
 civilians. There was no credible investigation, and no one was arrested.
 On August 4, armed men fired at crowds in a market in Gniguilim, near Abeche
 in eastern Chad, killing at least 82 persons and wounding 105. The Government
 conducted an investigation and reportedly arrested several persons, but it had not
 released any details by the end of the year, including the identities of the killers,
 which reportedly had not been satisfactorily established. No trials had been con-
 ducted, nor had those responsible been punished.
 On August 5, army units suppressed a demonstration, a protest against the
 killings in Gniguilim, in Abeche, killing at least two civilians and wounding several.
 On August 8, members of the Ouaddaian community in N'Djamena sought to hold
 a prayer meeting to protest the Gniguilim massacre. After being turned away by
 gendarmes and police, some Ouaddaian members attacked the police and gen-
 darmes, killing five. Senior officials called in the Republican Guard which used mas-
 sive force-heavy weapons and automatic rifles--against the remainder of the
 Ouaddain crowd and on bystanders, including in neighborhoods far removed from
 the scene of the riot. The Republican Guard killed at least 61 civilians and wounded
 over 100. The Government failed to take any disciplinary action against the Repub-
 lican Guard.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Transitional Charter provides for freedom
 of speech and press, and the small private press published articles criticizing the
 Government. The Government controlled access to radio, the most important me-
 dium, and to the sole television station. It permitted only government-approved pro-
 gramming and commentary but often included nonpartisan coverage ofOpposition
 activities and statements. However, in September, during a political crisis between
 the President and Prime Minister, the President denied the Prime Minister radio
 air time.
 Foreign publications were available. There were no reports of censorship of these
 publications or of issues withdrawn from circulation.
 The academic system is primarily state supported, and the teachers at all levels
 are state employees. Reportedly students and teachers practice self-censorship in
 discussions with a political content.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Transitional Charter pro-
 vides for freedom of association, assembly, press, and publication.
 Political and civil groups conducted meetings and press conferences for the most
 p art without government interference. However, the Government restricted assem-
 bly on several occasions. In August it banned religious and ethnic demonstrations,
 and in September it prevented leaders of political parties and associations from hav-
 ing access to a private conference hall by bringing pressure on the owner. Permits
 are required for public gatherings of all sorts.
 New political parties continued to appear and, as of the end of 1993, 43 parties
 were authorized to function. Parties and associations issued political and civic-ori-
 ented tracts of all sorts, many critical of the Government, without interference from
 the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Chad is officially and in practice a secular state. Islam
 Christianity, and other religions are practiced without constraint. Missionaries of ad
 religions are permitt d to enter Chad to proselytize and to perform public assistance
 work.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-No special permission was required of Chadians or foreigners to travel
 
 
 within most areas, but access to areas designated military zones was not permitted.
 The Government set up military cordons to restrict acccess to areas of southern
 Chad near the towns of Gore and Kou-Mouabe, both sites of human rights abuses.
 Most of the government roadblocks were removed in June on orders of the transi-
 tional Government. Although there was significant improvement, members of the se-
 curity forces continued to operate some roadblocks around the country, asked for do-
 mestic travel documents, and extorted money from travelers. The transitional Gov-
 ernment revoked the requirement for government authorization for international
 travel.
 Chadians were free to emigrate. Several thousand bona fide refugees, a product
 of mid-1992 ighting between the Government and rebels in the Lake Chad region,
 remained in Niger and had valid concerns as to their reception back in Chad. Simi-
 larly, approximately 12,000 refugees in camps in the Central African Republic, who
 fled southern Chad when their villages were attacked by the Republican Guard, had
 valid concerns about their safety if they returned to their villages. The presence in
 southern Chad of large units of soldiers of northern ethnic groups, some already re-
 sjonsible for atrocities in the south, discouraged reentry of refugees from the
 Central African Republic.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have this right, and President Deby and his MPS, backed by the
 military, dominate the political process. Nevertheless, positive movement towards
 political pluralism was noted in 1993.
 The ational Conference held from January to April established that elections
 would take place in 1994. The Conference consisted of approximately 800 delegates
 drawn from the Government, traditional leadership such as sheikhs and sultans, op-
 osition political parties, human rights groups, unions, students, women's groups,
 arming cooperatives, and other groups. The balance of representation was equi-
 table, and the discussions and debates were open and uninhibited. The Transitional
 Charter and the Letters of Instruction to the transitional Government were drafted
 in committee and presented to a floor vote. The Conference elected the Prime Min-
 ister from a slate of 13 candidates. It also elected from the floor 57 Transitional
 Council (CST) counselors, who in turn selected their president for a term of 6
 months.
 The CST utilized its authority to require key cabinet ministers, including the
 Prime Minister, to explain their programs to the Council. The CST exercised its leg-
 islative authority in refusing to ratify a treaty with Libya presented by the Presi-
 dency and directed the Prime Minister to reduce the Cabinet from 31 ministers to
 16 to bring the Government into conformance with the Letters of Instruction.
 During the year, there was increasing conflict between President Deby and Prime
 Minister Fidel Moungar over a variety of issues. Eventually the Transitional Coun-
 cil replaced Moungar in November with Kassire Coumakoye.
 The creation of a tripartite system of government, each institution with separate
 powers, represented a major advance in the Chadian political system. Though pre-
 ponderant authority remained with the executive, the other two government institu-
 tions in the face of difficult problems persisted in consolidating their respective and
 separate powers. A technical commission of jurists constituted at the end of the year
 began work on drafts of a constitution, electoral code, and charter of political par-
 ties.
 Chadian women have political equality and protection under the law and were ac-
 tive in the National Conference. Several hold high office in the transitional Govern-
 ment and are represented in leadership positions of the political parties. Neverthe-
 less,women are underrepresented in government, and cultural biases prevent their
 full integration into political life. There are one female cabinet minister and four
 female CST counselors.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Four Chadian human rights organizations operated legally: the Chadian League
 of Human Rights, the Convention for the Defense of Human and Citizens Rights,
 the Chadian Association for the Promotion and Defense of Human Rights, and the
 Chadian Association for the Struggle Against Human Rights Violations. These orga-
 nizations were active in the Nationa Conference, and some members are rep-
 resented in the transitional Government. Several of these organizations took part
 in commissions investigating human rights abuses. The reports of these organiza-
 tions were published without constraint. Reports on human rights abuses in the
 south were critical of the army (Republican Guard units) and persons who commit-
 
 
 57
 ted them. The political opposition and civil associations regularly criticize the Gov-
 ernment on human rights issues.
 The transitional Government, as one of its first official acts, commissioned a spe-
 cial government/human rights commission to investigate massacres that were car-
 ried out in southern villages near Kou-Mouabe. The commision's report was accu-
 rate and unbiased but in the end had little effect in disciplining those responsible.
 A similar commission to investigate atrocities in eastern Chad also had little impact
 (see Section 1.g.).
 An international organization, the Association for Victims of Repression in Exile
 (AVRE), visited Chad in midyear and again in December to treat torture victims
 and investigate the human rights situation. Representatives had access to high level
 government officials. A delegation of the International Human Rights Federation
 (FIDH) conducted a seminar and investigated human rights conditions in December
 under the auspices of the Chadian League of Human Rights. The Government gave
 several independent human rights organizations permission to visit prisons and reg-
 ular access to most prisoners (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Transitional Charter provides for equal rights to all citizens, regardless of
 sex, race, religion, or origin.
 Women.-According to the Transitional Charter and the Letters of Instruction,
 women have equal rights with men. The Transitional Charter provides that
 Chadians of both sexes have the same rights and obligations.
 In practice, however, culture and tradition among Chad's various ethnic groups
 perpetuate the de facto subordinate status of women, especially in rural areas where
 women do much of the heavy farm labor and have little opportunity for education
 or wage employment. The literacy rate for women is signficantly lower than for
 men: A 1991 United Nations study indicated that on the average females receive
 one-third of the education of males. In 1993 there were fewer girls in school than
 boys. Women are not discriminated against in property and inheritance rights under
 the law. However, in traditional practice males are favored in inheritance matters.
 The transitional Government gave some attention to women's issues. A new fam-
 ily code on which work had begun in 1992, was not completed by the end of 1993,
 largely because of frequent cabinet changes, government reorganizations, and lack
 of initiative on the part of employees who went for long periods without pay. The
 Transitional Councilpassed a contraception law, which allows Chadian women to
 make their own choices in family planning. Several women hold high positions in
 the Government as well as in commerce, the professions, and the military, and
 women's advocacy groups have begun to form, notably the Association of Women in
 Distress in Chad and the Association of Women Jurists. The latter group was in-
 strumental in pressing for improvements in womens rights at the National Con-
 ference and throughout 1993.
 Domestic violence directed against women, including wife beating, is common, and
 women have only limited legal recourse against abusive spouses. Police rarely inter-
 vene, and women usually rely on family or ethnic group to resolve such cases.
 Children.-The Government and Chadian society are supportive of children's
 human rights. Nevertheless, there are few active programs to address children's
 rights.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is widespread and performed on females
 at a young age. The practice is deeply rooted in tradition, both in the north and
 the south, and is strongly advocated by many Chadians, women as much as men,
 despite its severe adverse consequences for women's physical and mental health. Ac-
 cording to a recent survey sponsored by the U.S. Agency for International Develop-
 ment in Moyen Chari prefecture, the percentage of women who have undergone this
 procedure is extremely high and depends to an extent on religious aflinity. Some
 96 percent of rural Catholic women in Moyen Chari were found to be circumcised
 as compared to 86 percent of animist, 83 percent of Protestant, and 55 percent of
 Muslim women. Urban statistics range from a low of 53 percent for Protestants to
 63 percent for Muslims, 75 percent for animists, and 86 percent for Catholics. The
 Government took no action to prohibit the practice.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-There are approximately 200 ethnic groups.
 They are roughly divided among Saharan and Arab Muslims in the northern,
 central, and eastern regions, and Sudanian zone ethnic groups, who practice Chris-
 tianity or animist religions, in the south. Sustained civil conflict since independence
 in 1960, revolving primarily around ethnic differences, has prevented development
 of a solid sense of national identity. Ethnic and regional friction continues to trouble
 the country, despite efforts to ensure wide ethnic and regional representation in gov-
 
 
 ernment. Well-armed minority ethnic groups close to the President, which represent
 a small fraction of the population, exercised authority over military and civilian gov-
 ernment decisions.
 People with Disabilities.-Against a background of civil conflict and inadequate
 funding, the Government has not developed policies, including legislation on acces-
 sibility to buildings, to assist the disabled. Resources and medical expertise are sore-
 ly lacking. There is no official discrimination directed against the disabled, but they
 have little opportunity for wage employment or special education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Some 78 percent of all workers are involved in sub-
 sistence agriculture, animal husbandry, or fishing. Government employees and
 workers in the few state-owned enterprises constitute the bulk of union members.
 The Transitional Charter and Letters of Instruction specifically recognize labor's
 right to organize. Workers are free to join or form unions of their choosing. Only
 the military are prohibited from joining unions. Government authorization is re-
 ?uird before unions can commence operation, but this procedure was not tested in
 993. The dominant union federation remained the Federation of Chadian Unions
 (UST). A second, smaller federation, the Free Federation of Chadian Workers
 (CLTT), continued to operate. Neither union had organizational, financial, or proce-
 dural ties to the Government.
 While Ordinance No. 30 of 1975 suspending all strike action has not yet been re-
 pealed, the Government respected labor's right to strike. Teachers unions main-
 tained almost continuous strikes in 1993, resulting in loss of the 1992-93 academic
 year for primary and secondary students. Health workers struck in September and
 again in December. Strikes in December affected 12 of the 16 government min-
 istries. Subsequent to the National Conference, most organized labor had agreed to
 observe a social truce with the transitional Government, but the continued failure
 of the Government to pay civil servants eroded worker confidence and provoked an
 almost total work stoppage at the end of the year. Labor/government relations, good
 for much of 1993 deteriorated in later months.
 International Labor Organization (ILO) bodies reviewed complaints against the
 Government stemming from the arrests, antiunion discrimination, and other actions
 taken against the UST and individual unions in 1992 and deplorp'd t.bese actions
 as inconsistent with the requirements of freedom of association. In addition to Ordi-
 nance No. 30, organized labor remained under the authority of several outdated
 laws, such as Ordinance No. 1 of 1976 prohibiting public employees from exercising
 the right to organize and a provision in the Labor Code prohibiting all political ac-
 tivity of trade unionists. A new labor code finalized in draft in 1992, but not re-
 leased and implemented prior to the end of 1993, was to serve as a revocation of
 the old laws. The new code was not enacted into law because the Government rea-
 soned that the document needed a final review by a special commission. Funding
 for the commission was not available.
 There was no government restriction on labor union participation in international
 labor conferences. There were no incidents of government interference in union ac-
 tivities. However, several union members were murdered, leading many to presume
 that they were targeted for labor activisim. There was no indication that these alle-
 ghations were true. In the case of Mbailao Mianbe, head of a civil service union in
 t e UST, who was murdered in June, evidence pointed to his activities in army reor-
 ganization, not union work, as the motive behind his death.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not specifically
 protect collective bargaining; both the Transitional Charter and the Labor Code still
 in effect contain only generalized provisions for the rights of labor. The new labor
 code is expected to provide more precision and be in accordance with international
 conventions. The Government sets wages in the public sector, but in a departure
 from past practice the transitional Government has actively negotiated employment
 and wage issues with the UST and the CLTT. A case in point was the agreement
 of the Government to restore to service employees fired for striking in 1992. A new
 wage rate was negotiated. When the Government attempted to reduce wages further
 than the 1992 reduction, organized labor successfully negotiated a retraction of the
 decision. The Government is under heavy pressure from the International Monetary
 Fund and other international donors to cut spending and increase revenue.
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, and there is no
 formal mechanism for resolving complaints of such discrimination. In practice, how-
 ever, this was not a problem.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no specific legal prohibi.
 tion on forced or compulsory labor. No strong evidence was presented to indicate
 
 
 59
 forced or compulsory labor took place. There were allegations that unpaid soldiers
 stationed in the far north were required to work as domestics and field workers in
 order to survive, in some instances for years. The Government did not respond to
 these allegations.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 14 in the wage sector, but there is only limited enforcement of this
 law by the Ministry of Civil Service and Labor. In practice, employment of children
 is almost nonexistent except on family subsistence farms.
 Approximately 600 minors between the ages of 14 and 17 were reported to be in
 the army at the end of 1992. The Commission for Defense and Security of the Na-
 tional Conference reported that 293 minors had been demobilized as of April 1993.
 Children continued to serve in the army throughout the year.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work. -The drag labor and social welfare code, which
 was prepared in 1988 with ILO assistance, continued to be reviewed but was not
 approved for issuance due to government insistence on appointment of a commission
 to study the document.
 Meanwhile, minimum wages established under previous governments remained
 unchanged. An ILO committee expressed concern that the legal minimum wage has
 not been revised since 1978. A new minimum wage law which doubled the hourly
 rate was negotiated between the Government and labor in midyear. The minimum
 monthly wage is scheduled to increase to approximately $60 (18,000 CFA francs) in
 early 1994. Minimum wages are insufficient to support subsistence, much less main-
 tain an adequate standard of living. Salary arrearages of 4 to 5 months in
 N'Djamena and up to 8 months in rural areas for civil servants, combined with no
 pay for some soldiers for up to 24 months, have obligated most employees to seek
 other employment, engage in subsistence agriculture, or rely on the extended family
 Most nonagricultural work is limited by law to 48 hours per week with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural workers are statutorily limited to 2,400
 work hours per year. All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per
 week. The Labor Code recognizes the need for occupational health and safety stand-
 ards, including labor inspectors with the authority to enforce them. There is no indi-
 cation that such health and safety standards exist in practice, nor that inspectors
 have been appointed.
