 CHAD
 Chad is a republic with a transitional government headed by President Idriss
 Deby. President Deby and the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS) took power from
 Hissein Habre on December 1, 1990, and immediately declared human rights and
 democratization to be the primary objectives of the new Government. On March 1,
 1991, the MPS enacted a National Charter, which set up a 30-month transition pe-
 riod of government and concentrated power in the Presidency. The Charter also ab-
 rogated the 1989 constitution. In 1992 the National Charter was amended to des-
 ignate the Prime Minister as Chief of Government, and 26 political parties were au-
 thorized to operate. Plans for holding a national conference to set the course of de-
 mocratization were postponed from May to January 15, 1993.
 The Deby Government operates a large security and military apparatus that in-
 cludes an army of about 42,000 personnel (Republican Guard, Army, Gendarmerie,
 and Air Force), the National Police, and the Center for Research and Coordination
 of Information (CRCR). Chad's total military expenditures for 1989, the last year
 for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed
 analysis, were between $30 million and $33 million. The size of the security forces
 posed a serious drain on Chadian resources in 1992, and the Government had dif-
 ficulty in supporting them financially and in maintaining discipline. Army units in
 particular, committed serious human rights abuses. The Government has under-
 taken an ambitious program to restructure and reduce its military forces over the
 next 18 months. However, short-term cost savings may well be offset by severance
 and resettlement payments to personnel released from service.
 
 
 51
 Chad is one of the poorest countries in the world, with an estimated per capita
 income of $170 per annum. The national literacy rate is estimated at 25 percent
 and 80 percent of the po ulation is engaged in subsistence agriculture, fishing, and
 stock raising. Cotton is Chad's most important export. The Government relies-heav-
 ily on external financial support, especially from France, to meet recurring budg-
 etary costs and almost all government investment. Extensive corruption contributed
 to a worsened financial profile in 1992. In an effort to reduce expenditures, the Gov-
 ernment reduced government salaries and increased taxes, and in the process
 touched off a series of general strikes which further weakened the economy.
 The Deby Government made little progress in controlling human rights abuses in
 1992, which included extrajudicial killings arbitrary arrest and detention, and tor-
 ture. Abuses were primarily attributed to Zaghawa and Bideyat ethnic group mem-
 bers of security units under the authority of the Presidency. There was no discern-
 ible government effort to control, investigate, or punish those responsible. Govern-
 ment actions in the last quarter of the year, limiting public gatherings of opposition
 political party members and suppressing union activity, contributed to public dis-
 content and placed in doubt the Deby regime's intention to move forward with its
 reform agenda. Several rebel groups continued to operate within Chad's borders.
 The Government's lack of commitment to human rights in the areas noted above
 served to overshadow substantive improvements in other areas. Freedom of speech
 and the press was relatively unfettered. The Government authorized 26 political
 parties along with a large number of civic oriented associations. For most of the
 year, dhe right of assembly and the right to strike were exercised freely. Serious
 planning for a January 15, 1993, national conference began late in the year. The
 Government consulted with a broad stratum of the public, including those in the
 opposition, in an effort to build consensus on key issues.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-During the first months of 1992,
 there were credible reports of extrajudicial killings by military and security person-
 nel, some taking place with the full knowledge of senior government officials. In
 mid-January, several members of an opposition political party, the Rally for Democ-
 racy and Progress (RDP), were killed in the course of what appeared to be politically
 motivated arrests. In February Joseph Behidi, the Vice President of the Chadian
 League of Human Rights (LTDH), was murdered. His death aroused widespread
 local and international indignation. There was speculation that the motive for his
 murder may have been related to private business activities rather than his work
 as a human rights monitor, but at year's end the circumstances behind the murder
 remained unclear. There were allegations of government interference in the oper-
 ations of human rights groups, but little evidence existed to support these claims.
 Also in February, subsequent to an attempted coup, uncontrolled Chadian Na-
 tional Army units engaged in reprisals against civilians in the villages of Wallia and
 Boudouloum; credible sources report that at least 62 persons uninvolved in the coup
 attempt were killed. The victims were allegedly all of southern origin and included
 both military personnel and civilians. The Government did not conduct an investiga-
 tion, nor were trials held.
 In April Chadian rebels involved in fighting at Lake Chad were arrested in Nige-
 ria and transferred as prisoners from Nigeria to Chad. Credible information indi-
 cates at least 52 of 289 known prisoners were summarily executed. In August rebels
 in southern Chad attacked a government garrison near the town of Doba. Credible
 reports indicate that government forces killed at least 30 and possibly as many as
 100 unarmed civilians in Doba following the attack. The Government has not pub-
 licly investigated either of these incidents.
 Also in August, nine people were killed when police opened fire in an attempt to
 evict a religious leader and his followers living illegally on government prperty in
 the Diguel quarter of N'Djamena. Three Government Ministers resigned in protest
 over the Government's handling of this incident.
 Throughout 1992 there were allegations of random killing, thievery, banditry, and
 extortion by armed soldiers, mostly members of the Zaghawa ethnic group who had
 accompanied the Deby forces into N'Djamena in 1990. The Government condemned
 these acts by uncontrolled soldiers, but it did not attempt to discipline them. The
 Government established courts-martial in March 1991 to try military offenders, but
 in 1992 there was evidence that this judicial process was not effectively utilized.
 b. Disappearance.-There were allegations in 1992 of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. Many of those reported as having disappeared surfaced when large
 numbers of prisoners, including former Minister of the Interior Maldoum and others
 
 
 arrested in October 1991 for coup plotting, were released in January and June.
 There were credible allegations that political and security prisoners were being held
 incommunicado. No access was allowed to other prisoners returned from Nigeria to
 Chad. There were unconfirmed reports that they were released in August.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 In 1992 there were persistent reports that military and other security organizations
 engaged in torture and other cruel mistreatment, which included whippings, beat-
 ings, and other forms of physical abuse. These units also reportedly denied medical
 treatment to torture victims. The number of allegations diminished in the latter
 part of 1992. While the Government officially condemns the use of torture and the
 mistreatment of prisoners, it did not comment on these reports in 1992, nor, as far
 as is known, did it conduct any investigation of such reports. The Government did
 complete an investigation into abuses committed under the Habre regime and pub-
 lished a comprehensive and impartial report.
 Prison conditions under the Deby regime continued to be harsh, characterized by
 overcrowding, poor sanitation, lack of medical facilities, inadequate food, and mixing
 of male and female prisoners. Some of the worst prisons were closed in 1992, how-
 ever, and unlike in previous years, no allegations were received concerning deten-
 tion of children, deaths from malnutrition in common cells, or failure to remove bod-
 ies rapidly after death. Prisoners are dependent on their families for food, medi-
 cines, andother necessities. Nonpolitical prisoners are allowed daily access by visi-
 tors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Shortly after taking power the Deby Gov-
 ernment abrogated the 1989 constitution which provided certain formal safeguards
 against arbitrary arrest and gave detainees specific rights, such as the right to
 counsel and to be presented with charges. The Chadian Penal Code, which is still
 considered in effect, specifies these rights, but its provisions were not uniformly and
 consistently enforced. Most individual military or security organizations were able
 to arrest or detain citizens without legal warrant, without presenting charges, or
 without remanding a detainee to an ear y trial.
 In January a group of 15 senior members of opposition parties were arbitrarily
 arrested without legal warrant. They were detained at various nonofficial prisons
 for 2 weeks, but were not physically mistreated. Military and civilians were de-
 tained without charge as a result of an alleged coup attempt in October 1991 and
 subsequent to fighting at Lake Chad in December 1991 and January 1992. Two
 journalists were allegedly arrested without warrant during the general strike in
 September. In contrast, there were numerous allegations that military and civilians
 of the Zaghawa ethnic group who were guilty of crimes were not incarcerated (see
 Section i.e.).
 Despite two well-publicized releases of prisoners, there were reports that the Gov-
 ernment still held political prisoners and detainees. Due to the sensitivity of the
 Government on political issues and the lack of detailed public reporting on political
 detentions, the number was not known. High level Chadian officials contend no po-
 litical detainees or prisoners were held in 1992, attributing any arrests cited above
 to coup plotting and other crimes relating to national security. The Government con-
 sidered some of those arrested prisoners of war.
 The Deby Government actively engaged in a program for the return of Chadian
 exiles and refugees in 1992. There were no reports of voluntarily returning exiles
 being detained or mistreated. Significant numbers of Chadians have chosen not to
 return to Chad and remain in Europ, Niger, Libya, and other African countries.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tr.--ad's judicial system, modeled on the French
 legal system, is at best rudimentary, in part due to decades of civil war creating
 serious staffing and training deficiencies. Three forms of courts existed in Chad in
 1992: the regular judiciary, a traditional system presided over by village chiefs and
 sheiks, and the newly established special military courts. The latter was charged
 with trying soldiers accused of criminal activity and civilians who, while committing
 a crime, impersonated a soldier, accompaniedsoldiers, or used a military weapon
 (see Section L.a.). A court-martial conviction may be appealed to a higher tribunal
 within the military system. Executive clemency or pardon is possible. Defendants
 appearing before the court-martial have the legal right to be represented by an at-
 torney, and this right was exercised without interference.
 The highest court in Chad is the Appellate Court in N'Djamena. It reviews deci-
 sions of lower courts and judges all cases calling for more than a 20-year penalty.
 Due to the shortage of judges in the provinces, legal matters were often dealt with
 by traditional or other government authorities, including military commanders. The
 traditional or customary system of justice, common in the rural areas and used for
 civil matters, is not codified, but its judgments are generally respected by the popu-
 
 
 53
 lation. Decisions rendered by a traditional court may be appealed to the regular ci-
 vilian courts.
 There were no efforts at systemic overhaul of the judiciary in 1992. The judiciary
 remained subordinate to executive authority. The Government did make an effort
 to staff rural courts which had not functioned under the previous Government. In
 separate cases, two opposition political parties sued the Government for denying
 their requests to operate, contending that the Government did not respect the rules
 established for registration of new political parties. One party won its suit, and the
 Government resected the ruling, granting the party authorization. The second case
 was still under deliberation at year's end.
 In 1992, as in 1991 there were credible reports that the civilian court system and
 the new court-martial system were unable to brinj members of the Zaghawa ethnic
 gup to trial. Other allegations state that citizens bringing charges against
 Zaghawa were threatened with reprisal by other Zaghawa in the military. The Gov-
 ernment has not acted effectively to ensure equal administration of the law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Under
 the Chadian Penal Code, homes may be searched only during daylight hours and
 only under the authority of a warrant. In practice, security personnel of various
 agencies searched homes and arrested occupants without a warrant from judicial
 authorities. In February several deaths occurred as a result of searches of homes
 by the army in Wallia and Boudouloum after a coup attempt. There were numerous
 reports that thievery by soldiers occurred frequently during house and street
 searches. In sharp contrast to these incidents were professional, well controlled
 searches conducted by the Gendarmerie under legal warrants issued as part of a
 disarmament effort.
 Membership in the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS) is not required for em-
 ployment or appointment to high position. MIPS membership reportedly has been so-
 licited by coercive means in the rural areas.
 It was widely assumed by Chadians that surveillance of persons, monitoring of
 telephones, and checking of domestic and international correspondence occurred in
 199.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.--Considerable freedom of speech and press was
 enjoyed in 1992. Individual views and beliefs were expressed openly. Four private
 newspapers were published in 1992, sold openly, and often carried stories highly
 critical of the Government. The private newspaper N'Damena Hebdo was particu-
 larly noted both for its wide circulation and or its critical articles on the Govern-
 ment.
 Chadian television, radio, and the Chadian Press Agency continued to be govern-
 ment controlled in 1992. In these state-owned media, journalists were allowed some
 latitude in publishing and broadcasting and frequently covered antigovernment
 statements of the opposition. However, the Government stepped in during periods
 of high political tension to control the content of broadcasts. On several occasions,
 the Union of Chadian Journalists, independent of other labor groups called strikes
 to protest censorship. No adverse government reactions against the Union were re-
 ported.
 In the wake of rebel attacks at Lake Chad in early 1992, some pressure was put
 on the press, and self-censorship became more noticeable. A Radio Chad journalist
 was held overnight; he claimed that he was questioned about his political contacts.
 A reporter for N'Djamena Hebdo, who is also a stringer for Radio France Inter-
 national, received a suspended sentence and fine in April after the Government
 charged that his reporting on the January events had led to abandonment of an
 area by Chadian troops.
 Two journalists employed by the Government were arrested in September for
 broadcasting a radio appeal to other journalists to observe the general strike by lim-
 iting hours of air time at the radio station and by restricting publication of the gov-
 ernment paper. These journalists were released after 3 days of detention. The MPS,
 which serves as President Deby's state party, put pressure on the Government to
 place restraints on government and private media. The Government rejected these
 moves to limit press freedom. The homicides of three journalists in 1992 caused con-
 cern that a conspiracy exists to intimidate journalists. The Government has de-
 plored such acts, and premeditated murder has not been proven in any of the cases.
 Foreign publications were available in Chad, and there were no reports that for-
 eign publications were censored or withdrawn from circulation during 1992.
 The academic system is state supported, but the Government does not control the
 curriculum or course content. Class discussions of academic topics were unrestricted
 and uninhibited, but political commentar in and out of clas tended to he r-.
 
 
 strained, unless discussions took place among close, trusted friends. Fear of govern-
 ment informants is pervasive at institutes of higher education.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These freedoms increased dra-
 matically in the first half of 1992. The Government permitted assemblies and meet-
 ings with political objectives, and authorized political activity and political party or-
 ganizations outside the MPS. A large number of organizational meetings of political
 parties took place in public auditoriums, including in government-owned buildings.
 Several large political rallies, one of which attracted 15,000.*ople, took place with-
 out incident and    were   given  press  coverage  in  the  government media.
 Antigovernment speeches by opposition leaders at these rallies were transmitted
 verbatim in the government-controlled media. In February tens of thousands of peo-
 ple in N'Djamena conducted a march to protest the murder of human rights activist
 Joseph Behidi.
 However, a series of general strikes gradually led to a tightening of restrictions
 on assembly, starting in July, when a women a march during the general strike was
 broken up by gendarmes (see Section 6.a.). In late September and early October, the
 Government withdrew authorization on three separate oceasions for political parties
 to use a government conference room, one of few indoor spaces large enough for
 such gatherings in N'Djamena.
 In 1992 the Government required all public organizations, political or civic, to
 have official authorization prior to beginning operations. Authorization to function
 was granted liberally, and at yeares end, 26 poitical parties and approximately the
 same number of civic, advocacy, special interest, and social groups were legalized.
 Many of these parties and associations maintained offices and staff, published and
 disseminated position statements, and solicited financing.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Chad is officially and in practice a secular state in which
 Islam, Christianity, and other religions are practiced without official constraint.
 Both Islamic and Christian holidays are given official status. More than 50 percent
 of Chad's population is Muslim, and Chad is a member of the Islamic Conference.
 Christian and other missionaries may enter the country to proselytize and perform
 public assistance work. Christian missionaries are most active in the south. In 1991
 there were no reports of harassment for religious views, and religious publications
 are disseminated without government restriction.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Chadians and foreigners enjoy freedom to move around the country, ex-
 cept within military zones. However, many travelers complained of roadblocks
 manned by government forces who extort money before granting passage. Some
 roadblocks were also set up by criminals to steal money from travelers. Clearance
 by internal security services is required for international travel and is sometimes
 denied (see Section 6.a.). Chadians are free to emigrate and have the right to re-
 turn.
 From 1979 to 1982, as many as 185,000 Chadians fled civil war and drought to
 seek refuge in neighboring countries. Some 10,000 left following the December 1990
 overthrow of the Habre government. Many of Chad's refugees have since returned
 and resettled with the help of government organizations. In 1992, 3,000 of the esti-
 mated 20,000 Chadian refugees remaining in Sudan were repatriated by the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). There were no reports in 1992
 of mistreatment of returnees. In addition to these older refugee populations, several
 thousand Chadians fled to Niger in mid-1992 following fighting between government
 and rebel troops in the Lake Chad area.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1992 Chadians did not have the right to change their government by demo-
 cratic means. President Deby- rules under a 30-month mandate established by the
 March 1991 National Charter. He governs through a Prime Minister, who is the
 Head of Government designated in the National Charter, and a Council of Min-
 isters. The Prime Minister and other members of the Cabinet are appointed by the
 President. The Provisional Council of the Republic, a consultative body comprised
 of regional representatives and political notables appointed by the President, serves
 some of the functions of a legislature but without authority to draft or approve laws.
 The President's appointment power extends to all levels of key officials, including
 governors and canton chiefs, in charge of administering each of Chad's 14 prefec-
 tures and their subdivisions. Mayors of major towns also are appointed by the Presi-
 dent.
 Upon coming to power, Deby's provisional Government, through the National
 Charter abolished the 1989 constitution and the National Assembly but promised
 to install a multiparty system. A Charter of Political Parties was adopted on Octo-
 
 
 55
 ber 4 1991. The first party was legalized in early 1992 and was followed by 25 oth-
 ers. The Government postponed a national conference, scheduled for May 1992, until
 January 15, 1993. Among other objectives, the national conference is expected to
 draft a new constitution. President Deby promised municipal, legislative, and presi-
 dential elections in 1993, but at year's end no electoral timetable had been set.
 Chadian women have full political equality and protection under the law. How-
 ever, despite recent increases in the number of women active in politics and in civil
 organizations, social biases exist which limit opportunities. Very few women hold
 high-level positions in the Government, the MPS, or the opposition parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Deby Government encouraged investigation into human rights abuses com-
 nitted by the Habre regime and commissioned a major investigation into the latter's
 8 years in power. The results of this commission were widely disseminated and fa-
 vorably commented on by international human rights organizations as an impartial
 and comprehensive work. In contrast, the Government did not investigate or failed
 to publicize the results of investigations into various serious incidents including the
 deaths of prisoners returned from Nigeria, the circumstances surrundin the arrest
 of former Minister of Interior Maldum in October 1991, the two attacks at Doba
 or other incidents in which cvilians were killed, allegedly in the aftermath of coup
 attempts. Nor were those responsible for these a uses rought to trial.
 Four Chadian human rights organizations operated legally in 1992: the Chadian
 League of Human Rights LTDI      the Convention for the Defense of Human and
 Citizens Rights, the Chadian Association for the Promotion and Defense of Human
 Rights, antthe Chadian Association for the Struggle Against Human Rights Viola-
 tions. These organizations have conducted investigations and published findings
 critical of the Government. Members of human rights organizations have met with
 senior officials to discuss prison conditions, the national conference, and social crises
 such as the public reaction following the tehidi murder. The LTDH and the Chad-
 ian Red Cross also conducted an investigation of civilian deaths and injuries in
 Dobs in August. In May the Government established a ministerial position respon-
 sible for human rights and humanitarian affairs
 An Amnesty International team visited Chad in September to follow up on a 1991
 visit and met with senior Chadian officials as well as human rights organizations.
 The Government provided written replies to inquiries by the international commu-
 nity into human rights abuses. During 1992 the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) negotiated access to detainees in Chad; at year's end, however, the vis-
 its had not yet begun.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Se, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 There are approximately 200 ethnic groups in Chad. They are roughly divided
 among Saharan and Arab Muslims in the northern, central, and eastern regions,
 and Sudanian zone ethnic groups, who practice Christianity or animist religions, in
 the south. Sustained civil war since 1965, revolving around ethnic disputes, has
 badly fractured any sense of national identity. Ethnic divisions continued to be a
 major problem in Chad despite efforts to forge national reconciliation and unity.
 While regional and ethnic representation in government was diverse, real power re-
 mained in the hands of a few minority ethnic groups from northern and eastern
 Chad, principall the Zaghawa, Bideyat, and Gorane.
 Officially the Deby Government opposes gender discrimination.
 In 1992 the Government began work on a family code which it said would embody
 some legislation to protect rights of women; the code was in a final draft at year's
 end. However, culture and tradition among many of Chad's various ethnic groups
 perpetuate the de facto subordinate status of women. Much of the agricultural work
 on subsistence farms is done by women. Neither traditional law nor the Penal Code
 specifically protects women's rights. The literacy rate for women is significantly
 lower than for men, and a 1991 United Nations Development Program study stated
 that on average females receive one-third of the education of males.
 A few women are found in higher positions in the Government as well as in com-
 merce, the professions, and the military. The Ministry of Public Health and Social
 Affairs actively promoted women's rights by conducting a series of seminars on
 women's rights and health issues. One of the independent human rights organiza-
 tions, the ATPDH, is headed by a woman. One private women's advocacy group is
 authorized, the Association of Women in Distress in Chad.
 Household violence directed against women, including wife beating, is believed to
 be common, and women have only limited legal recourse against abusive spouses.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is widespread in Chad. According to an
 
 
 independent expert, the percentage of Chadian women who have undergone this
 procedure may be as high as 60 percent. This practice is deeply rooted in tradition,
 both in the north and the south, and is strongly advocated by many Chadians, in-
 cluding women, despite its severe consequences for women's physical and mental
 health. The Deby Government took no action to prohibit the practice.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Over 80 percent of all Chadian workers are involved
 in subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry, or fishing. Involvement in labor orga-
 nizations centers mostly on the public sector and the small, private commercial sec-
 tor.
 The National Charter of March 1991 specifically recognized the right of labor to
 organize, and workers are free to join or form unions of their own choosing. How-
 ever, government authorization is required before unions can commence operations,
 and relations between the Gov.ernment and Chad's principal union federation, the
 Federation of Chadian Trade Unions (UST), were seriously strained by frequent
 strikes (see below). A second, very small federation of unions formed in 1991, the
 Free Federation of Chadian Workers (CLTT), continued to operate in 1992. Neither
 union federation has organizational, financial, or procedural ties to the Government.
 Labor's right to strike was initially respected in 1992, notably in February, when
 labor protested the murder of a human rights activist (see Section L.a.). However,
 a series of general strikes called by the UST to protest late salary payments to gov-
 ernment workers and, subsequently, to combat government austerity measures
 aimed at lowering salaries and raising taxes of civil servants, led to increasing gov-
 ernment intervention. On October 11, the Deby Government announced the suspen-
 sion for an indefinite period of the UST's authority to function and banned all union
 activity to ensure a 'social truce." The UST called for another strike to begin No-
 vember 5. On November 4, the police arrested, without legal warrant, the president
 and the deputy secretary general of the UST and held them overnight for question-
 ing. No charges were brought. On November 16, the Government lifted the suspen-
 sion of the UST and permitted labor to resume activities. The UST agreed to rescind
 the strike call but continued to discuss with the Government both the reinstatement
 of 1,000 civil servants, who were suspended for earlier participation in the strikes,
 and payment of their wages.
 Shortly after the Government's suspension of the UST, members of an Inter-
 national Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) delegation, formed to conduct
 a firsthand inquiry into the suspension of the UST, were denied visas in Brussels
 and Paris by the Chadian authorities. While the International Labor Organization
 (ILO) has not yet taken a stand on the UST suspension, the ILO Committee on
 Freedom of Association held earlier in the year that the Government's administra-
 tive dissolution of UNST, the predecessor organization of the UST, in May 1991 con-
 stitutes a clear violation of ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association.
 There was no government restriction on labor union participation in international
 labor conferences before the suspension of the UST. In early November, however,
 the Government prevented the UST deputy secretary general from attending the
 ICFTU's regional meeting for Africa held in Morocco.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Chadian law does not specifi-
 c ally protect collective bargaining; both the National Charter and the Labor Code
 contain only generalized provisions for the rights of labor. The Government sets
 wages in the public sector and employers set wages in the private sector. However,
 unions actively negotiated with government and private employers on such issues
 as pay scales, benefits, taxes, strikes and a new labor code. Chadian law does not
 specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, and there is no formal mechanism for
 resolving complaints of such. discrimination. There are no export processing zones
 in Chad.
 c. Prohibition of Forced qr Compulsory Labor.-While there is no specific prohibi-
 tion on forced or compulsozrlabor in Chadian law, such labor did not occur in 1992.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 14 in the wage sector, but there is only limited enforcement of this
 law by the Ministry of Civil Service and Labor. In practice, employment of children
 was almost nonexistent, except on family farms.
 Approximately 600 minors between the ages of 14 and 17 were reported to be in
 the army. One objective of the Deby Government was to reorganize the army and
 release minors from the ranks. This process was to have begun in 1992 with the
 Government coordinating closely with the United Nations International Children's
 Education Fund to provide reintegration of the children into civilian society. No evi-
 dence exists that children were released as of the end of 1992.
 
 
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The draft labor and social welfare code that
 was prepared in 1988 with ILO assistance continued to be reviewed in 1992 but was
 not approved for issuance due to government/labor disagreement on terms for a new
 minimum wage scale. Meanwhile, minimum wages established administratively
 under the Habre regime remained unchanged under the Deby Government. Nation-
 wide minimum wage levels exist for separate categories of work. Minimum wages
 are insufficient to support subsistence much less maintain an adequate standard of
 living. Some workers rely on second jobs, subsistence agriculture, and assistance
 from the extended family. In an effort to control serious budget deficits, in 1992 the
 Government lowered wages of public employees and raised tax rates. Because of a
 severe fiscal crisis, due in part to a serious corruption problem, the pay of both civil
 servants and the military was in arrears by several months, with the problem worse
 in the provinces.
 Most nonagricultural work is limited by law to 48 hours per week with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural workers are statutorily limited to 2,400
 work hours per year. All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per
 week. The Labor Code recognizes the necessity for occupational health and safety
 standards, including labor inspectors with the authority to enforce them. There is
 no indication that such health and safety standards exist in practice, nor that in-
 spectors have been appointed.