 CHAD
 Chad was a defacto one-party state headed by President Hissein
 Habre until early December when he was overthrown forcibly by
 Idriss Deby, leader of the Patriotic Salvation Movement
 (MPS). In his first few days in power, Deby abolished the
 constitution of 1989 and dissolved most governmental
 institutions. He promised, however, to install democratic
 government, including, eventually, a strengthened national
 assembly, and to respect human rights. He also welcomed into
 his provisional Government members of the Habre regime who
 were not tainted by allegations of human rights and other
 abuses. Habre's government was authoritarian, deriving
 support from the military, which in turn was dominated by
 President Habre's Gorane ethnic group. Habre had begun a
 process of change from the top in 1989-1990, including the
 adoption of a new constitution and multicandidate elections
 for the National Assembly, which convened for the first time
 in October. The Assembly was dissolved by Idriss Deby.
 The Habre government operated a large and complex security and
 military apparatus that included the Army, the National
 Police, the National Security Service (DDS), and a
 Presidential Security Service. Again in 1990, there were
 credible reports of human rights abuses committed by the
 military and other security forces, especially the DDS. Some
 DDS officers were removed in 1990 for alleged corruption.
 Within a few days of assuming power, President Deby moved to
 integrate his forces with the Army, and he disbanded the DDS.
 Chad is one of the poorest countries in the world, with an
 estimated per capita income of $205 per annum. The national
 literacy rate is estimated at 25 percent, and 95 percent of
 the population is engaged in subsistence agriculture, fishing,
 and stockraising. Cotton is Chad's most important export.
 The Government relies heavily on external financial support,
 especially from France, to meet recurring budgetary costs and
 virtually 100 percent of government investment.
 Despite the promise of the new 1989 constitution, human rights
 remained circumscribed in 1990. The Habre government failed
 to address the numerous allegations of extrajudicial
 executions, torture and harsh treatment of prisoners,
 indefinite and incommunicado detentions, and denial of fair
 trial, and it maintained tight restrictions on freedoms of
 speech, press, assembly, and association, as well as the right
 of citizens to change their government democratically.
 Discrimination against women and restrictions on worker rights
 remained serious problems. On the other hand, the 1990
 legislative elections seemed fair and offered Chadians a range
 of choice previously unknown.
 The Deby regime immediately released all political prisoners
 and allowed the media access to them, including to those
 persons who had been tortured by the Habre regime. Although
 Deby pledged to develop democratic institutions and respect
 for human rights, few specific steps had been taken toward
 these goals by the end of 1990.
 
 
 CHAD
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 During most of 1990 there were reliable reports, including
 from Amnesty International (AI) sources, that the Chadian Army
 used extreme measures against civilian populations of eastern
 villages believed to harbor MPS rebels. (The MPS was then an
 insurgent force consisting primarily of the Zaghawa ethnic
 group operating out of western Sudan.) These included charges
 of summary executions, arbitrary arrests, and incommunicado
 detentions of men, women, and children related to rebels.
 Government secrecy under Habre made it very difficult to
 corroborate allegations of these or other human rights
 abuses. However, the summary executions of Zaghawa dissidents
 reportedly took place subsequent to government/rebel military
 battles during March and April. There were no reliable
 estimates of how many persons died through such extrajudicial
 killings. The Habre government denied these allegations, but
 it had not made any effort to investigate them or to respond
 to inquiries about them before its ouster. They were also
 reliable reports of arbitrary killings of civilians by Habre
 forces as they fled Chad in December.
 The Deby Government reported that Dr. Ramadane Amoli, a leader
 of a Hadjerai opposition group, died while detained by the
 Habre regime. No other details were available.
 Reports also coitinued to circulate in 1990 that the military
 forces had committed abuses, including summary executions,
 against Hadjerai dissidents in southeastern Chad. Many of
 these reports, however, may have referred to abuses committed
 in previous years.
 b. Disappearance
 Politically motivated disappearances of Zaghawa and Hadjerai
 dissidents took place in 1990. Direct military actions in
 eastern Chad probably caused civilian and military casualties
 in 1990 which may account for some reported disappearances.
 The Habre government contended that many reports of
 disappearances of Zaghawas were false, and that these persons
 were either Sudanese Zaghawas who returned to Sudan, or
 Chadian Zaghawas who fled to Sudan.
 The Government took no action in 1990 to clarify the fate of
 hundreds of Chadian soldiers loyal to ex-President Goukouni
 Oueddai who were captured in 1983 by Habre forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 First-hand accounts of cases of gross mistreatment and torture
 by Habre regime officials came to light after Deby's
 assumption of power. The national and international media
 provided detailed coverage of torture by the DDS under Habre,
 including a graphic account by Gali Ngothe. Ngothe, a former
 adviser to Habre and the new Minister of Higher Education
 under Deby, was detained for distributing antigovernment
 tracts and severely tortured by first being forced to drink
 excessive amounts of water and then dropped from a ceiling
 beam. Some released political prisoners presented to the
 
 
 CHAD
 media were unable to walk and bore scars of torture. Chadian
 television broadcast reports on police detention facilities
 and featured close-up views of partially covered corpses with
 bound wrists and feet, as well as of electrical torture
 instruments.
 The special AI report of February 5, 1990, stressed that
 former prisoners' testimonies, corroborated by medical
 examinations, indicated beatings and whippings were widespread
 throughout Chad's detention centers. Practices by guards
 included the use of electric shocks on prisoners' bodies. The
 AI report also stated that soldiers had forced women prisoners
 to serve as prostitutes. Habre's government never made a
 public commitment to investigate possible abuses or to enforce
 human rights guaranteed by the constitution.
 Prison conditions in Chad under the Habre regime were poor,
 and deaths due to malnutrition occurred. Most prisoners were
 dependent on their families for food, sleeping mats,
 medicines, and other necessities. Political prisoners were
 often held incommunicado, denied medical attention, and
 frequently moved. Families of common criminals, however, had
 daily access.' Military prisoners were separated from civilian
 prisoners in special detention centers. Conditions were much
 the same in all prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitution and the penal code under Habre provided for
 safeguards against arbitrary arrests and gave detainees
 specific rights, including the right to counsel and the right
 to be promptly presented with charges. In practice, however,
 the Habre government used its absolute power to arrest and
 detain persons without a legal warrant and without checks by
 the judiciary. Actions, publications, or verbal expressions
 that were considered critical of government policy were likely
 to be interpreted as seditious and led to arrest and detention
 without charge, trial, or access to counsel or family.
 According to the AI special report, a system of secret
 detention was condoned at the highest level of government.
 Gali Ngothe claimed he heard Habre's voice over a radio
 directing his torture. The DDS was the main agency that
 detained political prisoners. The Habre government admitted
 "exceptional detentions" of government opponents but never
 clarified the meaning of this category.
 The total number of political detainees held in Chad during
 Habre's last year in power is not known, but it is believed
 that 180 Hadjerai and 200 Zaghawa, including children, were
 still being held incommunicado at the time of his fall. A
 number of persons loyal to ex-president Goukouni Oueddai also
 remained in detention then. Most of those prisoners had never
 been charged or brought to trial. The Habre government denied
 holding political prisoners. At least 30 political detainees
 were released by Deby forces in December.
 While the Habre government would not release a definite count,
 a significant number of Libyan prisoners of war (POW's)--
 probably 2,000--had remained in Chadian camps since 1987. In
 August the government permitted the International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit 53 Libyan POW's scheduled for
 release. Also in 1990, the African Jurists' Association
 visited all Libyan POW's in"detention and reported that their
 treatment and condition were satisfactory. In December the
 Deby Government released all remaining Libyans, with roughly
 
 
 CHAD
 400 electing to return to Libya and others seeking asylum
 elsewhere.
 President Habre's program for national reconciliation included
 a call for the return of Chadian exiles. While Goukouni
 remained in exile, many others, including members of
 opposition groups returned and were integrated into the
 government. Unlike previous years, there were no reports of
 detention of returning exiles during 1990. Deby has also
 invited new exiles to return without fear of reprisal. At
 year's end, several hundred refugees who had fled the Habre
 regime had reportedly returned to Chad; others were taking a
 wait-and-see attitude.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Deby's plans for the role and organization of the judiciary
 were not clear at year's end. The constitution under Habre
 called for an independent judiciary, but this goal was not
 realized. In practice, the civilian judicial system did not
 deal with political offenses or the large number of political
 detainees. Trials in criminal cases were open or clQsed, at
 the discretion of the Habre government. Persons arrested for
 political or security-related offenses were detained in
 secret, tried in secret, and formal charges were not publicly
 announced.
 Chad's judicial system is at best rudimentary. Twenty years
 of civil war severely disrupted the modern legal system,
 modified from the French colonial legal system. Three forms
 of courts existed in Chad under the Habre regime: a civilian
 judiciary called for under the constitution, a traditional
 system presided over by village sheiks and sultans, and the
 powerful security-military system. Progress was particularly
 slow in government efforts to institute civilian law
 enforcement and civilian courts in prefectures outside the
 capital.
 The constitution under Habre called for the eventual
 establishment of a supreme court. One appellate court was
 seated in the capital. It reviewed decisions of lower courts
 and was charged with judging all cases that called for more
 than a 2-year penalty. There were several nonpolitical cases
 in 1990 in which the courts ruled against the government, but
 the judiciary remained subject to influence by the executive
 branch. Due to the shortage of magistrates and justices of
 the peace outside of N'Djamena, military district commanders
 acted as judges in civil and criminal cases. Access to
 attorneys was guaranteed under the law, but in practice was
 allowed only with the consent of the authorities. There were
 only three private attorneys in the country.
 The traditional or customary system of justice, common in
 rural areas and used for civil matters, is not codified.
 However, traditional law and judgments are generally respected
 by the population. Under Habre, appeal by law was possible to
 the regular civilian courts but rarely occurred.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the Habre regime homes could be searched by law only
 during daytime hours and only under authority of a warrant.
 In practice, security persornel searched homes and arrested
 occupants without a warrant from judicial authorities. Though
 
 
 74
 CHAD
 many high-ranking officials belonged to Habre's party, the
 National Union for Independence and Revolution (UNIR),
 membership was not required, including for government
 employment.
 Surveillance of persons and monitoring of telephone
 conversations was sporadic. Correspondence was often checked
 if carried overland within Chad. However, there was no
 indication that international mail or internal correspondence
 forwarded through the Chadian postal system was monitored.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The constitution provided for freedom of speech, but in
 practice public or private statements which the Habre
 government considered seditious or liable to incite opposition
 were not permitted. Self-censorship was exercised by many
 Chadians who opposed the government. The government detained
 persons for expressing views, either verbally or in writing,
 critical of the government, including in 1990 advocating a
 multiparty system. Opposition views were not voiced in the
 media.
 Chadian television, radio, and the two newspapers were
 government controlled under Habre, and Deby has continued this
 practice. In the early days of the Deby government,
 journalists were allowed great latitude in publishing and
 broadcasting to a degree unknown under the Habre regime.
 Foreign publications are available in Chad, and there were no
 reports that foreign publications were censored or withdrawn
 from circulation during 1990. The academic system is state
 supported, but under Habre generally operated free of
 government control of curriculum or course content. Class
 discussions were subject to the same restrictions imposed on
 the media.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While freedom of assembly was provided for in the new
 constitution under Habre, in practice antigovernment
 demonstrations or meetings were not permitted. There were no
 known attempts in 1990 by the population to assemble to
 express antigovernment views.
 Freedom of association was also promised by the constitution,
 but political interaction among persons and groups opposed to
 the Habre government would have been interpreted by the
 government as a threat to state security.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Chad is officially a secular state in which Islam,
 Christianity, and other religions are practiced without
 official constraint. Both Islamic and Christian holidays are
 given official status. More than 50 percent of Chad's
 population is Muslim, and Chad is a member of the Organization
 of the Islamic Conference. Christian and other missionaries
 may enter the country to proselytize and perform public
 assistance work. Christian missionaries are most active in
 the non-Muslim south. In 1990 there were no reports of
 harassment for religious views, and strictly religious
 publications are disseminated without government restriction.
 
 
 75
 CHAD
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Most Chadians enjoy freedom to move around the country, except
 within military zones or areas of recent or potential combat.
 Clearance by internal security services is required for
 international travel. In 1990 this did not appear to impede
 travel by most applicants, but it provides the means for the
 Habre government to bar travel by anyone considered an
 opponent of the government. Chadians are free to emigrate and
 have the right to return.
 In the past, thousands of Chadians fled drought and civil war
 to settle in neighboring countries. Several hundred refugees
 returned in 1990, and government organizations assisted them.
 There were no indications that returning refugees were
 ill-treated in 1990.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1990 under Habre, Chadians lacked the right to change their
 government by democratic means. Deby's provisional Government
 abolished the constitution and many institutions of the Habre
 regime. Deby has promised to install a multiparty system, but
 he had not announced any specific steps by the end of the year
 toward this goal. While the 1989 constitution called for
 separation of power among the executive, legislative, and
 judicial branches of government, the executive under President
 Habre held all authority. President Habre governed through a
 Council of Ministers and a National Consultative Council, the
 members of which were appointed by him and chosen for regional
 and ethnic balance.
 The new constitution, adopted by popular referendum in 1989,
 provided for universal, secret suffrage, presidential
 elections every 7 years, and elections for the National
 Assembly every 5 years. In December 1989, President Habre, as
 the sole candidate of his party, UNIR, was elected to a 7-year
 term. The constitution was silent on the matter of political
 parties, but only one political party, UNIR, was permitted
 under Habre.
 The 1990 elections for the National Assembly were hotly
 contested with as many as eight candidates vying for a single
 seat. Party membership was not required for candidacy. There
 was no evidence of government interference, and a number of
 government candidates were defeated. A significant number of
 the new delegates were not members of UNIR.
 Throughout 11 months of 1990, Chad continued to face
 substantial external and internal threats on two fronts, from
 Libya in the north, which occupies the Aozou border strip, and
 from the MPS, an insurgent group dominated by the Zaghawa and
 Hadjerai ethnic groups, operating out of western Sudan.
 Direct military engagements between the Chadian Army and the
 insurgents occurred in March and April 1990, resulting in
 substantial loss of life .on hoth sides. In November the MPS
 launched an offensive from Sudan which toppled the Habre
 regime within several weeks.
 
 
 CHAD
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1990 Chad cooperated with the ICRC and the African Jurists'
 Association, by allowing access to some of the Libyan POW's
 detained since 1987. Also, in late 1990 the Habre government
 expressed a willingness to respond to AI's charges of serious
 human rights violations. It asserted that AI's allegations
 were unfounded, and up to the date of its fall had not
 released any information about specific abuses or about
 possible future investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are approximately 200 ethnic groups in Chad. They are
 roughly divided among Saharan and Arab Muslims in the northern
 and eastern regions, and Bantu peoples, who practice either
 Christianity or animist religions, in the south. Sustained
 civil war since 1965, revolving around ethnic disputes, has
 badly fractured any sense of national identity. From 1979 to
 1982, when Habre took power, as many as 11 different armies,
 representing different ethnic groups or political
 orientations, battled each other. De facto discrimination by
 the formerly dominant Gorane ethnic group against other
 groups, and the backlash against that discrimination, were
 major factors in the fall of the Habre government. National
 reconciliation will be difficult to achieve, given Chad's
 history and the deep divisions among its many ethnic groups.
 Officially, the Habre government opposed discrimination, and
 Chadian women had full political equality and protection under
 the law. However, culture and tradition among many of Chad's
 various ethnic groups are strongly patriarchal and accord
 women lower status. Neither traditional law nor the Chadian
 civil and penal codes fully.protect women's rights. The
 literacy rate for women is significantly lower than for men.
 A few women are found in higher positions in government as
 well as in commerce, the professions, and the military, and
 both the party and the government at cabinet level have spoken
 of the need to advance women's rights. Nonetheless, women
 face a host of problems.
 Household violence directed against women is believed to be
 common, and women have only limited legal recourses against
 abusive spouses. Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is
 widespread in Chad, particularly in the south. While the
 Habre government expressed opposition to circumcision, no laws
 were enacted to prohibit the practice, which is deeply rooted
 in traditional religious attitudes of many Chadians.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Given the level of economic development, Chad's labor movement
 is in its infancy. Eighty percent of all Chadian workers are
 involved in subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry, or
 fishing. Involvement in labor organizations centers mostly on
 the public sector and the small commercial sector.
 Under Habre workers were fre6 to join or form unions of their
 own choosing. However, all unions were required to join the
 government-sanctioned umbrella organization, the National
 
 
 CHAD
 Union of Chadian Trade Unions (UNST). In 1990 UNST claimed to
 operate as a labor organization separate from party and
 government control, but with procedural ties to the Ministry
 of Labor, i.e., the government had the right to approve
 certain appointments to union positions. There was in fact
 some government liberalization of controls on UNST, which
 included officially separating it from UNIR and allowing UNST
 to be financially independent of the government. However,
 UNST and member unions were subject to the sameconstraints as
 other institutions and required to restrict voicing opposition
 to government policy. By the end of 1990, there was no
 indication on the Deby Government's policy towards unions.
 Under Habre strikes were allowed only if authorized by the
 Government. There were no prohibitions on unions
 participating in or joining international labor
 organizations. The Deby Government has given no indication
 that labor activity or strikes would be restricted. Several
 strikes of short duration took place in December, and
 solutions were negotiated with the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion
 discrimination, but antiunionism was not an issue in Chad
 during 1990.
 While the right of labor to bargain collectively was provided
 under Chadian law under Habre, these rights were substantially
 weakened by provisions that allowed the Habre government to
 intervene in the collective bargaining process and that
 required bargaining parties to submit collective agreements to
 the government for approval prior to the agreements coming
 into force. At year's end the Deby Government had given no
 indication of what role it would take in the collective
 bargaining process.
 Minimum wages were set by the government through the Ministry
 of Labor. Although a union could participate in negotiations
 with the Habre government, labor organizations had no
 effective leverage to force the government to accede to labor
 demands.
 There are no export processing zones in Chad.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no specific prohibition on forced or compulsory labor
 in Chadian law. In 1990 there were no reports of forced or
 compulsory labor in the agricultural or other private
 sectors. Forced conscription of males for military service
 continued under Habre in 1990, and young men, including
 juveniles, were rounded up on the streets.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment of children is 14 in the wage
 sector, but enforcement of this law is limited. In practice,
 employment of children is almost nonexistent, except on family
 farms, due to the shortage of work for adults.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Nationwide minimum wage scales'exist for separate categories
 of work, with the lowest permissible salary being
 
 
 78
 CHAD
 approximately $25 per month. Minimum wages are insufficient
 to support subsistence much less an acceptable standard of
 living. Many workers rely on second jobs, subsistence
 agriculture, and/or assistance from the extended family.
 Most nonagricultural work is limited by law to 48 hours per
 week with overtime paid for supplementary hours. Agricultural
 workers are statutorily limited to 2,400 work hours per year.
 All workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per
 week. Occupational health and safety standards have been
 established for the work environment, but enforcement is rare.
 Chad's poverty and limited economy make salaried work a
 precious .commodity. Both enforcement of laws and
 employee-generated complaints on work conditions are nearly
 nonexistent. The principal employer in Chad is the Government
 which, due to a severely restricted budget, had difficulty
 paying its own employees during 1990.
 
 
 79
