 CHAD
 Since 1982, Chad has been governed by a military regime led by
 President Hissein Habre. Relying upon the armed forces as his
 power base, Mr. Habre heads a Council of Ministers which,
 along with an appointed National Consultative Council,
 comprises the executive and legislative branches of the
 Government. The multiethnic National Union for Independence
 and Revolution (UNIR):was created in 1984 to broaden Habre's
 political base, and in'1985it continued to be the only
 legally authorized politicallmovement. President Habre is now
 making a concerted-effort to-create a truly national
 government and end-the complex civil war that has raged with
 varying intensity for over 20 years. The long conflict has
 produced-massive dislocations of Chadians and heavy civilian
 and.military casualties. Habre's efforts toward national
 reconciliation-are inhibited, however, by the continued
 occupation of the northern 40 percent of the country (mainly
 desert) by over 5,000 Libyan soldiers in alliance with rebel
 forces headed by ex-President Goukouni Oueddei, the leader of
 the so-called Transitional Government of National Unity
 (GUNT). Furthermore, the Libyans support much of the rebel
 activity in central and southern Chad, which involves forces
 tied at least nominally to GUNT vice president Colonel Wadel
 Kamougue.
 Although rebel activity in the South decreased during 1985,
 insurgent attacks against military and civilian targets still
 occurred sporadically and remain a constant threat. The
 vigorous and often indiscriminate government responses to
 these attacks have produced cycles of violence and human
 rights violations. Government soldiers and rebels alike
 sometimes pillage and murder, and many in the countryside
 continue to fear for their lives and consequently flee to
 neighboring countries.
 Chad is desperately poor. Its Government is debt-ridden and
 its population of 5 million has the lowest annual per capita
 gross national product (GNP) in the world: less than $80. In
 1985, however, the severe regional drought abated and
 prospects for good harvests improved. Economic and especially
 famine disaster was averted by the nearly $200 million of
 foreign assistance provided in 1985 for emergency food aid and
 development projects. The Chadian Government obtains most of
 its revenues from customs duties and an export tax on cotton.
 The cotton crop continues to be a favorite target of the
 rebels.
 During the years of the most intense period in the civil war,
 1979 to 1982, judicial and other civil institutions that might
 have protected human rights disintegrated and are only
 beginning to be reestablished in the nonoccupied areas. Armed
 conflict in the South accounted for many of the worst human
 rights abuses during 1985. However, the prospects for good
 harvests, healthier and more abundant livestock, steady
 reconstruction, together with war-weariness, a growing respect
 for President Habre's ability to govern, and increasing
 discord among the armed opposition, encouraged many rebels to
 abandon the insurgency and join with the Government.
 Libyan-occupied northern Chad remains closed to outside
 observers, and it is difficult to document human rights abuses
 there. The Chadian Government has accused the Libyans of
 forcibly deporting Chadians to labor camps and prisons in
 Libya, of compelling Chadian women to marry Libyan soldiers,
 and of imposing strict controls on virtually all civilian
 movement.
 
 
 68
 CHAD
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 SECTION 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 With the North firmly under Libyan military occupation, the
 fighting in 1985 was mostly between the Government and rebels
 in southern Chad. As a carry-over from 1984, when the
 insurgency in the south was much worse, de facto martial law
 continues in some southern provinces. Southerners suspected
 of supporting rebel commandos ("CODOS") against the Government
 have been victimized by the often poorly trained and
 disciplined government soldiers.
 There were many examples of both government and rebel violence
 in 1985: In February, in villages near Danamadji (Moyen Chari
 Province), government troops killed 50 civilians in an attempt
 to avenge the deaths of 12 National Armed Forces (FANT)
 soldiers at the hands of "CODOS". In April, presidential
 guards reportedly killed 17 villagers in Gondey. Early in the
 year, government forces executed 55 Democratic Revolutionary
 Council (CDR) rebels and suspected rebel sympathizers in the
 town of Mongo (Guera Province) without proper trial. In May,
 a seismic testing crew discovered 17 bodies in a stream bed
 west of Bebedjia (Logone Oriental Province). It was not
 determined if these were victims of government troops or
 "CODOS". In mid-June, "CODO" rebels pillaged two villages
 outside of Mongo and killed one farmer. In late July,
 government troops rounded up and killed approximately 60
 civilians in the village of Ngalo (Moyen Chari), many of them
 suspected of complicity with the rebels. President Habre,
 reportedly outraged, ordered that the two troop commanders,
 ostensibly the instigators of the massacre, be executed in the
 same village. "CODO" rebels killed the subprefect of
 Baibokoum in August, possibly in retaliation for the Ngalo
 massacre. Also in August, presidential guards killed five men
 and one child in Dogoininga. Dissension between Libyan and
 GUNT forces in Faya Largeau during September resulted in well
 over 60 deaths with many wounded. In late October, "CODO"
 rebels attacked a group of nomadic herders outside of Beinamar
 (Logone Occidental) and killed about 80 people. In November,
 "CODOS" burned the cotton crop of the Canton of Tchagara
 (Logone Occidental) and mutilated the Canton chief by cutting
 off his ears.
 Innocent victims also suffered as a result of FANT military
 operations against "CODO" rebels along the border with the
 Central African Republic (CAR). Chadian government troops
 reportedly invaded refugee camps in the CAR in late January,
 killing some 30 suspected rebels and sympathizers once they
 had taken them back into Chad. In anti-"CODO" operations in
 southern Moyen Chari, many civilians were killed by FANT
 troops in Maro subprefecture. The office of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the CAR reported
 that, as a result of these border operations, Chadians seeking
 refuge in the CAR increased by 25 percent in February and
 March. It was also reported that in December government
 troops entered northern Cameroon and attacked a group of
 Chadian refugees, injuring 35 or more persons.
 
 
 CHAD
 b. Disappearance
 According to Amnesty International, in its 1985 report
 (covering 1984), most reported disappearances and
 extrajudicial executions took. place during the operations in
 southern Chad, and many, occurred in.the fail of.1984 at the
 hand of government forces. In.1985,. there were again reports
 of disappearances, attributable to both government and
 opposition forces, but.the total number seems to have dropped
 from'1984. Many Chadians have fled-to neighboring countries
 to escapethe fighting and the-drought (see 2d below).
 There was a hostage-taking incident intFebruary in which three
 American oil company employees-were kidnapped by rebel
 commandos near Sarh (Moyen Chari). One of the hostages was
 almost immediately released; the other two were freed unharmed
 a few days--later when government troops swept the rebel
 hideout.. Anotherincident involving the abduction by rebels
 of two,.American oil company employees in southern Chad (Logone
 Oriental Province) occurred in late November. The hostages
 escaped unharmed in early December while government troops
 searching the area were engaged in combat with their rebel
 captors.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Many"incidents of torture and degrading treatment reportedly
 occurred in 1985 in connection with the fighting. In the
 countryside, government forces have been accused of arson and
 of humiliation of persons thought to-be sympathetic to rebel
 forces. There are occasional reports that rebels in southern
 Chad have maimed peasants who plant certain crops, primarily
 cotton, the most important source of revenue for the
 Government. One form of punishment is said to be the
 amputation of hands.
 Chadian prisoners of war from the National Transitional Unity
 Government (GUNT) forces are known to be held in N'Djamena and
 in the provinces. These POW's, several hundred in number, are
 not known to be singled out for mistreatment. In some
 instances, they may fare better than other prisoners to the
 extent that the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) is able to provide medical care and food for them. The
 ICRC has not been authorized access to the estimated 20 Libyan
 POW's being held by Chadian authorities nor to any political
 detainees.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In unoccupied Chad the judicial system and criminal code have
 evolved primarily from the body of law inherited from the
 former colonial power, France. In theory, this law
 incorporates safeguards against arbitrary arrest and specifies
 detainee rights, including the right to counsel and to be
 informed promptly of charges. However, in practice, civil
 strife over 20 years has severely disrupted the legal system,
 especially the operation of the courts. The Government and
 many opposing factions have felt few legal constraints in
 prosecuting military actions. De facto martial law remains in
 effect in a numberof southern provinces and Islamic law
 reportedly is used exclusively in the Libyan-occupied North.
 In particular, there are no legal safeguards in either area
 for persons thought-to be endangering the security of the
 State.
 
 
 CHAD
 Amnesty International has expressed concern in its 1985 report
 about the detention without trial of-suspected opponents of
 the Government as well as similar detention without trial of
 political opponents of GUNT. The Government contends that
 detainees are not prisoners of conscience, but
 prisoners-of-war captured in combat or counterinsurgency
 operations. Few, if any, of them have been charged with
 treason or espionage before the judiciary.
 Nevertheless, the Government released many political detainees
 in 1985, especially in the spring, for policy reasons, i.e.,
 to encourage national reconciliation. About 450 persons were
 freed during a three month period starting in early March.
 The Chadian Government continues to report that there are
 large-scale deportations of Chadians from the northern portion
 of the country to Libya for indoctrination, assimilation,
 forced labor, or military service in the Islamic Legion. The
 most well-known case of detention in the North was that of
 Acheikh ibn Oumar, leader of the Democratic Revolutionary
 Council (CDR), one of the factions previously aligned with
 ex-president Goukouni's GUNT forces. He was seized in
 November 1984 and imprisoned until his release in November
 1985.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has been critical
 of Chad in the past for the use of forced labor and in 1985
 sent a delegation to consult with Chadian officials on several
 outdated labor laws which do not meet ILO norms, including the
 ILO's conventions on forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Despite the civil war and Libyan occupation in the North, the
 Government since 1982 has been giving attention to rebuilding
 the judicial system in the more secure areas, notably in towns
 under government control. There are very few trained legal
 people in Chad, but the Government continued in 1985 when
 possible to appoint additional judges and investigating
 magistrates to handle regular civil and criminal cases. In
 February, the Council of Ministers established a special court
 of justice, inaugurated by the President in April, to try
 cases involving embezzlement of public funds and abuse of
 public office. Notwithstanding this progress, under the
 existing legal system the judiciary remains dependent on the
 chief executive.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Chadian law, homes may be searched only during the day
 and under authority of a warrant. In practice, however, there
 are many instances where this law has not been respected in
 the present civil strife. Private property has been seized
 and utilized as desired by soldiers, deserters, and bandits in
 all parts of Chad.
 In Libyan-occupied northern Chad there reportedly have been
 forced resettlements of Chadians and forced marriages between
 Chadian women and Libyan soldiers/colonizers.
 
 
 71
 CHAD
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Temporary detention is a likely penalty for publishing or
 spreading information considered contrary to the Government's
 interests. The Government owns most media (radio stations, a
 mimeographed daily news bulletin, and the weekly UNIR
 magazine). Chadian journalists are employees of the
 Government and practice self-censorship. Chadian law
 enforcement officials are known to "discourage" Chadians from
 listening to Radio Bardai, the rebel radio station in the
 North, which is actually located in Libya.   Private groups
 (religious and otherwise) publish nonpolitical information
 freely, and ideologically hostile foreign magazines and
 newspapers are sometimes on sale in the capital. Since late
 July, however, the distribution and sale of the Paris-based
 journal Afrique-Asie has been banned because of its persistent
 criticism of the Chadian Government. This is the first
 instance of an outright government ban since 1982. In 1985,
 the Government instituted the censorship of video cassettes,
 along with the control and licensing of video clubs and their
 commercial outlets.
 Freedoms of speech, press, and assembly are tightly controlled
 in the Libyan-occupied North where the use of French, one of
 the two official languages of Chad, has been largely
 proscribed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In government-controlled Chad, there is no forced membership
 in any political organization. However, voluntary membership
 is legally limited to the various components of the sole
 authorized movement, the National Union for Independence and
 Revolution (UNIR), which has endeavored throughout 1985 to
 strengthen and extend its organization.
 Chad's labor laws have provisions for freedom of association
 for workers, for confederation of unions, and for the right to
 bargain collectively. The right to strike exists only after
 arbitration at three levels and two ministries (Labor and
 Justice) fails. There are two labor union confederations in
 Chad, both of which are only marginally effective and in large
 part controlled by the Government. These unions are too weak
 and the economy too undeveloped for organized labor to be a
 significant political force.
 In Libyan-occupied northern Chad, the free assembly of
 indigenous Chadians is severely limited, but details are
 lacking.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Government-controlled Chad professes to be a secular state.
 Islam, Christianity, and other religions are freely practiced,
 despite historical pressures favoring Islam in much of the
 country. Both Islamic and Christian holidays are official
 government holidays. More than 50 percent of the population
 is Muslim. In the South, Christian missionaries are
 occasionally accused of sympathizing with "CODO" insurgents,
 but this suspicion is fading, and missionaries continue to
 enter the country, proselytize, and provide assistance to
 local populations. There is no evidence that being a
 non-Muslim subjects one to government disfavor.
 
 
 72
 CHAD
 In Libyan-occupied northern Chad, only the Muslim religion may
 be practiced openly.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Travel in Chad continues to be circumscribed by the presence
 of hostile forces north of the 16th parallel and persistent
 areas of instability in the South. There are few places, in
 fact, where there is no possibility of encounters with
 official or quasi-official roadblocks, highwaymen, or
 opposition forces. Because of the recent severe drought and
 persisting civil strife, thousands of Chadians have fled to
 neighboring countries, most notably some 100,000 to Sudan and
 50,000 to the CentralAfrican Republic. Although the
 agricultural situation improved in 1985, large numbers of
 these displaced persons were reluctant to return to conditions
 of possible deprivation, physical injury, and worse. The
 Government encourages the return of these displaced
 populations, except to Libyan-occupied northern Chad. The
 prefects of the eastern and southern provinces of Ouaddai and
 Moyen Chari are working with relief agencies to establish
 assistance programs to promote the repatriation of these
 persons under secure and manageable conditions. Expatriates
 in Chad are prevented from traveling in certain regions of the
 South because of insecure conditions. Units from relief
 organizations require military escort in some areas.
 International travel is permitted. Chadians may obtain
 regular passports for a fee of-about $45, provided-they have
 been cleared by Chad's internal security services, a process
 which normally takes less than a week.
 The movement of Chadians in the occupied north is reported to
 be tightly controlled and severely restricted.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The present political system does not allow for change of
 government by the people. Chad has been in a state of civil
 strife since 1965, with various factions, and as many as 11
 different armies, contending for control of the country.
 France and Libya are the key outside powers involved in Chad.
 Their 1984 agreement for withdrawal of all foreign troops from
 the country was honored by France and Zaire but violated by
 Libya, whose troops continue to occupy northern Chad.
 Since June 1982, Chad has been governed by President Hissein
 Habre, who heads a French-style Council of Ministers
 complemented by an appointed National Consultative Council
 (CNC) (protolegislature). Both councils are carefully balanced
 with a view toward ethnic and regional harmony. The source of
 President Habre's authority is the allegiance he commands from
 most of the armed forces, the security services, and the
 country's only authorized political movement, the National
 Union for Independence and Revolution (UNIR). The movement was
 created in 1984 as a means to increase Habre's base of support
 and to provide some political participation to the populace.
 UNIR's by-laws mandate the popular election of lower-level
 officials, but, as yet, no electionsphave been scheduled. At
 present, laws, decrees, and ordinances are proposed by the
 President and the Council of Ministers and "discussed" by the
 CNC prior to promulgation.
 
 
 73
 CHAD
 In the occupied northern zone, Chadians must establish
 Libyan-style "People's Committees." The leadership of the
 rebel Transitional Government of National Unity (GUNT) is
 Chadian, headed by former president Goukouni Oueddei. The GUNT
 was initially made up of representatives of several political
 factions, such as the Democratic Revolutionary Council, but
 GUNT support was eroded in 1985 by disillusionment with Libyan
 control and by Habre's increasingly successful efforts at
 national reconciliation. The GUNT is supported by Col. Qadhafi
 and, in effect, serves as a front for the Libyan occupation of
 northern Chad.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Amnesty International expressed its concern in 1984 to the
 Chadian Government about the disappearance or extrajudicial
 execution of hundreds of people detained at the hands of the
 armed forces and about the detention without trial of suspected
 government opponents. On invitation, Amnesty International
 sent a three-man team to meet with government officials in
 March and April to discuss its list of detainees. Many of
 those listed were prisoners-of-war, and others could not be
 identified. Names of only two political detainees remained
 unresolved at the end of the visit, and the Government promised
 to investigate these cases and to respond systematically to
 further inquiries. The Amnesty International team did not
 travel to the South or to the occupied North. Some of Amnesty
 International's concerns, as expressed in its 1985 report, are
 also covered above in Section lb and ld. Freedom House rates
 Chad as "not free."
 In April 1985, the Government accounted in detail for five
 Chadians whose fate had been queried by the Commission on Human
 Rights of the Archdiocese of St. Louis, Missouri.
 As noted above, the Chadian Government permits the ICRC to
 visit many prisoners-of-war, but does not permit ICRC visits to
 political detainees. The Libyans do not permit ICRC visits to
 Chadian prisoners-of-war in the North, although the ICRC is
 continuing its efforts to negotiate with the GUNT for such
 visits.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Chad's population of 5 million is growing at the high rate of
 3.8 percent annually and its people continue to rank among the
 world's most underprivileged. The economy is largely
 subsistence agriculture and herding, with cotton and animal
 products the only significant exports. Per capita GNP is
 estimated to be less than $80 per annum. After over 20 years
 of civil strife, Libyan/rebel occupation of the vast desert
 North, years of drought and increasing desertification, Chad's
 economic and social condition is precarious. Timely
 international disaster relief efforts, an encouraging rainy
 season, and reduced military action have combined in 1985 to
 improve conditions somewhat. Fully a third of the Government's
 budget goes to the military and most of the rest to pay the
 salaries of civil servants. Without a direct budget subsidy
 from France and other foreign assistance, the Government could
 not operate.
 
 
 74
 CHAD
 According to World Bank data for 1985, life expectancy at birth
 is 44 years, and infant mortality is 140 per 1,000 live
 births. Only 30 percent of the population had access to safe
 drinking water in 1980, the last year for which reliable data
 are available. There are no more than 50 Chadian physicians in
 the entire country, complemented by about 70 foreign physicians
 affiliated with nongovernmental organizations. The typical
 Chadian consumed only about 75 percent of the recommended
 caloric requirement in 1977, a year considered good by current
 standards. Approximately 20 percent of the population is
 functionally literate. About one-third of the primary school
 age population is enrolled in school. Female primary school
 enrollment is 18 percent of all school age children versus 50
 percent for males of the same age group.
 The minimum age for employment of children is 14. Chad,
 however, is predominately a labor-intensive agrarian society,
 so exceptions abound. The current minimum wage is
 approximately $22 per month. Nonagricultural work is limited
 to 40 hours per week with overtime to be paid for any excess.
 Agricultural work is limited to 2,400 hours a year. All
 workers must have at least 24 consecutive hours of rest each
 week, usually Sunday. Occupational health and safety are
 provided for by law and ministerial decree.
 In the public domain, women are generally subordinate to men.
 Women contribute greatly to Chad's agricultural productivity in
 virtually all aspects of farming. They also engage in commerce
 ranging from simple market stalls to the ownership of some
 larger businesses. Women constituted 10 percent of the 1985
 freshman class of Chad's national school for livestock
 extension agents. The titular members of agriculture
 cooperatives, however, still tend to be men. Some women serve
 voluntarily in the armed forces, although they are thus far
 excluded from officer training programs. In 1984, a Ministry
 of Social and Women's Affairs was created, headed by a woman
 minister, who is also one of the 15 members of the executive
 bureau of UNIR's central committee. UNIR also has an active
 women's organization. Many women and their children continue
 to be left without adequate means of support, with their
 husbands missing or dead in the civil strife, or away from home
 looking for work.
 Economic and demographic data pertaining to Libyan-occupied
 northern Chad are not available. Reports indicate that sizable
 quantities of livestock have been taken to Libya from northern
 Chad without proper compensation to their Chadian owners, and
 that Libyans use food distribution to keep the local
 populations under control.
 
 
 75
 U,S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: CHAD
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         5.3    16.0     35.4
 LOANS .................     0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      5.3    16.0     35.4
 A.AID ........ .............    2.0    11.0     15.5
 LOANS ..............O....  0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ... ..........       2.0    11.0     15.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.).,.        0.0      3.0      5.0
 B.FOOO  FOR  PEACE .......     3.3      5.0     19.9
 LOANS .................  0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. ..   3.3      5.0    19.9
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      3.3      5.0     19.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.0EV  &  WFP.      1.9      3.8     13.6
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       1.4     1.2      6.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ............. .      0.0      0.0     0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0     0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         0.0      2.2      5.2
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      2.2     5.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS .........        0.0     2.0      5.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....        0.0     0.2      0.2
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL..,     5.3     18.2     40.6
 LOANS .............. ...  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     5.3    18.2     40.6
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .......               0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 ---------------------------------------------------..-----
 TOTAL ........     4.5      5.2     6.2    286.8
 IBRD               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0     80.4
 IDS                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 .AFOB               0.0     0.0      0.0     49.1
 UNOP               4.5      5.2     0.0     34.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      6.2    15.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0    106.8
 
 
 76
