Chad
Political violence continues to destabilize Chad and the human rights climate
remains poor. More than 400,000 civilians live in refugee and displaced persons
camps along Chad’s eastern border with Sudan, at risk of rights abuses, including
child recruitment and gender-based violence. Many conflict-affected civilians are
situated in rural and remote parts of eastern Chad that insecurity puts off limits to
humanitarian actors, including some areas under the control of Chadian rebel
groups.
The past year saw a dramatic escalation in the three-year-old proxy conflict
between Chad and Sudan. A February coup attempt by Chadian rebels backed by
Sudan nearly toppled the government of Chadian President Idriss Deby Itno, and
a raid in May by Sudanese rebels backed by Chad brought fighting to the streets
of a suburb of Khartoum. Efforts by the African Union to mend relations between
N’Djamena and Khartoum have proved fruitless.
February 2008 Coup Attempt
Chadian rebels backed by Sudan invaded Chad from bases in Darfur in January.
By February 2, rebels and government forces were fighting gun battles in
N’Djamena, Chad’s capital. Government tanks and helicopters caused serious
destruction to civilian installations, including the central market. More than 400
civilians were killed and over 1,000 wounded before the rebels retreated back to
Darfur the next day. Spillover from the fighting left Chadian rebels in northern
Cameroon, along with 30,000 Chadian refugees.
In the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup d’etat, three prominent opposition
leaders were arrested. Two were subsequently released, but Ibni Oumar
Mahamat Saleh, the spokesman for a coalition of opposition parties, “disappeared.”
Suspected rebel sympathizers were subject to arbitrary arrest by security
forces, as were members of ethnic groups associated with rebel movements.
While in detention, many civilians were tortured and most were denied due
process.
In March the government convened a Commission of Inquiry to investigate crimes
committed in the wake of the February coup attempt. The Commission issued a
report in September that implicated President Deby’s Presidential Guard in the
disappearance of Ibni Oumar Mahamat Saleh and found that members of the
Chadian security forces were responsible for crimes including arbitrary arrests,
unlawful killings, torture, and rape. Chadian government helicopters were
charged with indiscriminate attacks against civilians. The Commission’s report
represents an important step toward accountability, but did not identify specific
perpetrators of abuses. A follow-up body established by the government to continue
the work of the Commission is composed of 10 ministers and the prime minister–
a lack of independence that suggests limited political willingness to push
investigations forward.
EU-UN Civilian Protection Force
In September 2007 the UN Security Council approved a European Union-United
Nations hybrid operation for the protection of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in eastern Chad. Deployment of the UN humanitarian component,
the United Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), was
subject to extensive delays, and its protection activities in refugee camps and
displacement sites were negligible in 2008.
Deployment of the military component, the European Union Force (EUFOR
Tchad/RCA), began in February 2008, and EUFOR’s 3,300 troops have been successful
in fostering a sense of security in some areas of eastern Chad, particularly
in large towns, refugee camps, and IDP sites. However, IDPs and other conflictaffected
civilians outside large towns received little protection from EUFOR, and
attacks against humanitarian actors in eastern Chad increased despite EUFOR’s
presence in the field.
In December the UN Security Council is expected to expand the operation by
adding up to 3,000 personnel and substituting European Union soldiers with UN
peacekeeping troops.
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons
Eastern Chad is host to over 220,000 refugees from Darfur and more than
180,000 IDPs. Most of the population is concentrated in official camps in the
Chad-Sudan border zone, but thousands of IDPs live in remote “unofficial” sites.
Despite ongoing violence and insecurity, aid agencies reduced IDP food rations.
Coupled with rising commodity prices, this put pressure on IDPs to return to their
villages to cultivate. Camps for IDPs and refugees have become militarized. There
is a high incidence of gender-based abuses in camps, including domestic violence,
rape, early marriage, forced marriage, and child trafficking. Tasks, such as
collecting firewood, expose women and girls to sexual violence. Threats and
attacks against humanitarian aid workers have prompted many organizations to
pull out of the region, leaving many civilians without access to aid.
The Use and Recruitment of Child Soldiers
The use and recruitment of child soldiers by government forces and allied paramilitary
groups is ongoing. The recruitment of children into the Chadian National
Army (ANT) is routine in internally displaced persons sites in the Goz Beida area
of eastern Chad. Children in Sudanese refugee camps in eastern Chad are also
subject to recruitment, primarily by the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), a
Sudanese rebel group that receives backing from the Chadian government.
The government reached a formal agreement with the United Nations Children’s
Fund to demobilize all children from the ANT in May 2007, but more than 93 percent
of the 512 children released from the government army to date were former
members of rebel factions that joined the ANT under the auspices of peace
accords. Demobilization of child soldiers from the ANT itself has been negligible.
In August 2008 the UN Security Council working group on children in armed conflict
confirmed the continued use and recruitment of child soldiers by all parties.
The working group noted that its recommendations issued in a September 2007
report had not been acted upon by the government.
World Bank Pipeline Project
In 1998 the World Bank loaned US$1.2 billion for a pipeline between oil fields in
southern Chad and an offloading terminal in Cameroon, kick-starting Chad’s
petroleum industry. The World Bank’s controversial Revenue Management
Program obligated the government to devote the bulk of its oil revenues to priority
sectors, such as health and education. In September, amid charges that government
officials were unwilling to meet these terms, the Revenue Management
Program was terminated. Citing the government’s non-compliance with the loan
terms, the World Bank secured the early repayment of the outstanding balance,
ending the Bank’s involvement in the pipeline project and freeing the government
of its obligation to earmark revenues to poverty reduction. Government revenue
over the lifetime of the World Bank project totaled at least US$2.5 billion.
Hissène Habré Trial
Senegal’s parliament passed a constitutional amendment in July removing the
final legal obstacle to judicial proceedings against former Chadian president
Hissène Habré, who stands accused of crimes against humanity and torture during
his 1982-1990 rule. The new legislation amended a 2007 law that permitted
the prosecution of cases of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
torture, including crimes committed outside of Senegal. The new law encompasses
crimes committed prior to the enactment of the 2007 law.
Prosecutors are conducting interviews with victims and former officials of the
Habré regime and are examining fourteen complaints filed in September, alongside
documentary evidence from the files of the Bureau of Documentation and
Security, Chad’s former political police. Based on a review of the evidence, the
prosecution will decide whether to file formal charges.
In August prosecutors in Chad accused Habré of providing support to rebel
groups involved in the failed assault on N’Djamena in February, and sentenced
him to death in absentia. Senegal’s Justice Minister expressed concerns that the
decision would interfere with Senegal’s proceedings against Habré, but Chadian
authorities insisted that the ruling pertained only to the events of February 2008.
Key International Actors
France has more than 1,000 troops permanently stationed in Chad and has provided
military intelligence, logistical assistance, medical services, and ammunition
to the Chadian military. During the attempted coup d’etat in February, French
military advisors provided intelligence to their Chadian counterparts, and France
arranged for the delivery of tank ammunition to the beleaguered government
forces on the night of February 2. In the aftermath of the February events, pressure
from France was instrumental in compelling the government to establish the
Commission of Inquiry to investigate possible war crimes. France, with other international
actors, will be pivotal in ensuring the follow-up commission is more
appropriately composed than at the time of writing, and works rigorously and
effectively.
The United States continues to train Chadian commandos in counterterrorism
under the Trans-Saharan Counter-Terrorism Initiative. However, in 2008 security
assistance to Chad came under scrutiny in the US Congress–in September
Senator Richard J. Durbin wrote to US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice questioning
the provision of military assistance despite Chad’s poor human rights
record. The US Child Soldiers Accountability Act, which was signed into law in
October, provides for the prosecution of any individual on US soil for the use and
recruitment of child soldiers, even if the children were recruited or served as soldiers
outside the US. Given the widespread use of child soldiers in Chadian government
forces, the new US law could potentially be applied to Chadian government
officials.
Chad is due to be reviewed under the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of
the UN Human Rights Council in May 2009.
