 CHAD
 judicial requirements in detaining persons (see Section i.e.).
 In security/political cases (the term is very broadly
 interpreted), the Government has a coiipletely free hand.
 Those who express views critical'of the Government, or hold
 views different from it, often are'regarded'as endangering the
 secuiity of tbe-State and may be subject to indefinite
 detefiion without trial.o Many detainees are held
 indoemunliado,,and most are never charged or trieo.
 The total number of poiitical detainees, as distinct from
 prisoneis'of--war, is not known. Among detainees believed held
 with6uit'charge, reportedly because of their political'beliefs
 oitethhic orilins, re:" Gamane Gody; Ahmed Lamina; Moussa
 Konate; Gamane Moussa; Keffine Abouzarga; Djibrine Daoud;
 Djimet Gondje; Issa Kamsoul; Abderamane Tchere; and Dari
 Tchere.'"!
 Between D66ember 1988 and December'1989, the Government
 released 625"Qh~dians' from prison,'including 6n December 22,
 1969, Moukhtar Bachar koukhtar, formerly Secretary of State,
 Ministry 6f Agriculture. M6st were former members of armed
 factions opposed ib the Government, especially the Chadian
 Patrioti6 Fr6nt-(FPTY'which r6ednciled with~the Government in
 1998: *Some of those released were considered political
 prisoners rather than POW's. All were given the option of
 joining (or rejoining) the Chadian armed forces, or of
 feturning.t6''heir former occupations.' The Government has
 steadfastly refused to allow the International Committee of
 thp-Red Cross (kCk) access to Libyn*ris6ners captured since
 1986. In November,'goverfiment puthbritieg met with a,
 high-level delegation of the ICRC, and it was announced that
 an agreeient in principle had been Veached "to prmit the ICRC
 to tak'measures leading to visits to the Libyan POW's."'
 However, by yeai's'end, no such visits had occurred. A number
 of Libyan POW's have joined the Libyan National Salvation
 Front," which is opposed to Colonel Gadhafi's regime and which
 is based in Chad. These Libyans are no longer considered
 POW's by the Government.-
 A humbde of  eople, primafily members of a clan Of the
 H&djerai'ethnic'roup, were'arrested on sequrity grounds in
 1987 and renained in detention during 1989 without charge or
 pFrspects bf eriaf. In December 1988, government. troops
 defeated a band'bf Libyan-backed rebels, most of whom were
 Hadjdrai, and mord Hadjerai suspected of complicity with the
 rebels were arrested and held without charge. According to
 AI, more than 180 persons belonging to the.Hadjerai ethnic
 group were in secret'detention at the beginning of 1989.
 These included a number of children.
 The President hks called for persons in exile to return to
 Chad;,miny'of them h'ave'done so and have been integrated into
 the Governmen. and military. Nevertheless, there also have
 been.iports'of detdntion by government security forces of
 former'Chaoian exiles upon their return to Chad, including
 Hadja M1eami, and her-daughier Azzifie. Although Hadja Merami
 was qubsequently released,'her daughter was reportedly still
 held  ith6ut charge at the end of:1989. President Habre's
 long-time'rival, ex-president Goukduni Oueddei, remained in
 self-imposed exile in 1989.
 With regard to forcq or compulsory labor, sde Section 6.c.
 
 
 72
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Chadian judicial system (the Supreme Court and several
 lower courts) and Criminal Code have evolved from the body of
 law (Napoleonic Code) inherited from the.former colonial
 power, France. This law includes safeguards against arbitrary
 arrests and provides for specified detainee rights, including
 the right to counsel and the right to be promptly informed of
 charges. There is also a traditional system of law presided
 over by sultans and chiefs. It is generally effective and
 fair in resolving property and other civil disputes and in
 dealing with cases involving petty local crime. Decisions in
 customary courts may theoretically be appealed to the regular
 courts.
 Armed conflict over more than 20 years has severely disrupted
 the legal system, and political/security cases almost never
 come before the courts. The Government has made some effort
 to restablish c~vilian law enforcement in liberated areas. AI
 states in its 1989 Report that, since President Habre came to
 power in 1982, no political prisoners have been brought to
 trial or even had their cases referred to judicial
 authorities. AI asserts they have been kept in secret
 detention, under harsh conditions, and are released only when
 it suits the Government's political purposes.
 Whether accused of crimes or security offenses, most Chadians
 do not get speedy trials, in part because of the rudimentary
 nature of the Chadian judicial system. There are only a few
 trained lawyers, judges, and other court personnel. Many of
 Chad's tribunals do not even have law books. The few trained
 judicial officials complain of a heavy backlog of cases.
 Trials can be held in public or private at the option of the
 Government. No legal right to a timely trial exists.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Chadian law, homes may be searched only during the day
 and under authority of a warrant. In practice, there are many
 instances where this law has not been respected, especially in
 areas where ethnic unrest continues. Correspondence carried
 by people traveling overland in Chad is often checed by
 authorities at various points, but correspondence sent through
 the Chadian postal system is less likely to be subjected to
 such controls.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Officially, free speech is assured under Chadian law, but in
 practice public or private statements that the authorities
 consider seditious have led to arrest. There is no prior
 restraint on the publication or broadcast of information in
 Chad, but the media (television, radio, and two newssheets)
 are government controlled and directed, and there is no
 opportunity for opposing views to be heard. The small Chadian
 press corps is careful not to criticize the Government or its
 policies. Occasionally the Government authorizes controlled
 public criticism of individual ministries or agencies of
 government and officials. Academic freedom is nominally
 respected but is subject to similar restraints.
 
 
 73
 CHAD
 The Government's treatment of foreign correspondents, uneven
 in the past, improved in 1989. The Government encouraged
 visits by foreign journalists, facilitated their interviews
 with public officials, and allowed them access to many areas
 of the c6untry long off-limits to the foreign press. It did
 not impose prior censorship, a hange from the past, but
 banned an April issue of Jeune Afrique magazine which
 contained an article about the attempted military revolt.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association-
 Freedom of assembly and association is restricted. Chadians
 may assemble peacefully only as long as the purpose of the
 meeting is not oppbaed to government policies. Prefects have
 the 'nominal right to forbid a meeting, but prior permits are
 not required.unless the gathering anticipated is large enough
 to cause a public hazard.
 Membership in U"IR is voluntary. Although President Habre is
 inteht on having a single mass political movement to which all
 Chadians will belong, he continued to permit the existence of
 a number of small former opposition political groupings.
 For a discusaion of freedom of association as it pertains to.
 Ilaor unions, see Sectioh'f.a.
 *C. Freedom .f Religion
 Chad is officially a secular state in which Islam,
 Christianity, and other religions are practiced freely. Both
 Islamic and Christian holidays are given official status.
 Iore than 50 percent of Chad's population is Muslim, and Chad
 is p member of the Organization of-the Islamic Conference.
 Christian missionaries may, nevertheless, enter the country,
 proselytize, and provide assistance to local populations.
 They are mainly active among the non-uslim ethnic groups in
 the south. Strictly religious publications are allowed to
 circulate freely. The Government neither favors nor disfavors
 members of particular, religions.
 d. Freedoin of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, az- Repatriation
 Chadians enjoy freedom to move around the country except
 within military zones or areas of recent or potential bombat.
 These restrictions generally pertain only to the northern
 one-third of the country and are not enforced for the sparse
 population of that large desert region. In the north,
 retreating Libyan military left thousands of landmines under
 the sand,.which have claimed some'civilian victims.
 International travel, is permitted, but regular passports are
 expensive (about $60), and travelers must be cleared by Chad's
 internal security services, a process which normally takes
 less than a week. Chadians are free to emigrate.
 In the bast, thousands of Chadians fled to neighboring
 countries because of drought and civil strife. As conditions
 began to improve in 1986, most of these displaced Chadians
 returned from neighboring countries,'encouraged by the
 Government. These returnees, as well as those Chadians who
 fled the occupied northern zone, have been well received.
 
 
 74
 CHAD
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the Chadian political system in effect through late
 1989, citizens did not have the right to change their
 Government through elections and referendums. Since June
 1982, Chad has been governed by President Habre, who heads a
 Council of Ministers complemented by an appointed National
 Consultative Council. Both Councils are carefully balanced to
 promote ethnic and regional harmony, as is the membership in
 the executive organs of the country's only authorized
 political movement, the National Union for Independence and
 Revolution (UNIR).   The main source of President Habre's
 authority has been the allegiance he commands from the armed
 forces and the security services. In some areas, traditional
 leaders (e.g., cantonal or village chiefs) are popularly
 elected or chosen by the subordinate members of the
 traditional hierarchy.
 While ethnic unrest continued in some regions of Chad, and
 opposition leaders such as ex-President noukouni remained
 abroad, President Habre made further efforts in 1989 to
 achieve international and national reconciliation on the
 political front. On August 31, Chad and Libya agreed to seek
 a political solution to their conflict over the Aozou strip.
 This Framework Accord, signed in Algiers, includes a provision
 for an exchange of prisoners of war and, potentially, the
 withdrawal of Libyan troops from the disputed northern border
 area.
 In addition, President Habre carried through on the
 "Libreville Accords," signed in late 1985 in Gabon by the
 Chadian Government and the rallying opposition parties,
 calling for the drafting of a new constitution within 4 years
 and eventual free elections. A Constitutional Commission
 presented a draft document in March 1989, and after scrutiny
 by the Government, the party, and the President, the people
 approved a new Constitution by referendum on December 10.
 President Habre was elected President without opposition at
 the same time. The Constitution promises basic human and
 political rights, including the rights of women and labor
 unions. It also provides for a unicameral legislature
 scheduled to be elected in 1990.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Chad cooperates with the ICRC in permitting some prison
 visits, but continued to deny the organization access to any
 Libyan POW's, although discussions on this issue continued in
 1989. It did not respond to Al's appeal for an investigation
 into Saleh Gaba's case (see Section l.c.). There are no local
 human rights organizations that monitor and comment on the
 Government's human rights policies.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are 200 ethnic groups in Chad. They are roughly divided
 between Saharan and Arab Muslims in the northern and eastern
 regions, and Bantu peoples in the south. The latter group
 includes both those who have retained traditional animist
 practices and those who have adopted Christianity. Over 20
 years of conflict have transformed the complexity of ethnic
 
 
 CHAD
 divisions beyond simple north-south formulations.  Between
 1965 and 1985 as many as 11 factional armies contended at
 times for control of-the country. In an effort to build a,
 national government, President'Habre has expanded ethnic and
 geographic representation by appointing people to top
 government, ano party positions from all parts of the country.
 Officially, Chadian women enjoy full political equality and
 the full protection of the law. In practice, neither
 traditional law nor the inherited French Code fully protects
 women's rights. The new Constitution specifically prohibits
 iscrlmnation on the basis of sex. Women contribute the bulk
 of labor in virtually all aspects of farming, even though men
 are the heads pf many agricultural cooperatives. Women also
 oengige-in commerce ranging from managing simple market stalls
 to the ownership of.some larger businesses. Women serve
 voluntaril.in the armed forces, although they are excluded
 from officer training programs.
 Violence against women, mainly wife beating, reportedly occurs
 in Chad on a fairly wide scale, but it is difficult to
 quantify. Doctors in Chad estimate that about 7 percent of
 admissions to'emergency wards are for domestic violence cases
 directed againstwomen, about 3 percent against rpen. While
 domestic violence is not sanctioned by the Government, the
 police do not normally intervene in domestic disputes because
 of strongly ingrained traditional attitudes of male
 dominanqe. Formal legal remedies are ineffective. Customary
 courts occasionally intervene, reflecting the mores of the
 different-ethnic groups they represent.- OFUNIR, the women's
 wing of the political party UNIR, is strongly and articulately
 vocal in opposing domestic violence directed against women.
 Early in 1989, OFUNIR organized a well-publicized lecture and
 discussion on the issue. Female genital mutilation
 (circumcision) has long been common in Chad; it is more
 prevalent in the south as part of initiation rites and in
 , cties among all ethnic groups as a status symbol. The
 Qvernmen ,opposes these practices but has not outlawed them
 due to the deeply rooted traditional and religious attitudes
 of many Chadians.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 About 95..percent of all Chadian workers are involved in
 subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry, or fishing. As a
 result, the labor movement is small and only marginally
 effective., Chad's labor laws permit -the formation-and
 functioning of unions subject to restrictions. The two rival
 trade union federations were merged in 1988 into a single
 national umbrella organization, the National Union of Chadian
 Trdde Unions (UNST), which subsequently became the labor wing
 of theruling UNIR party. All unions are required to be,
 membqrp of the UNST, which is controlled-by the Government.
 The UNST has not sought to affiliate with any international
 trade union organizations except African organizations'such as
 the Organization of African Trade Union Unity. -
 The right to strike exists only if arbitration at three levels
 in the Ministries of Labor and Justice fails. This process,
 which in effect makes strikes illegal, has been criticized by
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. The
 International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts
 (COE) has observed that various legal provisions of Chadian
 
 
 76
 CHAD
 law, which forbid public employees from exercising the right
 to strike, prohibit trade unions from all political activity,
 and suspend all strikes, are at variance with Convention 87 on
 Freedom of Association, which Chad has ratified. The
 Government has given assurances that these provisions will be
 repealed, and the ILO is advising the Government on the
 preparation of draft language for a new labor code.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Freedom of association and the right to form unions is
 guaranteed in Chad's new Constitution, and the right of labor
 to organize and bargain collectively is established in Chadian
 law. However these rights are weakened by provisions that
 allow the authorities to intervene in the collective
 bargaining process and require prior government authorization
 for collective agreements to come into force. Government
 labor tribunals exist to hear worker-employer disputes. Their
 decisions may be appealed to the judicial'system. Labor laws
 are applied uniformly throughout the country. There are no
 export processing zones.
 The ILO COE has welcomed the Government's stated intention to
 amend the labor code to reduce significantly government
 interference in the collective bargaining process.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The ILO has been critical of Chad in the past for the use of
 forced labor. The Government is continuing discussions with
 the ILO on revising its labor laws to meet ILO conventions on
 forced labor, which Chad has ratified.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 14 in the wage sector, but
 enforcement of this law is limited. There is general
 compliance in practice, given the large pool of adults seeking
 employment. However, children work on family farms at a much
 earlier age.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 2The .statutory minimum wage rate for workers in the formal
 ,economy is approximately $25 per month, which is barely
 sufficient for subsistence. The Government, the largest
 employer, promised to begin paying civil servants their full
 salaries in 1989, but frequent budgetary shortfalls caused
 irregular payments. Most workers must supplement their
 incomes through subsistence agriculture, second jobs, and/or
 reliance on the extended family system.
 Most nonagricultural work is limited to 48 hours per week,
 with overtime to be paid for any excess. Agricultural work is
 supposedly limited to 2,400 hours per year. All workers must
 have at least 24 consecutive hours of rest each week, usually
 on Sunday. Occupational health and safety standards are
 established by law and ministerial decree; but, as with most
 social legislation, enforcement is weak.
 
 
 77
 During much of 1989, the Federal Islamic Republic of the
 Comoros was a de facto one-party State led by President Ahmed
 Abdallah Abderemane, who, backed by the Presidential Guard,
 had been continuously in power since 1978. Located in the
 Mozambique Channel between East Africa and Madagascar, Comoros
 comprises three islands and claims a fourth, Mayotte, which is
 still governed by France. In.1989 there were four important
 amendments to the 1978 Constitution, including one which would
 have permitted President Abdallah to succeed himself in 1990.
 On November 27, President Abdallah'was assassinated'under
 mysterious circumstances. Under constitutional provisions,
 the head of the Supreme Court became acting President, and
 Abdillah's Cabinet of Ministers remained in place. However,
 effective power rested with Bob Denard, a French soldier of
 fortune; and approtimately 25 European mercenaries who were
 serving as the officefs of the Presidential Guard. Denard and
 his group eventually bowed to intense pressure from France and
 Soufh Africa and voluntarily departed the Comoros on December
 15, leaving command of the Presidenttal Guard in the hands of
 French troops who arrived that same day. At the invitation of
 the acting President, a wide spectrum of Comorian political
 leaders began rdunatable discussions in mid-December to
 prepare for new, demoqratic presidential elections in 1990.
 About 25 mercenaries, primarily French, had trained and led
 the South African-fu'ded Presidential Guard, which had primary
 resporisiblity for internal security and which was the source
 of a number of human rights abuses. France, which had
 provided considerable financial and technical assistance to
 the small'Comorian armed forces and the gendarmerie, seemed
 likely to reorganize the Guard and integrate it into the
 regular armed forces iftithe wake of the mercenaries' departure
 Agriculture dominates the economy, but Comoros is running out
 of arable land, and soil:erosion on the steep volcanic slopes
 is an incrdising problem. Revenues from the export of
 vanilla, essence 'of ylang ylang, and cloves continue to fall.
 Three'ihajor familie's, of which the late President Abdallah's
 is one, control most of the import-export business. Comoros
 is part of the French franc monetary zone and depends heavily
 on France for budgetary support and technical assistance. In
 1989 Comoros began to implement a number of economic reforms
 sought by the International Monetary Fund and World Bank,
 including a 5-percent cut in already low civil service
 salaries.
 Human, rights were sharply restricted during President
 Abdallahs rule. Freedom of speech, press, association,
 citizen s 'rights to Ihange their government, women's rights,
 and worker rights were all significantly restricted. Several
 weeks- before he was assassinated, voters in a referendum
 approved constitutional changes that removed restrictions on
 Presidqnt Abdallah's ability to succeed himself; there were
 numerous reports of fraud and tampering with ballot boxes in
 the referendum. During the brief period of rule by the
 mercenaries after Abdallah's death, there were almost no
 arrests, and virtually all political prisoners were released.
 By the end of the year, politicians were actively engaged in
 the preparations for presidential elections in 1999.
 
 
 78
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of such killings in 1989.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance in 1989.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no substantiated reports of torture or other cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment in 1989.
 However, there were unconfirmed reports that in the last days
 of the Abdallah regime, after the November 5 referendum on
 constitutional changes, there was some torture of suspected
 arsonists on the island of Anjouan.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In 1989 there were no known cases of arbitrary arrest or
 detention. In regular criminal cases, a person may not be
 detained more than 48 hours without being charged. This is
 generally followed in practice. However, under Abdallah's
 regime, there was apparently no such limit in cases involving
 national security, which was interpreted broadly by the
 Government. For example, four persons, including two former
 �ministers, were-detained for 2 months in 1988 in connection
 with a pamphlet criticizing the Government for its neglect of
 the island of Moheli.
 From November 27 to December 15, when Denard and the
 mercenaries effectively controlled the country, virtually all
 those who had been detained after the 1985 and 1987 coup
 attempts and in connection with the November 5 referendum,
 were released.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides for the equality of all citizens
 before the law and the right of all accused to defense
 counsel. The Comorian legal system applies Islamic law and an
 inherited French legal code. Most disputes are settled by
 village elders or by a civilian court of first instance. In
 regular civil and criminal cases, the judiciary is usually
 independent, and trials are public, but in national security
 cases during the Abdallah regime regular judicial procedures
 were sometimes completely ignored.
 One of Denard's last official acts was the release of Said
 Moustafa Cheik of the leftist Democratic Front, whom Abdallah
 considered to be the only political prisoner in the country.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of home and
 property. There were no known cases of arbitrary interference
 
 
 with privacy in 1989. There is no regular, systematic
 interference with correspondence, but some members of the
 opposition believed that their moil may have been screened by
 the Presidential Guard (see also Section 2.a.).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 -a. Freedom of Speech and Preis
 Despite constitutional provision for fteedom of expression,
 thought, and conscience, they were significantly restricted
 under President Abdallah's rule. C6mbrians discuss and
 criticize the Government and its leading personalities openly
 in some situations. During the parliamentary debates on the
 constitutional Changes, the Assembly's sole opposition member
 spoke fr~ely against the Government*, for which he was sharply
 criticized by President Abdallah, but otlerwize suffered no
 harasgient. The so-called tribune libre, an informal private
 forum for discussi6n of political, economic, social, and other
 issues, has'been in existence for several years. Meetings are
 by invitation, but all subjects are 'covered, and the existence
 of the group was known and tolerated by the Abdallah
 Government. Attendees include figures from both the public
 and private sectors.
 However, the Abdallah Government restricted public criticism
 of its performance. After political tracts critical of the
 regime appeared in Mutsamudu, Anjouan, the Government
 organized public meetings to criticize the authors, One
 rember of a leading business family, who wrote an open letter
 critical gf the Piqsident and atc~sed a senior minister of
 corruption, was harassed by the Government and fined
 exorbitant amountg for petty tai and customs duty
 'frregularities.
 There is 'a considerable degree of self-censorship by the
 go'0'nmdrft-owned radio station and the semi-independent
 Bimothly'newspaper. Prior censorship is rare.
 Foreign journals and newspapers are available, as are books
 from abroad. The Paris-based Indian Ocean Newsletter, which
 is often critical of the Comoros, generally arrives unhindered
 through the-intknational mail. To show solidarity with
 fellow Moslem-countries, Salman Rushdie's "Satanic Verses" was
 banned in 1989, and in March the Interior Minister personally
 led a public burning of foreign publications containing
 excerpts from the book. For several weeks after that
 incident, foreign publications were carefully screened and
 some issues were confiscated. An issue of the local newspaper
 -was recalled in order to reprint a page containing an article
 "ibout the Rushdie affair deemed overly critical of Westerners.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Copstitu6ion provides for freedom of assbciation. Under
 Abdallih, Comorians were circumspect about organizing public
 Political gatherings, and political groupings opposed to the
 Government kept a fairly low profile. The December roundtable
 discussions on the presidential elections comprised
 representation from a broad cross-section of society,
 including the previously banned Democratic Front.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions see Section 6.a.
 
 
 80
 c. Freedom of Religion
 An overwhelming majority of the population is Muslim. The
 Constitution holds Islam to be the "wellspring of the
 principles and rules which guide the State and its
 institutions." However, the State upholds the right of
 non-Muslims to practice their faith. There are churches for
 the small Protestant and Catholic populations. Christian
 missionaries work in local hospitals and schools, but they are
 not allowed to proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country.
 Passports and exit visas for foreign travel are generally
 granted. One disgruntled former government official was
 allowed to emigrate without any problem. A leading member of
 the opposition was denied an exit permit but successfully
 traveled to France anyway, via Mayotte and Reunion. Some
 members of the large Comorian community in France opposed the
 Abdallah Government, but in 1989 none of those returning to
 the Comoros were subjected to governmental reprisals.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizen!
 to Change Their Government
 Under Abdallah, the right of citizens to change their
 government through peaceful means existed in theory but not in
 practice. With his November 27 assassination and the December
 15 departure of the mercenaries who had led his Presidential
 Guard, a new political era opened in the Comoros. No less
 than 14 political groupings were represented in the roundtable
 discussions on the presidential elections, which will be held
 in 1990 at a date still to be determined. The roundtable
 discussions indicate that the Constitution will probably be
 modified to permit several political parties and presidential
 candidates to contest the elections. Following these, the new
 President would likely dissolve the Federal Assembly and
 organize open, multiparty parliamentary elections.
 In the 1987 Federal Assembly elections, opposition candidates
 were permitted to run, but there was widespread fraud on
 election day, and the ruling United Progress Party (UPP) won
 41 of 42 seats. In 1988 an opposition candidate won the
 by-election to fill the remaining vacant seat in the Assembly.
 Traditional social and economic institutions also influence
 importantly the country's political life. Intra-island
 rivalries have been a persistent and growing factor. Village
 notables and Muslim religious leaders tended to dominate local
 politics.
 Comoros continues to claim sovereignty over Mayotte, which did
 not join the other islands in declaring independence from
 France in 1975. The results of a 1977 referendum on the
 status of Mayotte--overwhelmingly in favor of remaining with
 France--has never been accepted by the Comorian Government.
 The French have indefinitely postponed a new referendum. In
 the June 1988 French parliamentary elections, 98 percent of
 the voters on Mayotte supported candidates advocating closer
 ties to France, while less than 2 percent favored candidates
 advocating independence or reunification with the Comoros.
 
 
 81
 Section 4 Govetnmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 After 1986 the Abdallah Governmeht did not respond to requests
 from human 'rights organizations including, as far as is known,
 Amnesty International's call for an investigati6n regarding
 the alleged use of torture on some detainees held after the
 1987 coup attempt.' No local human tights groups were
 permitted under President Abdallah's regime.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion;'
 Language, or Social Status
 The constitutional recognition of Islam's special status
 formalizes the deeply held commitment of most Comorians to an
 Islamic world view. The society respects authority based on
 inheritance, age, wealth, and religious leadership.
 The Constitution formally provides for the equality of
 citizens regardless of race, sex, or religion. Nevertheless,
 within Comorian society, men have the dominant role. Women
 have thd'xight to vote and to participate, in theory, in the
 political-procetsas candidates, but tradition has been a
 powerful force in discouraging women from direct participation
 in politics. Women are neither veiled nor limited, in terms
 of employment, to minor civil service posts. Change in the
 status of women is most evident in the major towns. Women are
 finding increasing employment opportunities in the small paid
 labor force, and generally receive wages comparable to those
 of men ifi similar work. Property rights generally do not
 disfavor women; for example, the house the father of the bride
 traditionally provides to the couple at the time of their
 marriage remains her property, even if her husband divorces
 her.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs but is
 believed to be rare. The Government has not addressed this
 issue specifically, however, and there are no studies or
 statistics available to help determine the extent of the
 problem. When an expatriate chef at a new luxury hotel
 slapped a woman for an alleged work infraction, her male
 coworkers quickly came to her rescue, and the chef was quickly
 fired. Female circumcision is not practiced in the Comoros.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution allows workers to form unions and to strike.
 However, farming on small landholdings, subsistence fishing,
 and petty commerce make up the daily activity of most of the
 population. Hence, the wage labor force is small (less than
 2,000 workers), and there are no formally constituted, legally
 recognized unions at present. There have been sporadic
 groupingt of workers in various sectors (dockers, taxi
 drivers) who have formed temporary associations for presenting
 .specific grievances, but these have tended to dissolve after
 their demands were met. Public service employees are not
 subject to the Labor Code but are granted the right to
 organize in civil service legislation. There is an active
 teachers, association.
 A half-day strike at a new luxury hotel led to the firing of
 the expatriate manager and improvements in pay and working
 
 
