 CHAD
 Chad is governed by a transitional regime in which effective power is held by
 President Idriss Deby and his party, the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS). Presi-
 dent Deby took power in a December 1990 coup and was confirmed as Chief of State
 by the Sovereign National Conference (CNS) of 1993. The CNS also adopted an in-
 terim constitutional document, the Transitional Charter, establishing a provisional
 parliament, the Higher Transitional Council (CST), and mandating an independent
 judiciary. In April the CST amended the Charter to permit a third extension of the
 transition, through April 9, 1996. The Government is headed by Prime Minister
 Djimasta Koibla, who was elected by the OST.
 The army, gendarmerie, police and intelligence services are responsible for inter-
 nal securi    embera of the security forces committed serious human rights abuses
 and were not subject to effective control by either the Government or judicial au-
 thorities. Officers associated with the ethnic group of President Deby dominate the
 Rapid Intervention Force, formerly known as the Republican Guard, and the Na-
 tional Aeurt Aency (ANS), a counterintelligence organ that also acted as an in-
 ternal political police.
 Chad's economy relies on subsistence agrculture, herding, and fishing. Annual
 per capita income is an estimated $130 to $190. It has little industry; the chief ex-
 port_ is raw cotton. The Government relies heavily on external financial and tech-
 nical assistance. Its major source of revenue is customs duties, but pervasive smug-
 gling and corruption severely limit revenues.
 The human rights situation worsened in some respects during the year. Govern-
 ment and rebel forces committed serious abuses of human rights and humanitarian
 law. The Government did not prosecute security personnel reportedly responsible for
 murderz rape, ,trture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and illegal search and seizure.
 P~olitical activity continued, hut an opposition leader was arrested in September. He
 was later released after opposition protests. The Government generally respected
 freedom of expression, but agents of the ANS ransacked the offices of an opposition
 newspaper and beat two journalists in June. No one was prosecuted for these ac-
 tions. The Government at times imposed illegal limits on freedom of assembly and
 association and forced cancellation of a legal protest march in June.
 In other respects, the judiciary remained subject to government interference and
 was unable to provide citizens with prompt trials. Citizens do not hav te ability
 to change their government. Discrimination against women was common.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.--Government forces and rebel fight-
 ers, including those of the so-called Armed Forces of the Federal Republic (FARF),
 were responsible for numerous deaths by summary execution or use of excessive
 force. Members of the security forces also committed criminal acts that resulted in
 civilian deaths. The Government took no action to prosecute abuses committed by
 its forces and routinely granted amnesties to rebels.
 According to credible reports, government troops killed a number of farmers in
 Eastern Logone province during counterinsurgency operations in late April and
 May. An investigation by human rights associations confgmed at least four victims:
 Jerome Gondje,Eloi Diondei, Claude Dieratorfum, and Faustin Grongrondje. The
 investigation also confirmed that the FsF killed a herder, Adoum Mahamat.
 Unconfirmed but credible reports by human rights organizations alleged that gov-
 ernment forces killed at least 50 other  sona in Eastern and Western Logone prov-
 inces from July through September. M t of the victims were farmers, but the total
 included a teacher and a priest as well as rebels kidnaped from prison. Most were
 allegedly summarily executed, while others were said to have been brutally tortured
 before being killed. Points of sheet metal were pounded into the head of one person,
 a spike through the head of another, and four nails in the head of a third. Two vic-
 tim were re orted burned alive, one was drowned, and one was hanged. Victims
 were said to hsave included a 15-year-old girl who was killed sistinterape, and a
 husband who was killed defending his wife. One victim's name had ear ier appeared
 on the list of 55 alleged rebels granted amnesty by President Deby in June. Human
 rights groups alleged that during the same period FARF guerrillas killed four peas-
 ants in the Easternmnd Wesrn Logon provinces.
 Government troops stationed in the region were a law unto themselves. According
 to credible reports, a regimental commander ordered that Malachie Mbakoubou, a
 noncommissioned officer, be tortured. Torture continued for more than 24 hours be-
 fore he was executed May 25. Mbaiterem Nassn, a FARF rebel imprisoned in
 
 
 52
 Moundou, capital of the Western Logone, was seized by armed men and transported
 to the countryside where he was tortured and executed on August 6. On September
 24 four bound and mutilated bodies were found floating near Moundou.
 In January the Government implicitly acknowledged responsibility for past
 human rights abuses in the Logone provinces when an official delegation to the re-
 gion offered financial compensation to victims' families, but the Government pros-
 ecuted no one for these or subsequent violations.
 Members of the security forces were also implicated in criminal acts of murder
 or attempted murder, as were armed customs agents. In one case, military assassins
 claimed that they mistook a World Bank consultant for their intended target and
 attempted to kill him. Although press reports and human rights associations identi-
 fied many of the perpetrators of these acts, the Government did not prosecute any-
 one.
 Confirmed killings or attempting killings in NDjamena included: an unidentified
 pedestrian who survived being shot three times at point-blank range by a bodyguard
 of former Army Chief of Staff Becher Moussa Houno; AI-Hadj Hassane and A1--Hadj
 Abdoulaye, shot by customs agents at the N'Djamena central market; and Moussa
 Galmaye and Kalimi Adoum, shot by ANS official Issa Brahim following a traffic
 dispute.
 Similar cases outside N'Djamena included Samantchouna Dongo Mboulou, a vet-
 erinary technician fatally shot in Moundou by two officers in April, one a security
 official of the regional military command, and Ambroise Ndoyo, a driver who failed
 to stop at a Moundou roadblock.
 b. Disappearance.-There were reports of peasants abducted by security forces for
 suspected involvement with FARF rebels. These reports remain unconfirmed, but
 many appear credible. Some persons who reportedly disappeared were among those
 granted amnesty in June and released in N' Damena.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Transitional Charter specifically prohibits torture and degrading or humiliating
 treatment. However, the Government failed to halt acts of torture and brutality by
 its security forces and took no effective action to improve conditions in its prisons.
 In March, following FARF threats to the parastatal Cotontchad, a police official
 and former secret police agent, Baal Zahr Papy, was sent to Moundou to assist mili-
 tary authorities in uncovering FARF sympathizers. Security forces arrested
 Cotontchad employee Edmond Mbaiornom without warrant at his residence on
 March 28. They bound and beat him, then forced him to drink large quantities of
 water in order to extract a confession. He was freed after 49 days without being
 charged.
 From late April to mid-May, the army intensified counterinsurgency operations in
 the Logone provinces. Units would typically-arrive in villages, demand information
 about rebels from local notables such as canton or village chiefs or church pastors
 and proceed to beat or torture them to obtain information. Other villagers received
 similar treatment for resisting abuses by troops. Rape of women of all ages by sol-
 diers was common. All villagers risked retaliation by FARF guerrillas if they cooper-
 ated. There were numerous reports of victims tortured by troops employing a prac-
 tice called the arbatachar, in which a victim's arms and legs are tied behind the
 back, cutting off circulation and causing possible paralysis. Some victims were
 bound this way and left in the sun; others were hung from trees and beaten. There
 were similar reports in August and September when the Government dispatched re-
 inforcements following an accord between FARF leader Laokein Barde Frisson and
 exiled former president Goukouni Wedeye.
 Logone villagers were not the only victims of these abuses. In March the prefet
 of Ouaddai province accused local security forces of illegal night arrests, beatings,
 and other abuses. On April 25, political leader Antoine Bangui, a retired inter-
 national civil servant, was beatenby army soldiers while campaigning in the West-
 ern Logone.
 Prison conditions are harsh. Prisons throughout the country are appallingly over-
 crowded, have poor sanitation, inadequate food, shelter, and medical facilities, and
 mix male and female prisoners. Prisoners are almost totally dependent on their fam-
 ilies for food and clothing. All prisons are in need of major repairs, and escapes are
 frequent.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Transitional Charter and the Penal
 Code prohibit arbitrary arrest. Arrest warrants must usually be signed by a judicial
 official. However, the Government does not always respect these requirements. Mili-
 tary and security authorities routinely arrest or detain persons without warrant or
 trial.
 On April 9 in Moundou, Baal Zahr Papy ordered the illegal night arrest of
 Damtangar Ley Gatou, vice president of the Moundou Chapter of the Chadian
 
 
 Human Rights League. Community residents came to Gatou Ley's defense, forcing
 security officers to flee.
 Security forces ille ally detained a number of alleged rebels. These included 10
 persons arrested in  Djamena for connections with the National Front of Chad and
 55 accused FARF rebels, mostly peasant farmers in the Logone provinces. All were
 released when President Deby decreed an amnesty for opponents of the Government
 on June 9.
 On June 1 in N'Djamena, ANS agents and gendarmes arrested without warrant
 two N'Djamena Iebdo journalists, Yaldet Begoto       Oulatar and Dieudonne
 Djonabaye, after ransacking the newspaper's offices. The journalists were taken to
 ANS headquarters where they were beaten and threatened. Authorities released
 them only after the intervention of Prime Minister Koibla. The ANS agents respon-
 sible were identified by an investigation promised by President Deby and carried out
 by the National Human Rights Commission but have not been bought to trial.
 The Government did not use exile as a political weapon.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Transitional Charter mandates an independ-
 ent judiciary. A national judicial system operates with courts located in provincial
 capitals, but it is underfunded and overburdened and subject to official interference.
 The Government has failed to implement judicial reforms ordered by the CNS.
 Breakdown of the criminal courts especially cripples the system, as official inac-
 tion and interference often prevent the judiciary from prosecuting cases. Persons ac-
 cused of crimes may have to endure up to several years of incarceration before being
 charged or tried. In many cases,persons arrested for felonies in the provinces may
 be brought to trial only if remanced to the overcrowded and dangerous house of de-
 tention in N'Djamena. The N'Djamena court of appeals is supposed to conduct regu-
 lar assizes in the provinces, but rarely does so.
 Civil courts, in contrast to their criminal counterparts, did demonstrate independ-
 ence in several high-profile cases. The N'Djamena court of appeals overturned a gov-
 ernment voter registration campaign. This was followed by a wholesale reassign-
 ment of judicial personnel. It also fined and sentenced to prison the director general
 of the ANS, who successfully defied the verdict by refusing to recognize the court's
 competence to judge him. The court convicted on a civil charge a presidential guard
 who fired on a diplomatic vehicle, but he escaped from custody the following month
 after being arraigned for attempted murder. The Moundou Tribunal sentenced to
 rison and fined an ANS agent for the attempted kidnaping of Damtangar Ley
 Gatou of the Chadian Human Rights League.
 The Military Code of Justice has not been enforced since the 1979-1980 Civil
 War, and courts-martial instituted early in the Deby Regime to try MPS fighters
 for crimes against civilians no longer operate. The remaiing military magistrates
 now sit as civilian judges on the N jamena court.
 People in rural areas usually do not have access to formal judicial institutions.
 In most civil cases they rely on traditional courts presided over by village chiefs,
 Chefs de Canton, or sultans. Their decisions may be appealed to a formal court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Transitional Charter provides for the right to privacy of home and correspondence
 and freedom from arbitrary search. The Penal Code requires that authorities con-
 duct searches of homes only during daylight hours and with a legal warrant. In
 practice, security forces ignored these provisions and conducted extrajudicial
 searches at any time. Chief offenders were the ANS and gendarmerie, who mounted
 illegal operations against opposition figures, and the army, which invaded villages
 in areas of internal conflict, in many cases abusing their victims and extorting goods
 and money from them (see Section 1.g.).
 On January 12, acting on orders of the Interior Minister, gendarmes entered the
 house of veteran political figure and major opposition leader Abdoulaye Lamana
 without possession of a warrant. They confiscated two registered hunting rifles. On
 August 30, ANS agents and gendarmes mounted a search of the residence of an-
 other opposition figure, former Minister Saleh Kebzabo, without a warrant and after
 dark. They abused his pregnant wife when she asked to see a warrant, then con-
 fiscated documents, money, and an automobile. Police arrested Kebzabo several days
 later, but released him after protests by opposition political parties. He filed a civil
 suit against the officials responsible.
 The Government engages in widespread telephone surveillance without judicial
 authority.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Security forces often failed to distinguish between combatants and non-
 combatants in carrying out military actions and exacted reprisals against villagers
 suspected of aiding rebels, including burning villages and destroying crops. There
 were credible reports from Eastern and Western Logone, Ouaddai, and Lake prov-
 
 
 54
 inces of villages which were pillaged and terrorized by government and rebel forces.
 Both sides extorted or stole money and goods from villagers. Inhabitants of villages
 victimized by one side were often then subject to exactions by the other for their
 supposed collaboration.
 In the Logone provinces, villages were forced to quarter army troops operating in
 the area, since the Government provided no barracks and little pay. Army units also
 evicted villagers from schools and churches for use as quarters. An inquiry con-
 ducted by the Papal Nuncio and the Catholic bishop of Moundou confirmed that
 troops had occupied churches in at least six Logone vlages in August.
 Both the army and FARF guerrillas prevented villagers from working their fields,
 at times destroying their seeds. The army forced some inhabitants to abandon vil-
 lages by threats and exactions, including burning. Army troops stole villagers' grain,
 livestock and other possessions, raising fears of famine. As a means of crippling gov-
 ernment export earnings, FARF fighters intimidated the inhabitants of many vil-
 lages from raising cotton their sole cash crop.
 In March, Movement 1or Democracy and Development (MDD) rebels in the Lake
 Chad region seized an American U.N. consultant and two associates as hostages.
 They later released the U.S. citizen in Nigeria.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Transitional Charter provides for freedom
 of speech and the press. The Government generally respected these rights, but there
 were instances of censorship of state radio, including by the Chief of State. The
 Higher Council on Communications (HCC) intervened effectively as an ombudsman.
 The Government did not censor opposition newspapers, and some were vocifer-
 ously critical of government policies and leaders. It also did not interfere with the
 distribution of opposition tracts and press releases. However, government agents
 were responsible for two attacks on independent journalists. In April army person-
 nel assaulted Mahdi Khalil Mahdi, the Moundou correspondent for the independent
 newspaper Le Progres, causing the newspaper to recall him. On June 1, ANS agents
 and gendarmes conducting a search of the home of a senior civil servant were sur-
 prised by a reporter for the newspaper N'Djamena Hebdo. The ANS detained the
 reporter and took him to the newspaper's offices, where ANS agents destroyed com-
 puters, printers, and other equipment, abused employees, and arrested journalists.
 The press consists of a national radio network, a press agency, and an N'Djamena
 television station, all owned and operated by the State, as well as a number of
 small, limited-circulation, independent and party newspapers. The state media, al-
 though regularly providing coverage of opponents of the Government, give priority
 to government officials and events and is subject to both official and informal cen-
 sorship. In August President Deby banned news of the ransacking of opposition
 party leader Saleh Kebzabo's compound by government agents. Deby lifed this
 order only after the HCC chairman intervened.
 The HCC, an independent institution mandated by the CNS, acts as an arbiter
 whose main function is to promote free access to the media. It has been able to prod
 state radio and television to air opposition views. In October, despite strong pres-
 sure from religious groups, it ruled that the television station had to drop its long-
 standing refusal to shnow an award winning film condemning female genital mutila-
 tion, directed by state television producer Zara Mahamat Yacoub.
 Academic freedom is respeted.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Transitional Charter pro-
 vides for freedom of association and assembly, and the Government generally re-
 spects these rights. Authorities routinely  ant  rmits for political and nongovern-
 mental organization (NGO) meetings and usually do not interfere in meetings or
 press conferences. Nevertheless, the Government was responsible for serious as-
 salts on freedom of assembly and association.
 In June the Government banned a citywide march organized by a coalition of op-
 position parties and NGO's to prtest the ransacking of the N'Djamena Hebdo news-
 paper offices and the mistreatment of its journalists (see Sections 1.f. and 2.a.). Au-
 thorities informed organizers that they would disperse marchers using lethal force
 if necessary. The Government stationed armed gendarmes along the planned route
 and occupied the offices of major labor organizations. The organizers cancelled the
 march.
 Chad currently has 60 registered political parties and several hundred NGO's.
 However, a confusion of laws governing NGO's enabled the Minister of Territorial
 Administration to threaten unions and human rights organizations with dissolution
 for organizing joint rallies with political parties in July and August in N'Djamena.
 The NGO's maintained that the law cited by the Government had been superseded,
 but acceded to the ruling.
 
 
 55
 On November 4, gendarmes illegally broke up a meeting of political parties called
 at Prime Minister's Koibla's request. In protest, the president of the CST, Issa
 Abbas Ali briefly suspended the activities of the provisional parliament.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Transitional Charter provides that the state is offi-
 cially secular, all faiths worship without government constraint.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Transitional Charter provides for these rights. The Government
 does not require special permission for travel in most areas. However, armed ban-
 dits operate on many roads, exposing travelers to assault, robbery, and murder,
 many bandits have been identified as soldiers and deserters. The Defense Minister
 personally led a mission to clear the country's main routes of illegal roadblocks, but
 security forces, guerrillas and bandits continue to maintain them, extorting money
 from travelers.
 Citizens may leave the country and return.
 Chadian refugees are free to repatriate, although many remain in neighboring
 countries. In May approximately 7,000 citizens returned to southern Chad from the
 Boubou refugee camp in the Central African Republic under the auspices of the
 U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. About 4,000 remain in the camp, in addition
 to others at Kaga Bandro and Bangui. Several thousand other Chadian refugees re-
 main in Niger, partisans of an unsuccessful rebel invasion of Chad in 1992. Fewer
 than 2,000 former Chadian refugees remain in Cameroon.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens were unable to exercise this right in 1995. Effective power remains in
 the hands of President Deby, members of his Zaghawa ethnic group, the military
 and security services they dominate, and his MPS party.
 The CNSgranted the Government a limited mandate to rule in accordance with
 the Transitional Charter. Neither the President nor members of the CST are subject
 to recall. The national government appoints local officials. The CNS mandated the
 establishment of an Independent National Electoral Commission to oversee elec-
 tions, but it was not installed until February. The National Voter Registration Com-
 mission initiated its campaign in December.
 Few women hold senior leadership positions. Two women currently serve in the
 20-member Cabinet; there are four women in the 52-member CST.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations operate with few overt restrictions, investigating and
 publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are often ac-
 cessible, hut are generally unresponsive or hostile to their findings.
 Nongovernmental human rights associations have become established members of
 civil society under the Deby regime and participate in key governmental institu-
 tions. They are courageous, if often partisan in publicizing abuses through reports
 and press releases, but only occasionally are able to intervene with authorities. All
 are dominated by opponents of the Government, impairing their credibility. Two
 governmental bodies, the newly established National Human Rights Commission
 and the Human Rights Committee of the CST, are also active, but the Government
 consistently ignores their recommendations.
 The Government permitted investigations by international human rights organi-
 zations, but took no action on their reports. In January, the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission (UNHRC) released a report on the human rights situation. Its Chad
 Special Rapporteur, M'bam Diarra Ndoure visited again in-November. The Govern-
 ment defended its record in two cases before the UNHRC under the confidential
 1503 Procedure. A delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross vis-
 ited prisons in N'Djamena, Moundou, Sarh, Abeche, Biltine, Bol and Baga Sola in
 March and April.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Transitional Charter provides for equal rights for all citizens, regardless of
 sex, race, or origin. In practice, cultural traditions maintain women in subordinate
 status, and the Government favors its ethnic supporters and allies.
 Women.-While no statistics are available, domestic violence against women is
 common. By tradition, wives are subject to their husbands, and have only limited
 legal recourse against abuse. Family or ethnic authorities may act in such cases,
 but police rarely intervene.
 Neither government nor advocacy groups operate programs to redress discrimina-
 tion against women. Women do not have equal opportunities for education and
 
 
 training, so it is difficult for them to compete for the few formal sector jobs. Property
 and inheritance laws do not discriminate against women, but traditional practice fa-
 vors men. Exploitation of women is especially pervasive in rural areas, where
 women do most of the agricultural labor and are discouraged from study.
 Children.-The Government has demonstrated little commitment to children's
 rights and welfare. It has not committed adequate funding to public education and
 medical care. Educational opportunities for girls are limited. bout as many girls
 as boys are enrolled in primary school, but the percentage of girls enrolled m sec-
 ondary school is extremely low, primarily because of early marriage. Although the
 law prohibits sex with a girl under the age of 14, even if married, this law is rarely
 enforced, and many families arrange marriages for girls as young as age 11 or 12-
 sometimes forcibly-for the financial gain of a dowry. Many are then obligated to
 work long hours of physical labor for their husbands in fields or homes.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is widespread
 and deeply rooted in tradition. Advocated by women as well as by men, the practice
 is strongest among ethnic groups in the east and south. It is usually performed prior
 to puberty as a rite of passage, an occasion many families use to profit from gifts
 from their communities. Opposition to its elimination is strong. Several female offi-
 cials of the Health Ministry attempted to develop a public education program to
 change attitudes toward FGM, but received no government support. A number of
 women's groups are active in promoting change, but few are effective; government
 officials discourage their activities. The award winning film on FGM by a Muslim
 woman was strongly condemned by Islamic associations and the Imam of the
 N'Djamena grand mosque. It was shown on state television, and provoked wide-
 spread discussion of this previously taboo subject.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no official discrimination against disabled per-
 sons. However, the Government operates no therapy, education, or employment pro-
 gam   for people with disabilities, and no laws mandate access to buildings for
 tem.
 National /Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnicity continues to influence government
 appointments and political alliances. There are approximately 200 ethnic groups
 from two general traditions: Arab and Saharan/Sahe ian zone Muslims in the nort
 center and east, and Sudanian zone Christian or animist peoples in the south. Ri-
 valries among these many groups have caused civil tensions and conflicts for many
 years.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Transitional Charter specifically recognizes la-
 bor's right to organize. All employees, except members of the military, are free to
 join or form unions. Unions must receive authorization from the Government in
 order to operate legally. However, few workers belong to unions: most Chadians are
 subsistence cultivators or herders. The main labor organization is the Federation of
 Chadian Unions (UST); its major constituent union is the Teachers' Union of Chad
 (SET). Neither has organizational, financial, or procedural ties to the Government.
 A number of minor federations and unions, including the Free Confederation of
 Chadian Workers (CLTT), also operate, some with ties to government officials.
 The Government generally respected the right to strike and organize. Armed po-
 lice and gendarmes occupied UST, CLTT, and SET offices for 2 days in June to pre-
 vent their participation in a march planned to protest government actions in the
 N'Djamena Hebdo affair. There were no strikes in the private sector, but work stop-
 pages by civil servants, teachers, and health workers over unpaid salaries were com-
 mon throughout the year in all areas of the country. On several occasions unionized
 public school teachers in N'Djamena engaged in intimidation of teachers in non-
 union private schools, forcing these schools to close in support of SET's demands.
 The International Labor Organization received but did not examine UST com-
 plaints against the Government for allegedly violating the right to strike and dem-
 onstrate, and for occupying union headquarters in 1994.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Transitional Charter and
 the Labor Code contain only general provisions on the rights of labor and do not
 specifically protect collective bargaining. The Labor Code requires the Government
 to set minimum wage standards and permits unions to bargain collectively.
 The law does not specifically prohibit antiunion discrimination, and there is no
 formal mechanism for resolving such complaints. In May three top union officials
 in Biltine prefecture, Bakari Aoudou and Nadjingar DjimodundoudJe of UST and
 Lokal Yokassi of SET, were suspended from their jobs by their employers at the be-
 hest of government officials and expelled for publicly presenting union complaints
 about insecurity in the region and nonpayment of salaries.
 
 
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor was outlawed in
 1952. There is no evidence of the practice in the formal economy, but there are indi-
 cations of isolated instances among rural farming or herding communities and in
 military installations in the north.
 In 1995 the newly established National Nomad Guard freed several men held as
 slaves by nomadic herders in the Lake Chad region. There was also strong evidence
 that the military routinely compels members to perform forced labor at isolated out-
 posts as punishment.
 d. Mimmum Age for Employment of Children.-The law stipulates that the mini-
 mum age for employment in the formal sector is 14. The Government does not en-
 force the law, but in practice children are rarely employed except in agriculture and
 herding. Several hundred young people between the ages of 14 and 17 reportedly
 serve in the armed forces.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code requires the Government to
 set minimum wages. It agreed this year to raise minimum monthly public sector
 wages beginning in 1995 from a range of $355 to $415 (cfa 7,100 to cfa 8,320) to
 $1,500 to $1,450 (cfa 21,000 to cfa 25,000), but failed to fuly implement the
 changes. Most wages are insufficient to support subsistence, much less to maintain
 an adequate standard of living. According to a UST study, public sector wages re-
 mained the same from 1977 to 1994 while the cost of living rose by 400 percent.
 The Government also failed to pay its employees fully, particularly in areas out-
 side the capital. Salary arrears to civil servants at year's end were as much as 4
 to 5 months in N'Djamena and up to 8 months outside the capital. There were no
 payments at all to some members of the military for most of t hey ear. Many state
 employees were obliged to search for second jobs, raise their own food crops, or rely
 on family for support.
 The law limits most nonagricultural work to 48 hours per week, with overtime
 paid for supplementary hours, and agricultural work to 2,400 hours per year. All
 workers are entitled to 24 consecutive hours of rest per week. The Government took
 no actions to enforce these standards.
 The Labor Code mandates occupational health and safety standards and inspec-
 tors with the authority to enforce them. These standards are rarely respected in
 practice. There is no indication that the Government has ever appointed safety in-
 spectors.
