CHAD
The 1989 report on Chad understates serious violations of human rights under the government of President Hissène Habré. The report's vagueness may result from a pattern of government secretiveness criticized for several years by Amnesty International. The report calls attention to this problem, noting that government secrecy and the practice of holding prisoners incommunicado make it difficult to obtain information on torture. But it does so only after stating that there were no "confirmed" reports of torture in 1989.
To its credit, the Chad report acknowledges the government's "completely free hand" in dealing with politically sensitive and security-related cases. The report also acknowledges the harshness of prison conditions, including physical abuse of prisoners, malnutrition and deprivation of medical treatment. The report likewise notes government control of the media, sharp restrictions on freedom of assembly and association, and weak enforcement of social legislation. Nevertheless, it is apologetic in tone, and sometimes misleading.
Generally, the introductory sentence of a sub-topic begins with the most favorable information, while actual reports of human rights abuse are buried in the text. For example, the subsection discussing the right to a fair public trial begins by discussing pretrial protections contained in the Napoleonic Code inherited by Chad upon independence from France. The report states that the Napoleonic law "includes safeguards against arbitrary arrests and provides for specific detainee rights," but neglects to say that these are paper guarantees only. The report itself states one page earlier that many detainees are held incommunicado and are never charged. It next proceeds to discuss non-governmental adjudication, by sultans and chiefs, of civil disputes and petty crimes. At the end of the subsection, following a discussion on the lack of speedy trials in Chad, the report adds that, "[tjrials can be held in public or private at the option of the government." In this fashion, the report hides the pertinent information that there is no right to a public trial in Chad and simply does not answer the question of whether government trials are fair.
The report notes that Amnesty International has reported that no political prisoners have been brought to trial or referred to judicial authorities since President Habré came to power in 1982. Amnesty's "assertion" is cited without a comment, alongside vague references to long delays in the courts; to severe disruptions of the legal system
28
Chad
caused by civil war; and to efforts to re-establish civilian law enforcement in "liberated" areas. However, administrative and logistical difficulties might explain the partial failure of the legal system, but would not account for a virtual denial of due process to hundreds of people held by the government in 1989 for reasons of their political opinions, their family relations, ethnic background or perceived opposition.
Although vague and understated with respect to acknowledged deficiencies in human rights protections, the Chad report also simply omits certain human rights violations. For example, there is no mention of the extrajudicial killing of Bichara Chaïbo, a former high-ranking officer in the national security service, the Direction de la documentation et de la sécurité. Chaïbo, formerly a close associate of the president, had escaped from Chad in 1986 following accusations that he was plotting against Habré. Recognized as a refugee by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Chaïbo was forced to return to Chad in September 1988 from Togo, where he was not afforded a hearing. The Chaïbo incident is included in the 1989 Togo report, but not mentioned or referenced in the 1988 or 1989 Chad reports.
Despite the report's assertion that no "disappearances" were confirmed in 1989, Amnesty reported in 1989 receiving "recent information" that six civilians, including several teachers arrested in the eastern town of Abéché in 1983, had never been charged or held in any known detention center. (Amnesty in 1990 quoted former government officials as saying that the six were extrajudicially executed shortly after being arrested.) The organization said it had previously received written assurances from the Chad government in 1985 that the persons were being held and would be brought to trial. Amnesty similarly reported in 1989 on the fates of several dozen of some 1,000 people seized in the 1983 capture of Paya Largeau. These would constitute "disappearances" within the definition contained in Appendix A to the State Department report. Finally, the report inflates the numbers of prisoners of conscience released during 1989 by including 312 prisoners released in December 1988 whose release was already reported in the previous year's country report.
The report correctly notes that the nation adopted a constitution by referendum on December 10, 1989 and that President Habré was simultaneously elected unopposed to a seven-year term. The report, however, fails to discuss whether the constitution provides for contested presidential elections in the future. Similarly,
29
Chad
the report fails to mention how often legislative elections are to be held in the future. Such information would indicate whether the citizens have an enforceable legal right to change their government. In fact, the constitution is silent. By including this discussion in the section entitled "The Rights of Citizens to Change their Government," the report is implying that the constitution bestows this right. The constitution, however, provides that the mechanisms for presidential and parliamentary elections are to be governed by statutes.
Although Chad adopted a constitution in 1989 protecting certain basic human rights and outlawing torture, Chadian law had already guaranteed certain rights and prohibited certain practices with little practical effect. There appears to be substantial evidence that these legal protections were ignored in 1989 and in prior years. Nonetheless, the Chad report asserts: "Significant steps were taken in 1989 to improve the [human rights] situation." The State Department undermines its own conclusions by omitting essential information.
30
