 TOGO
 Togo is a one party state with a mixed socialist-
 private enterprise economy. The present regime came
 to power in a military coup in 1967. President Eyadema
 is the only military officer holding cabinet office.
 The country is small and its primary natural resource
 is phosphates. President Eyadema has developed a
 nationalist philosophy to unify an ethnically diverse
 population and has strongly promoted economic and
 social development. There were arrests in the spring
 of 1977 of persons suspected of being a front for com-
 munist efforts to subvert the regime. They were released
 after publicly professing loyalty. There are no known
 political prisoners. National unity and social pro-
 gress are given precedence over individual civil and
 political liberties. Amnesty International visited
 Togo at the invitation of the government in the fall
 of 1977. The results of that visit are unknown, but
 this indicates a degree of confidence by the government
 in its human rights record.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The President has stated that torture had occurred
 in some cases in the past on the initiatives of subordi-
 nates, but that he had not been informed at the time
 and disapproves of its use. There is no indication
 that torture is presently occurring.
 b. Cruel, inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Prison conditions reflect the poverty of the country,
 but there is no evidence of cruel, inhuman or degrad-
 ing punishment.
 c. Arbitrary Arrests or Imprisonment
 The government this year released the approximately
 35 political prisoners it acknowledged holding. We are
 not aware of any arbitrary arrests since the releases.
 (121)
 
 22-145 0 - 78 - 9
 
 
 122
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Virtually all defendants enjoy due process, including
 fair, public trials, under a legal system closely
 modeled on the French system. Persons detained in poli-
 tical cases (in which the executive has influence over
 the courts) have resorted to pleas for presidential
 clemency which have been granted.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 This is not usual, but may occur in rare political
 cases if the government deems it necessary.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care and Education
 Togo's budget reflects the high priority accorded to
 education, health and agriculture. For example, while
 the overall budget increased ten percent in 1977, the
 budget for the ministries of Education and Rural
 Development increased 33 percent. Resources are lim-
 ited but it is expected that in the long term these -bud-
 get increases will result in improvement in the quality
 of rural life in Togo. Weather, pricing policies and
 traditional practices have hampered development of agri-
 culture. The government is in the process of upgrad-
 ing its defense structure in response to what it per-
 ceives as an increased comnunist threat in the region.
 The Ministry of Defense received a 30 percent increase
 in the 1977 budget and vow gets about 18 percent of
 the total budget. The GOT's strong opposition to cor-
 ruption is apparent in numerous cases of the arrest and
 prosecution of allegedly venal officials.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 
 
 123
 Freedom of thought, speech, and assembly are respected
 to a substantial degree but are limited by the fact
 that political activities outside the sole political
 party are discouraged. Freedom of religion is respect-
 ed. The press is government-controlled. Labor unions
 are influenced but not directly controlled by the
 government.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel
 and emigratioi, is to our knowledge allowed.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 There have been no elections since a plebiscite in 1972
 in which support for the President was expressed by al-
 most 100 percent of the popular vote. Within the
 single party system, active participants are in a posi-
 tion to express their views on such issues as the
 functioning of the government and performance of indivi-
 duals up to and including members of the government.
 Togolese who do not take an active role within the
 party play a miiimal political role. An active role in
 party leadership is limited to those who have shown
 some leadership ability and support party objectives
 but all Togolese are encouraged to actively demonstrate
 support for and help to implement party objectives.
 While the regime is military-backed and came to power
 through a coup d'etat, the president is the only mili-
 tary man holding a cabinet position.  Rule is by
 decree.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-Governmental
 Investigation of alleged Violations
 of Suman Rights
 A representative of Amnesty International visited Togo
 in the fall of 1977 at the invitation of the Government,
 a demonstration of Togo's positive attitude toward
 international investigation and confidence in its record
 of human rights observance.
 
 
