 TOGO
 During 1993 President Gnassingbe Eyadema continued to consolidate effective
 state power. He arbitrarily declared the termination as of December 31, 1992, of the
 transitional government including the legislative High Council of the Republic
 (HCR), which had been appointed by the National Conference in 1991. In January
 he reappointed as Prime Minister Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, whose Government,
 though nominally independent, cooperated closely with the President throughout the
 year and regularly took policy positions consistent with Eyadema's views. On Au-
 gust 25, Eyadena won reelection as President in an electoral process marred by seri-
 ous irregularities and by the nonparticipation of all major opposition candidates and
 a majority of Togo's registered voters. The opposition, known as the Collective for
 Democratic Opposition (COD 11), and the HCR rejected the President's moves, in-
 cluding installation of the Koffigoh Government, as unconstitutional.
 Toward year's end, the Government began preparations for legislative elections to
 be held in early 1994. The Government agreed to meet some opposition demands
 concerning technical election preparations but did not accede to broader political de-
 mands. Some opposition parties declared their intention to boycott the polls on the
 basis that genuinely free elections were not possible under prevailing circumstances,
 while others planned to participate provided that conditions they considered nec-
 essary were met.
 The President's power rests on his control of the security forces, especially the
 army which is largely composed of officers (90 percent) and soldiers (70 percent)
 from the President's northern ethnic group. The Togolese security forces, numbering
 a pproximately 13,000, consist primarily of the army, navy, air force, national police
 (Surete), and gendarmerie. The Interior Minister is nominally responsible for the
 national police, whose director reports in reality to the President. The Defense Min-
 ister nominally supervises the other Togolese security forces but, in fact, they report
 through the General Staff to President Eyadema. Security forces committed various
 human rights abuses. The call for the creation of a politically neutral special secu-
 rity force with the task of providing election security was one of the key demands
 cited by the opposition and independent labor unions in launching the November
 1992-July 1993 general strike, along with a demand for a declaration of neutrality
 by the army and a reshuffling of the Cabinet of Ministers to include more opposition
 representatives.
 About 80 percent of its 3.4 million people are engaged in subsistence agriculture,
 but the country also has an active commercial sector. Togo has an annual per capita
 gross domestic product of less than $500. The 8-month general strike severely dam-
 aged both the public and private sectors of the economy. Declining prices for Togo's
 principal exports (phosphates, coffee, cocoa, and cotton) continued to affect the econ-
 omy adversely.
 The human rights situation deteriorated significantly in 1993, with the President
 turning back the clock on democratic progress and with the security forces engaging
 in massive abuses, including political killings and intimidation of political opponents
 and the press. During the year, several hundred thousand people became displaced
 or temporarily fled the country for safety, and the political opposition became in-
 creasingly divided, with some of its partisans committing serious abuses. The Presi-
 dent frequently benefited from the pattern of army violence, which intimidated the
 opposition and strengthened his hold on power.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 301
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.--Government security forces and, to
 a lesser extent, opposition partisans were responsible for political and extrajudicial
 killings. On January 25 and 30, members of the security forces committed a series
 of extrajudicial killings. In the January 25 incident in Lome, the forces fired on
 crowds of unarmed opposition demonstrators, numbering in the thousands, killing
 at least 19 and wounding many more, according to credible human rights sources.
 Between January 26 and 30, unknown assailants (but suspected to be opposition
 militants) killed and wounded at least four members of the security forces in Lome,
 primarily in opposition-dominated neighborhoods. The military and the Government
 blamed COD-IT for the killings. On January 30, members of the security forces re-
 sponded to these attacks by firing indiscriminately for . period of 8 hours in various
 Lome neighborhoods, killing at least 12 people and wounding 31 or more. Security
 forces ransacked several houses belonging to opposition leaders and looted over 20
 stores. Much higher figures of dead and wounded have been cited for the January
 25 and 30 attacks, but these could not be confirmed. The January 30 incident pro-
 voked the flight of more than 250,000 Togolese to neighboring countries. In addition
 roughly 125,000 were displaced within the country as primarily Lome residents fled
 the capital's violence for the relatively peaceful countryside.
 On March 25, in an attack credibly attributed to armed Togolese oppositionists,
 a group of commandos, some based in Ghana, attacked Lome's main military camp,
 Ding General Mawulikplimi Amegi, President Eyadema's personal military Chief
 of Staff, and severely wounding the Commander of the Presidential Guard, Lt. Col.
 Gnandi Akpo, who later died of his injuries. The apparent aim of the attack was
 to kill President Eyadema. In retaliation, over a period of several days security
 forces summarily executed at least 20 Togolese, mainly soldiers. The victims in-
 cluded Colonel Koffi Tepe, Deputy Chief of Staff of the armed forces, who was later
 accused publicly by the Defense Minister of involvement in the March 25 attack, two
 of Tepe's sons, and one nephew. Well over 300 soldiers sought refuge in Ghana and
 Benin. Victims of the purge appear to have included soldiers suspected of involve-
 ment in the March 25 attack, those thought to have opposition or democratic ten-
 dencies, and some simply belonging to southern ethnic groups.
 It was unknown whether these extrajudicial killings referred to above and var-
 iously attributed to elements of the Government or the opposition were specifically
 directed by higher authorities on either side. The Government took no effective ac-
 tion to arrest or punish the perpetrators of any of the January or March attacks.
 It did issue a warrant for the arrest of opposition olitical leader Gilchrist Olympio,
 which was later withdrawn when Olympio officiary declared his candidacy for the
 Presidency. COD-II members denied involvement in the March 25 attack.
 Political and extrajudicial killings continued throughout the year. For example, on
 April 15, members of the security forces in Cinkasse, northern Togo, shot to death
 three anti-Eyadema demonstrators. On election eve, August 24, members of the se-
 curity forces in Lome shot and killed gas station attendant Joseph Akara and
 wounded Louis Amedome, Secretary-General in the Mayor's office of Lome, as the
 two passed close to the Ghana border during the night. Government spokesmen sub-
 sequently claimed that the security forces had thus foiled a cross-border incursion
 by oppositionists, although no evidence of in:olvement in the purported incursion
 by Akara or Amedome was presented. On August 26-27, 19 persons died under
 mysterious circumstances while in police custody. The 19, as well as others, had
 been arrested in Agbandi and Diguina, near Blitta, central Togo, for their alleged
 destruction of polling places on election day, August 25. They were beaten at the
 time of arrest, and, according to credible reports, the 19 died of suffocation because
 of confinement in a crampe , airless cell. Among those who died were four young
 boys, aged between 12 and 15. The Government claimed, unconvincingly, that the
 fatalities were caused by poisoned food brought by the victims' friends and relatives.
 b. Disappearance.-No confirmed cases of disappearances were reported during
 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruet, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although detailed information was lacking, there were plausible reports that Togo's
 security forces tortured detainees on several occasions in 1993, including, according
 to the defense lawyer, the suspects in a July political bombing case (see Section
 1.e.). Torture appears most commonly to take the form of severe beatings. Detainees
 are frequently beaten by the security forces after arrest.
 Prison conditionsremained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and inadequate
 food and medical care. The International Committee of the Red Cross and local pri-
 
 
 302
 vate organizations are allowed access to prisons for monitoring purposes with ad-
 vance government permission.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under long-standing Togolese law, per-
 sons arrested may be held incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an ad-
 ditional 48-hour extension in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice, most de-
 tentions conform to this provision. However, prisoners may legally be detained with-
 out bail for lengthy periods once they have appeared be fore a judge. Bail is rarely
 granted for serious crimes. Access is normally granted to family members and attor-
 neys after the initial 48- or 96-hour detention period. Warrants are issued by a
 judge or senior police official. Although detainees have the right to be informed of
 the charges against them, this is not always done in practice. Pretrial investigation
 is conducted by a special judge who examines the adequacy of the evidence and de-
 cides on bail.
 Nevertheless, the shortage of qualified judicial personnel, especially judges, the
 lack of training and material resources, and official indifference have produced a
 backlog of prisoners who are held for long periods of time-in some cases 1 to 3
 years-before being brought to trial. Most pretrial detainees are accused of common
 crimes, but a few are accused of politically motivated crimes. The Government fre-
 quently used brief investigative detentions of less than 48 hours, some of which
 were related to the detainee's opposition political activity. For example, Alessi Wil-
 son, the treasurer of the Togolese Human Rights League, was held by authorities
 for more than a day due to his investigation of the killing of Isaac Gbikbi.
 The number of political detainees held by the Government at year's end was un-
 known, but there were at least several, despite government denials. Ex-Corporal
 Bikagni Nikabou, who was alleged to have smuggled arms into Togo for use by op-
 position militants, has been detained without trial since October 1992. His father
 and brother, who were arrested shortly thereafter, continued to be detained without
 charges being brought against them.
 In 1993 there were no persons formally exiled from Togo. However, most opposi-
 tion leaders left Togo for an extended period for reasons o personal sar'ty following
 the January 30 random shootings in Lome. Subsequently, most top opposition lead-
 ers returned to Toga by July.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The judicial system, while formally independent
 of the Government, is subject to intervention and manipulation by the executive
 branch. This was most evident in the 1993 Supreme Court's decision to exclude Gil-
 christ Olympio from the presidential race.
 The judicial system employs both African traditional law and the Napoleonic Code
 in trying criminal and civil cases. The Supreme Court stands at the apex of the
 court system. Special courts exist to handle cases related to public security (State
 Security Court), embezzlement of public funds (Tribunal for Recovery of Public
 Funds), and violent crimes (Court of Assizes). The State Security Court has not con-
 vened in recent years.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.). The
 result was a serious impediment to the delivery of justice. Trials are open to the
 public, and judicial procedures are respected. Defendants have the right to counsel
 from the preliminary investigative phase, may confront witnesses and present evi-
 dence, and enjoy a presumption of innocence. Lower court decisions may be ap-
 pealed to two higher courts. In rural areas, the village chief or Council of Elders
 may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who reject the traditional ruling may
 take their case to the regular court system, which is the starting point for cases in
 urban areas.
 There were no clear cases of political prisoners (as distinct from political detain-
 ees) in Togo in 1993. On September 10, the Third Chamber of the Lome Criminal
 Court convicted two members of the opposition political party Democratic Conven-
 tion of the African People (CDPA), Gerard Akoumey and Stephane Koudossou, of
 placing a bomb in July at the headquarters of the Action Committee for Renewal
 (CAR) opposition political party. The bomb caused minor injuries to several persons
 and modest damage to the CAR headquarters and the adjacent National Human
 Rights Commission offices. The defendants publicly confessed, but some opposition
 fig.ures asserted that the charges were trumped up. The lawyers for the defendants
 withdrew from the case when their arguments alleging that one defendant was un-
 derage and that the confessions had been coerced were rejected by the Court. The
 defendants were convicted nonetheless in the absence of counsel. The trial fell short
 of a fair trial by internationally accepted standards.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, searches of private residences may be authorized by a judge or sen-
 ior police official. In political and national security cases, the security forces need
 no prior authorization. Telephone taps and monitoring of correspondence are once
 
 
 again being practiced by the Government after a year's hiatus. The police and Gen-
 darmerie continue to maintain domestic intelligence services.
 There were massive violations of privacy and home by security forces in the Janu-
 ary and March disturbances (see Section La.). Death threats and apparent surveil-
 lance by government forces directed against opposition leaders were common. Some
 prominent figures avoided living at home because of the perceived threat to their
 safety. The Government has undertaken no investigations of these abuses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press. These rights, however, were often constrained by threats, harassment,
 damage to property, and personal violence. Forces sympathetic to the Eyadema Gov-
 ernment were most likely responsible for these actions.
 Approximately 15 independent weekly or biweekly newspapers were published in
 1993 and were often critical of the Government. Wile opposition newspapers are
 widely available in Lome, some have reported difficulties in distributing their edi-
 tions in interior regions because of harassment from supporters of President
 Eyadema.
 On February 26, unknown assailants severely wounded the editor in chief of the
 opposition newspaper Ablode, Leopold Ayiti, who also was a spokesman for COD II.
 So far as is known, no efforts have been made to apprehend the perpetrator of the
 crime. On April 15, a group of persons some reported to be in military uniform, en-
 tered and ransacked the offices of the Tribune Des Democrates, an opposition news-
 paper, beating members of the newspaper staff who were present. It is again be-
 lieved that the perpetrators were members of the security forces, possibly angered
 by articles strongly critical of the security forces.
 On May 25, a bomb exploded at the Grandes Editions printing plant, publisher
 of three opposition newspapers. Two of these newspapers are now printed in Benin.
 On June 4, a small explosion shattered the windows of the building housing the op-
 position newspaper Atopani Express. Pro-Eyadema elements, perhaps associated
 with the security forces, were the likely perpetrators.
 The 8-month general strike (November 1992-August 1993) had a deleterious effect
 on the news industry. The strike, triggered by public outrage over soldiers taking
 members of the HCR hostage in November 1992, had primarily political aims, in-
 cluding calls for a politically neutral security force to provide election security, neu-
 trality by the army, and more opposition representation in the Cabinet. When the
 strike began, most journals suspended publication as a gesture of support for the
 strike. As the strike wore on, opposition newspapers began to publish special edi-
 tions at half the regular price or, in some cases, had to suspend operations for lack
 of income. Most of the major independent weekly and biweekly newspapers had re-
 sumed regular publication by September 1993.
 The Minister of Communications and Culture convened a meeting in May with
 representatives of the independent media and cautioned them to be more respon-
 sible in their reporting. The Interior Minister in August warned newspapers and
 tract publishers that they would be prosecuted for publishing defamatory material
 and that the offending publications would be seized.
 In the last quarter of 1993, official harassment of the opposition press increased,
 including through the courts. Government authorities seized several opposition
 newspapers on the grounds that they lacked complete information in their
 mastheads as required by law. In November the authorities detained a representa-
 tive of the opposition newspaper Ibanou Express, Claude Gumzoe, for more than a
 week when he was found carrying a copy of the Express into the countryside. On
 November 17, they arrested Katakpaou Toure, the director of the opposition news-
 paper Lettre de Tchaoudjo, for publishing an alleged defamatory article. Subse-
 quently, a court fined Toure $20,000 (5.5 million C FA francs) and gave him a 12-
 month prison sentence, with 11 months suspended, for defaming President Eyadema
 and Defense Minister Bouraima. Toure was released immediately since he had al-
 ready served more than 1 month in jail awaiting trial. However, three other mem-
 bers of his newspaper's staff, arrested at the same time as Toure, apparently on
 similar grounds, remained in custody without trial at year's end.
 In another case, on November 24, the Government tried in absentia in the Lome
 Criminal Court the director of publication of Ibanou Express, Komlan Ihougan, and
 a staff writer, Angele Kpanouvi, on charges of defamingPresident Eyadema. On De-
 cember 17, the Court sentenced Ihougan and Kpanouvi in absentia to 3 years' im-
 prisonment and fined them $7 275 (2 million CFA francs). Court proceedings in a
 case stemming from charges of defamation brought in September 1992 against the
 director of a leading weekly, La Parole, had yet to be concluded.
 
 
 In 1993 the official media (two radio stations, one television station one daily
 newspaper) provided coverage that was strmngly slanted in favor o? President
 Eyadema and the Government. Except for the 2-week official campaign period just
 before the August 25 presidential election, which the opposition boycotted, the state
 media deliberately ignored opposition activities or statements and any international
 commentary critical of the Government.
 Twoprivate Ghana-based Togolese radio stations broadcast opposition views in
 1993. One, Radio Liberte, broadcast a call to arms to the Togolese people as the
 March 25 attack on Lome's main military camp was under way. These stations were
 heavily jammed by the Togolese Government. Two pro-Eyadema private radio sta-
 tions were established in 1993.
 The University of Benin, Togo's sole university, was closed during much of the
 long general strike. Most primary and secondary schools were closed as well. Aca-
 demic freedom exists in the sense that there is an atmosphere in which ideas and
 differences of opinion can in principle be debated, but in practice opinions expressed
 in academic forums tend to be muted because of concerns about potential govern-
 ment harassment.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, Togo-
 lese are free to assemble and to organize in associations and political parties. Public
 demonstrations require advance notification, and on occasion the Government bans
 demonstrations or modifies their time or place, citing grounds of public safety or in-
 terference with public business. In September the Government issued a declaration
 that henceforth demonstrations would be banned on weekdays in order to avoid in-
 terference with work.
 In practice, security forces repeatedly used excessive force to prevent political as-
 sembly and demonstrations and to harass opposition leaders (see Section L.a.). On
 January 19, government security forces shot and wounded four persons in a crowd
 of citizens gathered in a peaceful prodemocracy demonstration to show support for
 the High Council of the Republic.
 Political groups from southern Togo hesitated to campaign in the north, the Presi-
 dent's home area, where they were sometimes harassed or attacked by supporters
 of the President. Progovernment figures, including the Prime Minister, were occa-
 sionally subject to harassment when visiting opposition strongholds in southern
 Togo.
 There are a number of private associations. In order to be officially recognized,
 private associations must register with the Government, a procedure that is not un-
 duly burdensome.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, which is
 enjoyed in practice in terms of religious belief, clergy, and religious publications.
 Non-Togolese clergy are welcome in Togo. They are free to proselytize and engage
 in other religious activities.
 Local religious groups are free to maintain contacts with coreligionists in other
 countries. There are no restrictions on travel for religious purposes. All official reli-
 gious observances are ecumenical in nature, and the Government does not favor any
 specific religion. Membership in a particular religious group confers no advantage
 or disadvantage in the regime.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right of domestic and foreign travel and emigration, the right to
 change residence or workplace, and the right to return to the country are generally
 res ected.
 gore than 250,000 Togolese, mainly southerners, fled to neighboring Benin and
 Ghana, and roughly 125,000 persons moved from their homes to new locations with-
 in Togo after the January and March events. By the end of the year, many Togolese,
 with government encouragement, had returned from Benin and Ghana and from the
 interior, although others remained in their place of refuge, concerned about unset-
 tled conditions and their personal safety.
 Refugees are permitted to stay in Togo and are not forced to return to countries
 in which they fear persecution. An estimated 300 officially recognized refugees re-
 side in Togo. They are mainly Ghanaians and Liberians.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1993 the people of Togo did not enjoy the right to change their government
 by peaceful means. President Gnassingbe Eyadema dominated the Government. De-
 claring that the transition government and its institutions in their present form ex-
 pired on December 31, 1992, President Eyadema on January 18 unilaterally
 reappointed Joseph Koffigoh as Prime Minister. The opposition and the High Coun-
 cil of the Republic rejected Koffigoh's appointment as unconstitutional, since the
 
 
 305
 HCR under the interim Constitution has the power to name or change the Prime
 Minister. This dispute left the Prime Minister and the Government he formed in
 February in an ambiguous legal status. While nominally independent, the crisis
 Government headed by Prime Minister Koffigoh was, in fact, subordinate to Presi-
 dent Eyadema.
 The leislative branch, the HCR elected by the National Conference in 1991, did
 not function in 1993. Most HCR members fled Togo after the January 30 shootings
 in Lome, making it difficult or impossible to gather a quorum.
 Presidential elections held on August 25 were seriously flawed. Although the mo-
 dalities for the elections had been agreed in difficult negotiations between the oppo-
 sition and the President's representatives, culminating in the Ouagadougou Accords
 of July 11, the Eyadema regime did not faithfully implement them. One major oppo-
 sition candidate, Gilchrist Olympio, was excluded from running by the Supreme
 Court on essentially technical grounds. The other two major opposition candidates,
 Edem Kodjo and Yaovi Agboyibor, ultimately boycotted the elections and called on
 their supporters also to boycott the polls, publicly basing their decision on the tardy
 and flawed electoral preparations. After Kodjo s withdrawal, the four opposition
 members of the independent National Electoral Commission withdrew from the
 Commission, as did some opposition supporters on the local electoral commissions
 and polling staffs. The opposition parties did not provide delegates to observe polling
 operations as allowed by the Electoral Code and generally failed to demonstrate a
 commitment to prepare seriously for the elections.
 In the absence of meaningful opposition, and with only a minority of voters, oing
 to the polls, President Eyadema won reelection by default for a 5-year term. There
 were many irregularities, e.g., inflated and inaccurate electoral lists and double vot-
 ing. There was also intimidation and sacking of polling places by opposition sym-
 pathizers intended to impede the elections.
 French official observers, as well as private observers, specially selected and in-
 vited by the Togolese Government, remained to monitor the elections, while an offi-
 cial German delegation and a joint National Democratic Institute/Carter Center del-
 egation, led by former President Carter, withdrew after all remaining major opposi-
 tion candidates decided to boycott the elections. The Government allowed some non-
 governmental organizations to observe the elections but failed to grant permission
 to others such as the Inter-African Union for Human Rights.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in political activi-
 ties, and many women do participate through membership in associations and politi-
 cal parties, teachers' unions, and protest groups. However, the total number of
 women in government is small. Five women are in the 79-member HCR, and 1
 woman is a Minister in the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several private human rights groups exist, among them the Togolese Human
 Rights League and the Association for the Promotion of the Rule of Law. The Togo-
 lese Human Rights League prepared some reports in 1993 on the Togolese human
 rights situation. However, the Eyadema-controlled security forces subjected human
 rights monitors to threats and harassment. In the wake of the January 30 violence,
 many human rights monitors left Togo. None was able to function effectively as a
 result.
 The National Human Rights Commission (CNDH), established and funded by the
 Government was also largely inactive through much of 1993 because of the closure
 of its office during the e nded general strike and the departure abroad of its presi-
 dent because of security forces' threats against him. Citing the long-term absence
 of the CNDH's president from Togo and the expiration of the terms of office of
 CNDH members, the Government in October issued a decree designating four mem-
 bers of the CNDH's Executive Committee to take charge of current operations until
 a new permanent commission was formed, as called for by the Constitution. The
 president of the CNDH a strong critic of the Eyadema regime, was excluded from
 the reconstituted CNDh Executive Committee, and denounced the Government's
 move as illegal interference with the Commission's affairs.
 A Ministry of Human Rights also exists, but since September 1992 it has been
 combined with the Ministry of Social Welfare. This Ministry conducted little activity
 in 1993 due in part to the general strike which emptied many government offices.
 The Covernment received visits from representatives of governmental and non-
 governmental international human rights organizations in connection with observa-
 tion of the August 25 elections. In addition, in December a representative of the
 Montreal-based International Center for Human Rights and Democratic Develop-
 ment visited Togo. On March 11, the United Nations Human Rights Commission
 
 
 306
 
 adopted a resolution deploring the repeated acts of violence which resulted in many
 civilians being killed or wounded and the use of force by the armed forces during
 peaceful gatherings. Amnesty International published a critical report on Togo's
 human rights situation on October 5. The Government responded publicly, asserting
 that Amnesty International favored the opposition and was engaging in a maladroit
 attempt to destablize the country.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family ori *n, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal political or other
 convictions. Legal mechanisms exist for redress of discrimination complaints, but
 they are not very effective. Private sector discrimination on the basis of ethnic group
 and gender, while not officially sanctioned, is common.
 Women.-Notwithstanding constitutional protections and economic and social
 rights, including maternity leave benefits, set forth in the Family Code adopted in
 early 1980, in practice women continue to be subjected to discrimination, especially
 in education, pension benefits, and traditional law. A husband may legally oppose
 his wife's right to work and assert control over her salary. Employers are often re-
 luctant to hire women, especially to positions of responsibility. Far fewer women
 than men receive university education, and the number of women graduates from
 secondary schools is low, which accounts for a low female literacy rate of 31 percent
 (compared with 56 percent for males).
 In the urban economic sphere, women dominate both local market activities and
 commerce with Togo's neighbors, often amassing considerable wealth in the process.
 However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas, where most of the population
 lives, leave women with little time for anything other than taxing domestic and ag-
 ricultural field work. More than civil law, customary or traditional law-which af-
 fects the vast majority of women--discriminates against women, e.g., a wife has no
 rights in the case of divorce, separation, or death ofa spouse.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs in Togo. Mechanisms exist
 within both the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for re-
 dress, but the police rarely intervene in domestic violence cases. In recent years, in-
 stances of trafficking in Togolese women for purposes of prostitution have come to
 public attention. Local houses of prostitution exist. In addition, Togolese women
 have been promised jobs in the Middle East or Europe, transported there and then
 forced into prostitution and sometimes otherwise abused. There are no specific laws
 dealing with trafficking of this nature, and the Government has made no visible ef-
 forts to curtail it.
 Children.-The Government devotes few resources to children's welfare. For ex-
 ample, there are only a handful of juvenile courts, and children are often mixed with
 adult criminals in jails. Orphans or other needy children are aided more by ex-
 tended families or private organizations than by the State. Tradition often dictates
 that, especially in financially strapped families, a male child is selected to be edu-
 cated in preference to a female. In fact, females receive only one-third of the school-
 ing of males, according to a U.N. study.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is performed at an early age and is prac-
 ticed by a few ethnic groups in Togo's northern and central regions. While some re-
 ports indicate the practice may be gradually diminishing, an expert in the field indi-
 cates that as many as 50 percent of the females may have been mutilated.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-The security forces are dominated by north-
 ern ethnic groups, while commerce and the professions tend to be the preserve of
 southerners. Most political parties are dominated by southerners, except for the pro-
 Eyadema arty. Ethnic rivalries dating from precolonial times have been exacer-
 bated by tle civil unrest of recent years and inadequate law enforcement.
 With the rise in tensions between the north and south of Togo, some residents
 of minority ethnic groups in those regions have been harassed and attacked by their
 neighbors belonging to the majority groups and consequently moved back under
 pressure to their home regions. Southern Togolese were predominant among those
 who fled from Togo to neighboring Benin and Ghana after the January 30 shooting
 spree by security force members.
 People with Disabilities.-The Constitution obliges the Government to aid dis-
 abled persons and shelter them from social injustice, but government assistance is
 limited in practice. Although disabled persons are not subject to official state dis-
 crimination and hold some responsible positions in the Government, disabled per-
 sons have no meaningful recourse against private sector discrimination. Some dis-
 abled persons find assistance and a livelihood in privately supported workshops,
 
 
 while many others are compelled to beg in the streets. The Government does not
 mandate accessibility of public or private facilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution gives most workers the right to
 join unions and the right to strike. Members of the security forces, including firemen
 and policemen, are not allowed to join unions or strike, and government health care
 personnel do not have the right to strike. As approximately 80 percent of the popu-
 lation is engaged in subsistence agriculture, the work force in the formal (wage) sec-
 tor is smal, involving some 80,000 to 100,000 workers, of whom 60-70 percent are
 estimated to be members or supporters of a union.
 Prior to 1991, the Government effectively limited the right of association by re-
 quiring all workers to pay dues to the National Confederation of Togolese Workers
 (CNTT), which was formerly associated with the ruling party, a practice that had
 been criticized for years by the International Labor Organization (ILO). This prac-
 tice gave the C   a de facto monopoly on the labor movement, although trade
 unions could and did exist outside the CNTT. In Aug at 1991, the National Con-
 ference suspended the automatic withholding of CNTT dues for all workers, and it
 froze C's asets. A number of trade unions left the CNT, some of which then
 affiliated with two new federations: the Labor Federation of Togolese Workers
 (CSTT) and the National Union of Independent Syndicates (UNSIT).he CNTT has
 probably been surpassed in membership by these new unions which, while inde-
 pendent of any political party, cooperated closely with the opposition parties in the
 recent 8-month general strike. While the CNTT no longer has a formal government
 affiliation, it remains assoiated with the Government and the former sole political
 party, the RPtw (Rally of the Togolese People).
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against workers' rights for reasons of
 sex, origin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution
 against strikers. Many civil servants were transferred in the wake of their participa-
 tion in the general strike, and such transfers were widely denounced by labor lead-
 ersand opposition politicians as arbitrary and discriminatory.
 After the military takeover of the HCR in October 1992, the independent unions
 belonging to the Independent Collective of Unions (CSI) called for an unlimited gen-
 eral strike, which began on November 16, 1992. It officially ended Auphst 2, 1993,
 after the signing of the Ouagadougou Accords which called for multi party presi-
 dential elections. Striker demands were primarily political. Because of the lon gen-
 eral strike, there was little or no collective bargaining or other labor activity in
 1993.
 The various federations and unions are free to associate with international labor
 groups. The CNit and the UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-oThe Labor Code guarantees
 workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal (wage) sector em-
 ployees are nominally covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However, true
 collective bargaining is limited by the Government's role in producing one tripartite
 bargaining agreement signed by the unions mangement, and the Government.
 This agreement sets wage standards for alli formsl sector employees. Individual
 groups in the formal sector can attempt, through collective bargaining, to negotiate
 a more favorable package, and some do, though it is not a common practice. The
 CNTT had a role in the bargaining process when it was the de facto monopoly labor
 federation, but it acted more as a spokesman for labor inter-sts within the Govern-
 ment and ruling party than as an independent labor federation. Since 1991 the
 CNTT, as well as the newer labor federations, have taken a more active role in inde-
 pendent collective bargaining.
 The 1974 Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor
 is charged with resolving labor-related complaints.
 A law allowing the establishment of export processing zones (EPZ's) was enacted
 in late 1989. A number of companies have received EPZ status, and about a dozen
 have begun operations. The EPZ law provides exemptions from some provisions of
 the Togolese Labor Code, notably the regulations on hiring and firing workers. Em-
 ployees of EPZ firms do not enjoy the same protection against antiunion discrimina-
 tion as do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law is silent on the
 question, forced or compulsory labor does not exist in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial
 and technical employment require a minimum age of 18. These age requirements
 are generally enforced in the formal sector in urban areas by inspectors from the
 
 
 308
 Ministry of Labor. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in farming and petty
 trading, very young children traditionally assist in their families' work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages are set by the Government
 for different categories, but less than the official minimum wage is often paid in
 practice. Official minimum wages range from approximately $55 to $90 (14,000 to
 22,000 CFA francs) per month. Many workers cannot maintain a decent standard
 of living at the lower official minimum wages, and many must supplement their in-
 comes through second jobs or subsistence farming. The Ministry of Labor is osten-
 sibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage system, but there is no ef-
 fective enforcement in practice. Labor practices are regulated by the Labor Code.
 The Code stipulates that there should be equal pay for equal work, regardless of
 sex, and this provision is generally observed in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory; and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 Enforcement is weak, however, and these provisions are not universally respected.
 Health and safety standards in the workplace are determined by a technical con-
 sulting committee in the Ministry of Labor, which may levy penalties on employers
 who do not meet the standards. In practice, the Ministry's enforcement of the var-
 ious provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Larger enterprises are required to pro-
 vide medical services for their employees and usually attempt to respect occupa-
 tional health and safety rules, but smaller firms ofe do not.
