TOGO
While the State Department accurately reports the litany of human rights violations that occurred in Togo during 1991, it fails to point out the harmful impact of these violations on the future of democracy in Togo. The report states that despite the turmoil in late 1991, President Eyadema's powers were greatly reduced and that Prime Minister Koffigoh was "Head of Government and in charge of the military." Yet the report also acknowledges that the military attempted several coups and besieged and later stormed the Prime Minister's office, forcing him to surrender. The Prime Minister was compelled by these actions to recognize the Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais, the former ruling party, previously banned by the transitional parliament. The report fails to convey the danger these events pose to the fledgling multiparty system.
Gnassingb^ Eyadema has ruled Togo with little regard for human rights for 24 years. It is certainly a hopeful sign that he has given in to pressure to form a multiparty government. But at the same time, he has sought to thwart every effort to truly establish multiparty rule. Yet the State Department report seems to accept at face value his proclamation of support for democracy and his denials of responsibility for human rights violations committed by the army (which continues to be under the command and control of President Eyadema). The report, for example, asserts that "[m]any Togolese believe that President Eyadema played a role in the military uprisings, even though he denies it and worked on all three occasions to restore calm," a statement that gives unsubstantiated credence to the President's denials. Last year's critique noted that the report had described "serious violations of human rights without glossing them over with upbeat language or deriving false optimism from the Togolese government's promises and symbolic gestures." Unfortunately, the same cannot be said this year. While last year's report resisted the temptation to derive hope from symbolic changes, this year's report emphasizes words and gestures at the expense of deep-rooted problems.
Although historic progress was made at the National Conference in August, the report fails to mention that the Conference itself was
371
Togo
disrupted at least twice. During the opening days of the conference, the author of a book that was severely critical of the Eyadema government was, according to press accounts, "kidnapped by 50 armed policemen who surrounded [him] and forced [him] barefooted to a lorry in which [he] was taken to the police station." Later in August, President Eyadema suspended the conference and surrounded the hall with troops, although he later relented and allowed the conference to continue.
Military involvement in human rights atrocities are also at times glossed over. The report, for example, asserts that members of the Togolese army "are believed" to be responsible for most of the deaths of 28 civilians whose bodies were recovered from a Lomé lagoon in April. Yet the report later acknowledges that members of the military publicly admitted their participation and that the National Human Rights Commission unanimously concluded that the army was responsible for the deaths.
The army, composed primarily of members of President Eyadema's own ethnic group, has remained loyal to him during his presidency, and key command positions are held by hand-picked supporters and presidential family members. Many reputable publications have suggested that ethnic violence that has flared up over the past two years may have been instigated by the armed forces or the President himself, in an effort to show that multipartyism will lead to chaos.
Since the National Conference, President Eyadema has significantly weakened the Prime Minister's position; reinstituted his political party (RPT); maintained control over the military; and retained more resources than any opposition group. The report glosses over the failure to effect fundamental structural change that could enhance human rights in Togo.
The report contains similarly overly optimistic assessments in its section on fireedom of speech and press. The opening sentence begins: "While Togo achieved freedom of speech and of the press in 1991. . . and concludes by contradicting itself with numerous examples of
372
Togo
violation of these freedoms. Radio and television are still government controlled, which is especially important in a country like Togo, where the literacy rate is low, newspapers are expensive and the overwhelming majority of people obtain information from radio and television.
The report accurately documents limits on press freedom, but neglects a number of examples of military threats against individuals in the government-controlled media who attempted to present an independent political perspective. Although the report states that: "Radio and television provided live coverage of almost ail of the National Conference proceedings," it fails to mention an incident in August when the military surrounded the radio station and interrupted live transmission of a debate at the conference. Also neglected are the August search of the home of the editor-in-chief of the television station after he demanded the creation of an independent press, and an incident in October in which members of the armed forces held a gun to the head of Mawuenya Edevi Ocloo during a radio broadcast and forced him to read a statement denouncing the transitional government.
The report fails to describe daily harassment of the press that includes threatening telephone calls, surveillance, interrogations and confiscation of papers. Moreover, no description of the practice of pre-publication censorship is provided - newspapers must submit three copies of each edition to the Ministry of the Interior, which has four hours to approve or disapprove publication.
In addition to failing to mention the search of the home of the editor-in-chief of the television station, the report mischaracterizes the search of the home of opposition political leader Yawo Agboyibor. It reports that his wife was "manhandled" by members of the army in civilian clothes who then set fire to his home and cars; Amnesty International reports that 50 armed men broke into the house, vandalized and burned it, and severely beat Mrs. Agboyibor and another family member.
The report inadequately assesses the police and gendarmerie's continued role in domestic surveillance. For example, it makes the
373
Togo
sweeping statement that domestic intelligence services "are no longer focused on the political opposition." Yet the report acknowledges the burning of Mr. Agboyibor's house and police activities against newspapers and even says that "efforts to eliminate the domestic activities of military intelligence have not been completely successful."
Although the report describes the army's violent attacks on demonstrators in the introductory overview, it fails to describe these and other incidents in sufficient detail in the section addressing freedom of peaceftil assembly and association. Specific incidents included use of excessive force to disperse crowds during the student protest in March, during which a number of students, as many as 12 in some reports, were killed. The report characterizes these demonstrations as "erosions of Government control" and not as deliberate acts to punish and intimidate government opponents.
The State Department was careful to correct a flaw in last year's report in the section on fair public trials. Last year, the report buried the fact that the judicial system is not independent of the executive; this year, the section opens with this information.
Overall, the State Department's 1991 report on human rights in Togo provides a good description of many of the significant violations prior to the National Conference. It fails, however, to recognize the urgency of the current situation and President Eyadema's responsibility for placing obstacles in the path of transition to democratic rule. It conveniently divides the year in half in order to be able to conclude that "[b]y midyear, Togo's human rights situation had improved significantly with the installation of the transitional Government and institution of a democratic interim Constitution." The attempted military coups of October and November and the December kidnapping of the Prime Minister pose grave threats to the long-term prospects for human rights and multiparty democracy in Togo. In this connection, it is significant that large numbers of persons have fled Togo fearing political violence and repression because of the president's and the military's thwarting of the democratic process. The human rights situation remains precarious.
374
