Togo
While the State Department accurately reports on many aspects of the status of human rights in Togo in 1992, it fails to discuss the most important issue currently facing Togo ~ the extent to which President Gnassingbe Eyadema, who had ruled Togo as absolute dictator for 25 years, is personally responsible for setbacks to democracy and the political violence plaguing the country.
For example, while the report states that "[t]he struggle toward democracy was dealt serious blows during the year," it does not state who is responsible for these "serious blows." Indeed, in another section, the report states only that "[slcheduled elections were postponed because of political violence and squabbling among various factions." The report does concede (in its section on the right of citizens to change their government) that security forces committed most of the violence, but the report's failure to mention the military in other sections, especially in the introduction, gives the impression that the military cannot be held responsible for the majority of the political violence. For example, the introduction states only that "(a)ssassinations and attempted assassinations were part of a larger climate of insecurity in which prominent figures were threatened, and many bombings and attacks by gunmen were carried out throughout the country."
Moreover, while the report accurately describes many incidents of political violence in 1992, it completely fails to discuss any of the evidence which demonstrates that President Eyadema, as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces,
is personally responsible. First, the report fails to explain sufficiently that it is clear that the army is intensely loyal to President Eyadema and that all of their violent actions have redounded to his benefit. For example, the report does not mention that 70% of the soldiers and 90% of the officers in the army are members of the Kabyes, President Eyadema's own ethnic group, and that the General, Mr. Bonfoh, is President Eyadema's close confidant. Moreover, as the report accurately notes, the August 1992 negotiations to end the impasse between the transition government and President Eyadema, "enhanced President Eyadema's power, putting him in charge of security issues, giving his political party greater representation in the Government, and requiring his agreement to a new ministerial cabinet." The report fails to note, however, that the August negotiations were the outgrowth of the instability created by the military's violent acts. In this vein, it is significant that the State Department fails to report that President Eyadema has continually opposed efforts by the opposition to reconstitute an army which has been responsible for numerous human rights abuses because such a reorganization would effectively weaken his power base.
Second, while the report notes that the Paris-based International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) attributed the assassination attempt on Gilchrest Olympio, a leading opposition candidate, "to security forces associated with the President," the report fails to mention that the FIDH explicitly implicates Captain Ernest Gnassingbe, President Eyadema's son. The report also fails to mention that the Inter-
379
Togo
African Union for Human Rights found that Ernest Gnassingbe was personally responsible for human rights violations in the Bassar region. Finally, on October 7, Corporal Nikabou Bikagni, a member of the Togolese League of Human Rights, was arrested by members of the armed forces controlled by Captain Gnassingbe. Clearly, the alleged involvement of President Eyadema's son in numerous human rights violations also raises questions concerning President Eyadema's culpability.
The report also fails to mention that President Eyadema has publicly stated numerous times that he has not given up his power. For example, Le Monde reported on October 1, 1992 that President Eyadema has stated that "while the 1991 National Conference declared itself sovereign, the sovereignty belongs to the people, and I am their sovereign. I was elected to be President until December 31, 1993." President Eyadema was elected in a 1988 election in which he was the only candidate and which was neither free nor fair.
President Eyadema has repeatedly claimed that the army acts spontaneously and he usually urges the army to return to its barracks when it has engaged in illegal activity. The opposition, however, has argued with some justification that President Eyadema's actions are a ruse. Amnesty International and numerous expert analysts on Togo have agreed and specifically charged President Eyadema with thwarting democracy in Togo. While the State Department report may not have taken a position on President Eyadema's responsibility because it viewed the evidence as ambiguous, at a minimum, the
report failed to comply with its obligation to fully air this issue.
A fuller discussion of the October 1992 hostage-taking, which provoked a general strike, would have helped dramatize the degree to which President Eyadema may be held personally responsible for the setbacks to democracy in Togo. The military took members of the High Council of the Republic (HCR) hostage on October 22 to demand that the government release money frozen since August 1991 that the soldiers claimed belonged to the Rassemb/ement du Peup/e Togolais (RPT), the single party formed by President Eyadema during his dictatorship. As the State Department accurately reports, the soldiers physically abused numerous HCR members. President Eyadema, as is his usual practice, demanded that the soldiers return to their barracks. Prime Minister Koffigoh, however, also ordered the Treasury Minister, Kodjo Agbeyome, an Eyadema ally, not to release any funds until the military released the hostages. President Eyadema did not support Prime Minister Koffigoh on this point. The Treasury Minister ignored Prime Minister Koffigoh's orders and released the funds.
In an effort to restore his lost authority, Prime Minister Koffigoh then attempted to discharge the Treasury Minister, the Communications Minister and the Minister of the Interior, the last of whom was suspected of having contributed to numerous human rights abuses. President Eyadema declared these discharges unconstitutional, even though the constitution stated that the Prime Minister was the chief of the government. President Eyadema also declared that he would not follow the Togolese Supreme Court's
380
Togo
decision on this issue because the court's president was appointed by Prime Minister Koffigoh.
In November 1992, immediately after the hostage taking event, the United States (along with France and Germany) suspended a $19 million aid program to Togo. The State Department's report should, but does not, express the same level of concern. The hostage-taking events demonstrate that President Eya-dema will not subject himself to the rule of law.
The report, while it recognizes that President Eyadema is now "in charge of security issues," also fails to specifically condemn him for the failure to investigate and punish past human rights abuses. For example, to date, no formal investigation of the April 1991 Be Lagoon incident, where 31 persons were allegedly killed by security forces, has been undertaken. Although the Togolese National Human Rights Commission requested his cooperation, President Eyadema has taken no action to identify the perpetrators or to bring them to justice. Although this event took place in 1991, the 1992 report should have recounted this significant violation and noted that action has not yet been taken by the government. While the report does note that no effective action was taken to apprehend and punish those responsible for 1992 political and other extrajudicial killings, its failure to mention the continuing failure to investigate or prosecute those responsible for the Be incident is striking.
The State Department also reports in this section that "the armed forces denounced as false a [report of an] assassi-
nation attempt against Gilchrest Olym-pio," without further explanation of what happened. It is unclear why the armed force's denunciation was included in this section. Left alone, it gives the mistaken impression that the army was right, where as discussed above, there is substantial evidence demonstrating the military's involvement in this attempt.
With regard to other sections of the report, some important details have been overlooked. In the section on freedom of movement, the report does not mention that one of the opposition's key demands has been that the Togolese keep open the frontier between Togo and Ghana 24 hours a day. Many southern Togolese, who are generally opposed to President Eyadema, have taken refuge in Ghana when violence has occurred. When the frontier is closed, it is more difficult for them to return once the violence has subsided.
The section dealing with freedom of speech and of the press begins with optimism which is then contradicted by reports of abuse, imprisonment, abduction and harassment of media figures. Last year's critique noted that the 1991 report's section on freedom of speech and press "concluded] by contradicting itself with numerous examples of violation of these freedoms." The section this year repeats this mistake by claiming that "[fjreedom of speech and of the press was exercised in 1992," but then contradicts itself by reporting that "those freedoms were sometimes constrained by episodes of harassment, damage to property [and] threats of violence." These exceptions swallow the report's asserted rule.
381
Togo
The State Department's instructions on the preparation of the reports state that, while reporters must be careful not merely to render an opinion, "it is not sufficient [to indicate that a report of abuse is ambiguous]. We must go on to say whether we believe such reports are credible." The instructions should also require an explanation as to why certain reports or sources are deemed credible and others are not.
For example, in the introduction and in the section on torture and degrading or cruel treatment or punishment, the report states with regard to the kidnapping and torture of Captain Esso Pello that "[t]here was one credible report of torture in 1 992" without further explanation as to what is deemed "credible." The source of the "credible" report of torture is not cited, and examples of reports deemed not credible are not offered for purposes of comparison. There was more than one report of torture in 1 992, and some were from sources that the State Department relies on in other sections, for example, the World Organization Against Torture (OMCT).
An OMCT report charges that Corporal Nikabou Bikagni, a member of the Togolese League of Human Rights, was apprehended and arrested at the Togo-Ghana border on his way to Lomé, on October 7. According to OMCT, Mr. Bikagni "was presented on television showing signs of ill-treatment" on October 8. It further reported that Mr. Bikagni had fled to Ghana in December 1991, seeking refuge after the coup d'etat of December 3 resulted in several threats on his life.
In its section on the government's attitude regarding international and nongovernmental human rights investigations, the report states that "human rights monitors were subject to threats of violence credibly attributed to elements of the security forces," but it does not report that on June 14, Mr. Mba Kassemba, a member of the Executive Bureau of the Togolese League of Human Rights, was seized from his home and taken to an unknown location. His wife reported to OMCT that he was beaten and taken away by heavily armed soldiers. The State Department should have reported that human rights monitors are subject to more than "threats of violence."
The 1992 report was informative and comprehensive in its sections on women's rights, worker rights, freedom of religion and the judiciary. The problems in these areas were specifically reported, including what relief, if any, Togolese law provides, compared with what actually occurs. These discussions also include information on what the government has done (or has not done) to provide relief to minority grdups.
Togo took great strides toward becoming a democratic nation in 1991, and, as the State Department accurately reports, the process was reversed in 1992. Nevertheless, the State Department's report, by glossing over President Eya-dema's role in this deterioration, does not help to further the cause of human rights in Togo. At this moment, it is crucial that the international community put pressure on President Eyadema to allow for democratic change, reformation of the armed forces and prosecution of those responsible for human rights abuses. Unfortu-
382
nately, the State Department report undermines the arguments of those who are attempting to persuade the international community to put such pressure on President Eyadema.
383
