 TOGO
 The Government of Togo is authoritarian, and power is firmly
 centralized in the hands of President General Gnassingbe
 Eyadema. Eyadema is also head of the armed forces and of the
 only legal political party, the Rassemblement Du Peuple
 Togolais. The Eyadema Government has been in power since
 1967. Its legal authority is based on a written Constitution
 adopted by national referendum in 1979. Only party members
 are permitted to participate in the political process. As
 head of the party, President Eyadema dominates the executive,
 legislative, and judicial functions of government. The
 Government's control of the elements of coercion, including
 the military, the Gendarmerie, and civil police (Surete), and
 the wide recognition that it is willing to use them, are
 important factors in maintaining its authority.
 Togo's economy is heavily oriented toward subsistence
 agriculture, with most Togolese participating only marginally
 in the modern (cash) sector. Coffee and cocoa are the only
 significant crop exports. Togo exploits and exports one
 mineral product, phosphate. World prices for these three
 exports have been well below normal recently, and Togo has had
 to institute an austerity program, with attendant hardship on
 the population. Togo also has a small but flourishing
 commercial sector and encourages private enterprise, much of
 which is carried out by women.
 The human rights situation in Togo changed little in 1985.
 Following a series of bomb explosions in August, about 20
 people were arrested on suspicion of antigovernment
 activities, and most are still being held. There were about
 40 persons being held without charge in late 1985 on general
 political grounds. There were also cases of death of several
 persons from unresolved causes while under government
 surveillance/custody.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The death of Colonel Koffi Kongo on March 29 while he was
 under government surveillance led to some speculation that he
 had been killed by security personnel. An Amnesty
 International team visited Lome 10 days later and met with the
 President, other government officials, and Kongo's family,
 including his French wife. All concerned--including the
 attending military physician--said that Kongo had died of a
 heart attack. Although President Eyadema had agreed to an
 autopsy, the family members refused to permit a postmortem
 examination. The causes of his death thus remain unverified.
 During August, there was a series of three separate weekend
 bomb explosions in Lome. The primary purpose appears to have
 been to embarrass the Government. When a bomb went off at the
 national insurance office August 24, an employee who was
 working late was killed by the blast. Those responsible have
 not as yet been identified nor has anyone claimed
 responsibility for the blasts. In addition, the Government
 informed Amnesty International representatives who visited
 Lome in October that one of those who was arrested on
 suspicion of antigovernment activity died of hypertension and
 
 
 351
 TOGO
 heart trouble while under detention. Amnesty International
 said that they had received reports that he died following
 electrical torture. As no judicial inquiry was held following
 his death, it too will likely continue to be surrounded by
 uncertainty as to the actual cause.
 b. Disappearance
 In 1985, there were no reports of disappearance in Togo.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While the President has enjoined Togolese authorities to
 refrain from torturing prisoners, there is no specific
 Togolese law prohibiting torture. Some released prisoners and
 trial defendants have claimed to have been beaten or tortured
 and have alleged that their statements to the police were
 obtained either by threat or application of physical
 coercion. There were several such reports in 1985,
 particularly after the September arrests. Following the visit
 by Amnesty International in October, Amnesty representatives
 said that they had seen 14 of the prisoners, and they all had
 the general look of having been "badly treated." It appears
 to be the general belief of the populace that torture is
 practiced, particularly by the military and the Gendarmerie.
 Prison facilities are overcrowded and rudimentary with limited
 space, light, sanitation facilities, and ventilation. Food
 and medical care are reported to be barely adequate by local
 standards. Families are allowed to visit prisoners and to
 provide food. Only military and paramilitary personnel are
 granted access to Togo's four military prisons. Past reports
 have cited prisoner beatings and hard labor on state-owned
 farms.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Togolese legal system does not include the right of habeas
 corpus, nor does this right exist in practice. Prisoners
 accused of crimes unrelated to political security are usually
 held for no longer than 48 hours prior to indictment or
 provisional release pending investigation, but nothing
 prevents authorities from holding a person beyond that time
 without charge. Arbitrary arrest and detention occur in Togo,
 although such cases are generally confined to those the
 Government considers guilty of "crimes against the public
 trust" (e.g., corruption or threat to national security,
 including political opposition). There is no functioning ball
 system. Those held in administrative or preventive detention
 are usually not formally charged and cannot obtain redress
 through the courts. They may be detained as long as the
 Government deems necessary for the investigation. As many as
 20 people were placed under administrative detention in
 September for antigovernment activities (i.e., possession
 and/or distribution of antigovernment tracts or painting
 antigovernment slogans on walls). They were subsequently
 fired from their jobs. Administrative sanctions against
 officials have also included assignments to residences in
 their home villages, where they are required to report weekly
 to the regional Gendarmerie office.
 Reports indicate the national Gendarmerie has exercised almost
 unlimited power in arresting and detaining persons in Togo.
 
 
 352
 TOGO
 Present practice allows any permanent officer of'the
 Gendarmerie to arrest and detain persons without seeking prior
 permission or submitting a subsequent report. President
 Eyadema is believed to follow such cases closely. The number
 of detainees held by the Gendarmerie in its Lome prison,
 outside the structures of local judicial process, has been
 reported to be as high as 50. Persons detained by the
 military are processed through the military judicial system.
 There is no forced labor in Togo outside the prison system.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Traditional courts at the village level handle a large number
 of civil and even criminal cases, with evidence generally
 being presented by both sides before the village chief or:a
 council of elders who then make a decision. Those who do not
 accept a traditional court's ruling may take cases to the more
 formal legal system existing in the cities. Formal pretrial
 proceedings are sometimes protracted. A crowded court docket
 and shortage of judges make speedy trials unlikely.
 Defendants accused of nonpolitical crimes are generally
 accorded the right to a public trial and the right to be
 represented by counsel. When the defendant cannot afford the
 cost of an attorney, counsel is appointed by the Government.
 A defense attorney is permitted to talk with the defendant
 privately. Defendants and counsel are formally notified of
 charges in writing. Special courts handle security,
 embezzlement of public funds, and violent crimes and observe
 the same standards of justice as regular courts. Togo's
 judicial system is not independent of the executive branch and
 is open to political interference in those trial cases deemed
 important to the Government.
 In July 1985, President Eyadema announced the release of what
 the Government claims to be the last three political prisoners
 it was holding. The three, Kodjobi de Souza, Kaou Sanvi, and
 Kouassi Lanyo Sanvi de Tove, were convicted in 1979 for their
 part in the abortive 1977 coup. Opposition sources outside
 Togo have claimed that there are up to 200 political prisoners
 in Togo but are unable to produce specific names. Nearly all
 of the approximately 50 detainees mentioned in Section ld were
 arrested because they were judged to be threats to internal
 security and thus could be considered political prisoners.
 The number of political exiles is unknown.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 It is generally thought that there is monitoring of
 correspondence and telephones and that there are extensive
 networks of informants in all important sectors of Togolese
 society in order to check on dissident activity. Searches of
 private residences in both civil and criminal cases are
 normally authorized by a judge or senior police official. In
 matters judged by the Government to involve national security,
 searches without formal authorization are permitted.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There is no legal restraint to freedom of speech in Togo. It
 is exercised fully except on political matters. On all
 matters concerning the President or Government, citizens feel
 
 
 353
 TOGO
 constrained and are careful to avoid criticism. A free press
 does not exist in Togo. The Government owns and operates the
 media, which it regards as a vehicle for mobilizing popular
 support for its policies. It does not permit publication or
 circulation of material criticizing its policies or officials
 and considers any such activity a serious offense. From
 time-to-time, the media will report that some cabinet
 ministers and mid-level government functionaries have been
 accused of corruption and/or ineffective implementation of
 programs. Foreign publications normally freely circulate and
 foreign radio broadcasts are not jammed. In early April 1985,
 following the death of Colonel Kongo, one issue of the
 magazine Jeune Afrique was not allowed into Togo. Academic
 freedom is practiced only in nonpolitical fields.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled. Prior government
 approval must be obtained before large groups may assemble.
 Approval for such gatherings involves a political question and
 is granted at the discretion of the Government. This
 effectively precludes antigovernment political meetings.
 Permission for other types of meetings is not difficult to
 obtain. Professional groups are enjoined to avoid political
 activities.
 The single national trade union federation, La Confederation
 Nationale des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT), is controlled by
 the national political party. Organization of workers is
 permitted only under its banner. The federation conveys the
 Government's views and requirements to workers and, on certain
 economic issues, represents workers' concerns to the
 Government. The right to organize is guaranteed under the
 Togolese labor code and all major sectors of the Togolese work
 force are unionized. Workers also have the right to strike,
 but only after every remedy to arbitrate the dispute has been
 throughly exhausted. When disputing parties deadlock, the
 Government involves itself as arbitrator and through this
 informal mechanism, most strikes are averted. Strikes,
 however, have occurred only rarely in the past. In each
 instance, the Government continued to dialogue with striking
 workers and the strikes ended shortly thereafter without
 physical coercion or arrests of striking union members.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion generally prevails in Togo, although the
 Jehovah's Witnesses were banned by a government decree in
 1979. This one religious faith is not recognized by the
 Government as a religious group having the right to conduct
 services, proselytize, or otherwise carry out religious
 activities. There are, however, no known legal penalties for
 being a Jehovah's Witness. No specific religion is favored by
 the Government. There is no requirement for religious groups
 to be licensed by the Government. With the exception of
 Jehovah's Witnesses, the open practice and teaching of
 religion is permitted. There is no restriction on publishing
 strictly religious material. Foreign clergy are allowed to
 proselytize. Local religious groups are permitted contact
 with similar organizations in other countries. No
 restrictions exist on.religious travel. Religious affiliation
 is neither an impediment nor an advantage with regard to
 advancement in Togo and is compatible with membership in
 Togo's only political party.
 
 
 354
 TOGO
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or workplace, is
 allowed for Togolese and foreigners. Domestic travelers may
 encounter security or customs-related official roadblocks.
 Passport issuance is restricted by the Government in order to
 control the number of professional Togolese who emigrate and
 also to keep known political dissidents under close scrutiny.
 Exit visas are also required. Except for the few political
 exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other countries
 may return at will. Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees,
 as well as displaced persons.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Eyadema holds a monopoly of power in Togo and has
 maintained it since 1967. Togo is a one-party state.    There
 are, however, institutions permitting some participation in
 decisionmaking where the President is not directly involved.
 All citizens are considered to be members of the party, and
 active party members may express their views at party meetings
 on issues such as the implementation of policy and the
 behavior of subordinate officials. No challenges are allowed,
 however, to the President's political program and the central
 committee's decisions. During the last election in
 December 1979, President Eyadema was the only candidate and
 was elected for a seven-year term with 99.7 percent of the
 votes. Togo has a 77-member National Assembly which debates
 certain categories of proposed legislation as defined by the
 Constitution but has no real power to reject laws proposed by
 the executive. The National Assembly can and does require
 ministers to justify their budgets, and it gives sanction to
 policy decisions. The National Assembly elections of March 24
 permitted party members, for the first time, to be elected
 from local groups. Previously, all Assembly members
 represented a national constituency and one list of candidates
 was selected by the Government. Within the one party there
 were 216 candidates for 77 seats and there were a number of
 spirited contests. The Government's control of the local
 media insured that campaign rhetoric did not take an
 antigovernment tone. All regional ethnic groups and both
 sexes are represented within the single party. Currently, 4
 women serve on the 26-member central committee of the party,
 and 3 women are National Assembly delegates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Togo has been active in human rights forums. Togo was a
 member of the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva from
 1982-84. Following the abortive July 4, 1985,Ocoup in Guinea,
 President Eyadema joined with the President of the Ivory Coast
 in appealing to the Guinean President for leniency for the
 coup plotters, when there were pressures for their immediate
 execution.
 The Government of Togo has also in the past cooperated with
 international organizations such as Amnesty International, in
 investigating charges of human rights violations. As
 mentioned above, Amnesty International teams visited in both
 
 
 355
 TOGO
 April and October. A lesser degree of cooperation was
 exhibited on December 31, however, when a three-person Amnesty
 International team arrived at the Lome airport and was denied
 entry. There are no human rights organizations based within
 Togo that report on or observe human rights violations. In
 its 1985 Report, Amnesty International expressed concern about
 the use of politically motivated detention without trial and
 about reports of torture and ill-treatment and harsh prison
 conditions. Freedom House rates Togo as "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Togo is listed among the U.N. General Assembly's least
 developed countries. Its population of 3,023,000 (1985) is
 growing at the high rate of 3.1 percent annually, in a
 relatively resource-poor land mass of only 56,000 square
 kilometers. Per capita gross national product was $280 in
 1983. Revenues from its major exports, phosphates, cocoa, and
 coffee, have been much lower than historic levels. In the
 late 1970's, Togo made major investments in industrial
 projects and tourist infrastructure, many of which proved to
 be unprofitable. As a result, the Government found itself in
 economic straits and had to institute major reforms with World
 Bank and International Monetary Fund cooperation. Over the
 past 5 years, the primary focus of governmental development
 policies has been on increasing agricultural production. Togo
 is virtually self-sufficient in food in normal climatic
 conditions.
 Inadequate government resources have limited efforts to
 improve health and sanitation levels in Togo, although
 Ministries for Public Health, Social Affairs, and Education
 typically receive large shares of the regular national budget
 (40 percent of the 1983 budget). Life expectancy at birth is
 49 years, and the infant mortality rate is 107 (1985) per
 1,000 live births. On a nationwide basis, there is only 1
 doctor for every 18,100 people (1980) and 1 nurse for every
 1,430 people (1980), although the Government operates 21
 hospitals and nearly 300 dispensaries or clinics throughout
 the country's 21 prefectures. About 42 percent of the
 population (1980) has access to safe water; in urban areas,
 the figure rises to around 70 percent, while dropping to 31
 percent for rural areas. About 42 percent of the urban
 population is estimated to be living below the absolute
 poverty level (1978).
 Education has also been a major focus of government policy.
 School attendance is theoretically compulsory until age 15.
 The adult literacy rate was cited by the World Bank as 16
 percent in 1970, 27 percent for males and 7 percent for
 females. Since many children beyond normal primary school age
 (6-11) are still enrolled in primary schools, the overall
 primary school enrollment ratio is 105 percent (1982). For
 males, this ratio is 131 percent and for females 80 (1982).
 Labor practices in Togo are set by the Togolese Labor Code
 adopted in 1974, which is generally respected in practice.
 The Code specifically stipulates that there should be equal
 pay for equal work, qualifications, and production for both
 sexes; working hours of all employees in any enterprise,
 except for agricultural enterprises, should not normally
 exceed 40 hours per week; the employment of children under 14
 in any enterprise is prohibited; at least one period of 24
 hours of rest per week is compulsory; and workers earn 30 days
 
 
 356
 TOGO
 of paid leave each year. Enterprises must run a regular
 medical service for its employees. Health and safety
 standards in the workplace are determined by a technical
 consulting committee at the Ministry of Labor and instituted
 by decrees. There are penalities for employers who do not
 meet the conditions of the decree.
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled
 out in the Family and Individual Code which was adopted in
 early 1980. Under this Code, women's rights include maternity
 leave benefits. Women dominate local market activities and
 commerce with Togo's neighbors and often amass considerable
 wealth. Formal equality under the law and success in the
 local marketplace do not mean total equality for all women
 throughout Togo. Civil law, for example, recognizes a woman's
 property rights, but customary or traditional law gives all
 property to the male in the event of separation or divorce.
 Economic conditions in rural areas also often leave women
 little time for anything other than carrying water, finding
 firewood, cooking, caring for the family, and helping to raise
 food crops. The Government has undertaken a campaign to make
 women throughout the Togo aware of their expanded
 opportunities under the new family Code.
 
 
 357
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TOGO
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...       7.7      9.0      6.1
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 7.7           9.0      6.1
 A.AID ....... ..............   3.4      3.9      3.6
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    3.4      3.9      3.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO  FOR  PEACE .......     1.9      2.9      2.5
 LOANS .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   1.9      2.9      2.5
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      1.9      2.9      2.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.        0.7      0.9      0.7
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....      1.2      2.0      1.8
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST...      2.4      2.2      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   2.4      2.2      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......      2.4      2.2      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 .II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,,       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EDTRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHEP  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL,.      7.7      9.0      6.1
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   7.7      9.0      6.1
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985    1946-85
 TOTAL........    87.6    24.7     46.4    475.9
 IBRO               0.0     0.0      0.0      3.5
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA               81.2     0.0     46.4    257.7
 I0                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               6.4    23.1      0.0     89.3
 UNOP               0.0     1.6      0.0     31.2
 OTHER-UN           0.0     0.0      0.0      3.8
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0     90.4
 
 
 358
