 TOGO
 President General Gnassingbe Eyadema and his Assembly of the Togolese People
 (RPT) party, strongly backed by the military, continue to dominate the exercise of
 political power. During the year, the RPT party was able to persuade three opposi-
 tion Assembly deputies to vote with it, thus gaming an effective majority in the leg-
 islature. The RPT then manipulated the rules governinghe e electoral process, and
 thus further consolidated its majority in the legislature through by-elections held in
 August. Despite an effort to create a government of national unity, the opposition's
 refusal to participate resulted in a new government formed in the wake of the by-
 elections with an overwhelming majority of RPT ministers. The Eyadema Govern-
 ment, which also exerts control over the judiciary, made little progress in its pro-
 fessed intention to move from an authoritarian legacy to democracy.
 The security forces consist primarily of the army (including the elite Presidential
 Guard), navy, air force, the Surete Nationale (including the national police), and the
 Gendarmerie. Approximately 90 ercent of the army's officers and 70 percent of its
 soldiers come from the Presidents northern (Kabye) ethnic group. The Minister of
 the Interior, an army colonel, is in charge of the national police and the Defense
 Minister has nominal authority over the other security forces. In practice there is
 little differentiation between civilian and military authorities. Security forces re-
 main overwhelmingly loyal to their chief, President Eyadema, subject to his direct
 control, and carry out his orders. Some members of the security forces committed
 serious human rights abuses.
 About 80 percent of the countys estimated 4.25 lion people are engaged in
 subsistence agriculture, but there is also an active commercial sector. The main ex-
 ports are phosphates, cotton, and cocoa, which along with revenue from Lame's por,
 are the leading source of foreign exchange. Annual per capita gross omest ic pro-
 uct is around $300. The country is slowly movng toward structural adjustment
 under programs of international financial institutions and has resumed moderate
 growthL
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The Government re-
 stricted citizens' right to change their eovernment. Security forces were responsible
 for extrajudicial killings, beatings, arbitrary detentions, and interference with citi-
 zens' movement and privacy rights. The Government did not, in general, investigate
 or effectively punish those who committed such abuses. Prolonged pretrial detention
 was oonplace, and prison conditions remained very harsh. The Government con-
 tinued to influence the judiciary, defendants' rights to fair and expeditious trials are
 not ensured, and some detainees wait years to be judged. There were instances of
 infringement of freedom of speech and the press by security forces and the Govern-
 ment, including investigative detention to harass journalists and political opponents,
 and suspension of newspaper publication. Societal discrimination and violence
 against women, as well as abuse of children, continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-A heavy security presence combined
 with habitual impunity enjoyed by members of the security forces has created a cli-
 mate in which excessive force can be used without legal consequences. The security
 forces were responsible for at least three extrajudicial killings.
 Captain Philippe Aote of the Togolese Armed Forces was shot in the back and
 killedat a security checkpoint in Lme by security forces on January 7. As was his
 longstanding practice, Aote was jogging when stopped and uestioned. The Govern-
 ment claimed that Captain  sote was mistaken for a terrorist since he was armed.
 Azote had been dismissed from the military earlier in his career for suspicion ofrtak-
 ing part in the killing of General Amegee, and sources close to the mlitary claim
 Mzot's death was revenge by a military faction which supported Amegee. The sol-
 dier who shot Azote was originally commended for his antiterrorism work; after
 Mzot was identified, the soldier was arrested. There has been no trial.
 Security forces killed Thomas Rupprecht, a German embassy employee with diplo-
 matic status, at a security checkpoint in Lame on March 27. An investigation report
 indicates that Rupprecht was shot numerous times while attempting to drive away
 ater arguing about a demand to be searched. Two soldiers were arrested, and the
 
 
 291
 Government has given compensation to the family, but there has not been a trial
 for the accused perpetrators.
 A Togolese soldier at a security checkpoint shot and killed Anthony Dogbo, a Gha-
 naian taxi driver, on the outskirts of Lome on April 11. Despite several requests
 from the Ghanian Embassy to compensate the deceased's family or to punish the
 perpetrator, the Government has not responded, and there has been no known in-
 vestigation.
 In addition to these confirmed incidents, opponents of the Government alleged
 other killings linked to security forces. Unidentified persons in military uniform
 were responsible for the murder of Rose Lebene Woenagno on January 26. State In-
 s.petor Amouzou Efoe Paul A        whose responsibihties gave him access to sen-
 stive government accounting files, was killed on February 17 by unknown persons.
 Adjakly was found by a radoutside Lome with injuries to his head; his motorcycle
 revealed no signs of an accident, and his briefcase lay untouched next to him. On
 April 29, a group of unidentified persons carrying macine guns tortured and killed
 retired mason Iomai Yebsse. Media coverage of the Yebesse incident, insinuating
 security force involvement, led to the suspension of an opposition newspaper (see
 Section 2.a.).
 On October 14, three soldiers manning an armed security checkpoint in Lame
 near the Ghana border were killed by gunfire. The attack was credibly alleged to
 be carried out by opposition elements and a previously unknown group, the Interior
 Committee for Democracy and Salvation, claimed responsibility.
 Numerous prisoners died due to lack of medical facilities and widespread disease
 in  sons (see Section 1.c.).    e          e
 Swere no developments in                                n opposition
 Lt Vincent Tokofa, the 1994 killing of Gaston Edeh, or the 1992 killings of Marc
 Atidepe and Tavio A.orin.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were, however, no developments in the 1994 disappearance of David Bruce,
 or in the disappearance of Afougnilede Essiba, Adanou Igbe, Kobono Kowouvi, and
 another companion, all four of whom were arrested by soldiers at an armed security
 checkpoint in Adetikope in 1994. In 1994 the Government began an investigation
 of the Bruce disappearance but has not reported any results.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishent.-
 The law prohibits these practices, but security forces often beat detainees imme-
 diately after arresting them. Some suspects have credibly claimed to have been tor-
 tured, including beatings and lack of access to food and medical attention. The Gov-
 ernment did not investigate, prosecute, or punish any officials for these abuses.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and inadequate
 sanitation and food. Medical facilities are practically nonexistent, and widespread
 disease in prisons led to an estimated 15 deaths of incarcerated individuals. Prison
 guards in the overcrowded Civil Prison of Lome charge prisoners a small fee to
 shower, use the toilet, or have a place to sleep. Children are often incarcerated with
 convicted adults. Women are housed separately. International and local private or-
 ganizations have access to prisons for monitoring purposes.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile-The law allows authorities to hold ar-
 rested persons incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-
 hour extension in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice, detanees can be
 and often are detained without bail for lengthy periods with or without the approval
 of a judge. Family members and attorneys officially have access to a detainee after
 the initial 48- or 96-hour detention period, but authorities often delay, and some-
 times deny, access.
 Judges or senior police officials issue warrants. Although detainees have the right
 to be informed of the charges against them, police sometimes ignore this right. The
 law stipulates that a special judge conduct a pretrial investigation to examine the
 adequacy of evidence and decide on bail. However, a shortage of judges and other
 qualifiedpersonnel plus official indifference have resulted in lengthy pretrial deten-
 tions-in some cases several years-and confinement of prisoners beyond their sen-
 tences. An estimated 50 percent of the prison population were pretrial detainees. In-
 creasingly, the Government used brief investigative detentions of less than 48 hours
 to harass and intimidate opponents and journalists for alleged defamation of Gov-
 ernment officials (see Section 2.a.). The Govenent often resorts to false charges
 of common crimes to detain and intimidate opponents.
 There were instances of arbitrary arrests and detention. Nicoue Broohm, Coun-
 selor for Social Affairs and Human Rights for Prime Minister Kodjo and member
 of Kodjo's Democratic Union of Toga Party (UTD), was arrested by gendarmes in
 June and detained for 3 days for allegedy helping a student with a study of the
 President's chances of winning a referendum on the Constitution. Kokouvi Adakou,
 
 
 292
 a UTD Vice President, was arrested by gendarmes and questioned a week before
 legislative by-elections in Notse. Adakou was released the same day. David
 Oladokoun, a UTD leader in Atakpame, was arrested by gendarmes in May and de-
 tained for 3 days for expressing his opinion on the 1998 presidential elections. He
 was released and arrested again within 24 hours, but again released 2 days later.
 Alfred Adomayakpo, former chief of security for Kodjo and former Director of Na-
 tional Security, was arrested by gendarmes on July 10 for allegedly editing tracts
 calling for armed revolt. Denied access to a lawyer for 10 days, e was not released
 until September 23. The Gendarmarie arrested Minister of Rural Development and
 Tourism, Yao Doh-Feli, also of the UTD, on August 13, and released him 2 hours
 later.
 Commander of the Gendarmarie Pitalouani Laokpessi claimed that security forces
 were looking for another person of the same last name.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, in practice the executive branch continued to influence the judici-
 rYe Supreme Court stands at the apex of the court system. The civil Judiciary sys-
 tem includes the Sessions (Court of Assizes) and Appeals Courts. A military tribunal
 exists for crimes committed by security forces, but its proceedings are closed. Tradi-
 tional law discriminates against women, particularly in the area of inheritance.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.).
 Magistrates, like most government employees, are not always paid on time. The ju-
 dicial system employs both African traditional law and the Napoleonic Code in try-
 ing criminal and civil cases. Trials are open to the public, and judicial procedures
 are generally respected. Defendants have the right to counsel and to appeal. The
 Bar Association provides attorneys for the indigent. Defendants may confront wit-
 nesses, present evidence, and enjoy a presumption of innocence. In rural areas, the
 village chief or council of elders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who
 reject the traditional ruling may take their cases to the regular court system, which
 is the starting point for cases in urban areas.
 The Government released political prisoners in late 1994 and early 1995 under
 the December 1994 general amnesty. The amnesty law, however, was not consist-
 ently applied. Dodji Agbaglo, Alex Kpayedo, Paul Hooper, Pierre Hooper, and Ed-
 mond Atto, members of the radical youth opposition gup M05 arrested in 1994 for
 an alleged plot to blow up an electrical station at the state-owned Togolese Office
 of Phosphates, were sentenced on July 3 to between 5 and 7 years in prison. Despite
 the apparent political motivation of the crime, the State Prosecutor exercised his
 discretion and refused to apply the December 1994 general amnesty law to this case.
 Other members of MO5 were released under the General Amnesty.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, a judge or senior lice official may authorize searches of private
 residences. In plitic  an national security cases, the security forces need no prior
 authorization. Police conducted searches without warrants, searching for dissidents'
 arms caches as well as for criminals, often under the guise of searching for identity
 cards. Armed security checkpoints exist throughout the country, and security forces
 arbitrarily interfere with privacy by searching vehicles, baggage, and individuals in
 the name of security. The Government monitors telephones and correspondence and
 maintains the police and Gendarmerie as domestic intelligence services.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice al-
 though on occasion it intimidated journalists through threats, detention, and perse-
 cution.
 There is a lively press consisting of approximately 10 independent newspapers,
 some of which are often extremely critical of President Eyadema. There are four
 independent radio stations, and two private television companies retransmitting
 international satellite stations, but none of the independent broadcasters provides
 any reporting of local or national events. The official media consist of one radio sta-
 tion, one television station, and one daily newspaper. Although they were generally
 slanted in favor of President Eyadema and the Government, they allowed the oppo-
 sition limited access.
 There were instances of detention and censorship. Moreover, intimidation of the
 press leads to self-censorship. Moudassirou Katakpaou Toure, director of the opposi-
 tion newspaper, The Letter of Tchaoudjo, was sentenced on January 17 without
 being present at the trial or sentencing to 5 years in prison and a $10,000 fine for
 "defamation of the Chief of State." The Letter of Tchaoudjo was suspended indefi-
 
 
 293
 
 itely. On June 19, the opposition newspaper, The Tribune of Democrats, was fined
 ,000, suspended for 6 months, and its director of publication, Eric Lawson, was
 sentenced without being present at the trial or sentencing to 5 years in prison for
 "inciting hate and spreading false news" regarding a series of articles blaming a
 murder on an unidentified commando squad of persons in uniform. The Government
 never exercised its right of reply nor called on the paper to print a retraction, and
 the trial was held in secret without informing The Tribune or Lawson of the charges
 against them. In September the opposition newspaper, The Crocodile, claimed uni-
 formed security forces harassed its vendors in northern Togo and, through intimida-
 tion, prevented the distribution of independent newspapers.
 In November journalists from three opposition newspapers: Le Combat du Peuple;
 Le Crocodile; and Forum Hebe, were detained and questioned for periods up to 48
 hours, ostensibly for articles accusing a gendarme of killing his wife. However
 Lucien Messan, Director of Publication for Le Combat du Peuple, was questioned
 concerning his intentions for printing an article accusing security forces personnel
 of participating in a stolen car ring. Messan's interrogators included Gendarmerie
 commander Laokpessi, who was an g those implicated in the article.
 At the University of Benin, Togo s sole university, academic freedom is con-
 strained by concern among professors about potential harassment by the Govern-
 ment or antiopposition militants and the lack of a faculty-elected rector. Opposition
 student groups are intimidated by an informer system that has led in the past to
 government persecution. The only recognized student group is pro-Eyadema.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens are free to organize in associations and political parties, and in practice politi-
 cal parties are able to hold congresses, elect officers, register, and meet. However,
 fear of informants and harsh reaction from the Government has reduced public dem-
 onstrations. In August a preelection rally by Prime Minister Kodjo in Mango was
 forced to be relocated, then canceled, when RPT activists, some with machetes, dis-
 rupted the event. On November 16 and 17, a delegation of CAR leaders was har-
 assed when roadblocks were set up outside towns in Amou prefecture where they
 were to hold political rallies. While the rallies ultimately took place, the delegation
 had to transit numerous barricades, and at one point members of the delegation
 were assaulted by an RPT supporter. There are many active nongovernmental orga-
 nizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country. Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, however, armed security
 checkpoints and arbitrary searches of vehicles and individuals are commonplace.
 The lack of discipline of the soldiers manning the roadblocks and their actions, such
 as firing at vehicles and frequently demanding bribes before allowing citizens to
 pass, impede free movement within the country.
 The Government generally cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in as-
 sisting refugees. While there is no legislated body to determine asylum or refugee
 status, the Government routinely accepts the decision of the UNHCR office resident
 in Lome. The Government provides first asylum (and provided it to approximately
 400 persons in 1996). Although in June the Governmentprovided medical supplies,
 foodstuffs, and water to a Lerian refugee ship, the Zolotitsa, which had been
 searchin the coast for a port to disembark its 435 passengers, it did not authorize
 disembarkation. With the exception of the Zolotitsa incident, there were no reports
 of forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 The August 1995 agreement with UNHCR for the repatriation of an estimated
 45,000 Togolese refugees living in Benin and 75,000 to 80,000 living in Ghana
 neared completion by year's end The UNHCR estimates there will be 25,000 refu-
 gees remaining at year's end. They have extended the repatriation program to April
 1997, at which time they estimate 15,000 refugees will remain expatriated. The
 Government also accommodates roughly 8,500 refugees, mainly Ghanaians.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens peacefully to change their gov-
 ernment. In recent elections, however, this right was only partly respected. In Au-
 gust by-elections, President Eyadema and his RPT party manipu ated the rules gov-
 erning the electoral process and thus further consolidated their majority in the leg-
 islature. There were reports of security forces visiting towns weeks in advance of
 the election and warning their populations of violence if opposition candidates were
 
 
 294
 elected. An RPT parliamentarian threatened at a public meeting in Mango that op-
 position candidates would be killed if they won.
 Institutions created to ensure transparency in electoral procedures and to adju-
 dicate election disputes, such as the National Electoral Commission and the Con-
 stitutional Court, are either controlled by the President or still not in place. Inter-
 national observers found the 1993 presidential election to be seriously flawed.
 Eyadema maintains a highly centralized government, including influencing impor-
 tant nominations of ministers, prefects, mayors, and traditional chiefs. The Govern-
 ment does not openly restrict the functioning of political opponents, but the Presi-
 dent uses the strength of the military and his government allies to intimidate and
 harass citizens and opposition groups. Eyadema also continues to influence the judi-
 The Constitution provides for universal suffrage and a secret ballot, and these
 provisions are respected in practice.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or members of ethnic
 minorities in politics or government. Although many women are members of politi-
 cal parties, there was only one female minister in government and one female dep-
 uty in the National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several local private human rights groups, including the Togolese
 Human Rights League and the Center of Observation and Promotion of the Rule
 of Law. In general the Government allows groups access to investigate alleged viola-
 tions of human rights. However, the Government usually does not follow up on in-
 vestigations of abuses. Years of government threats and intimidation of human
 rights leaders, combined with a lack of results from human rights initiatives, have
 led some human rights monitors to end their public activities.
 The Government includes a Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. The National
 Assembly voted in November to enact a ministerial decree to reorganize the govern-
 ment-sponsored and government-funded National Human Rights Commission
 (CNDH). The opposition, which boycotted the assembly vote, criticized the new law
 for allowing the President to control the composition, and ultimately the actions, of
 the CNDH. In practice neither the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights nor the
 CNDH operate independently from the President. The International Committee of
 the Red Cross has a permanent representative in Togo.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family origin, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal political or other
 convictions. However, the Government does not provide effective redress for dis-
 crimination complaints, and discrimination based on both ethnic group and sex is
 common.
 Women.-Violence against women continues. Although mechanisms exist within
 both the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for redress, the
 police rarely intervene in traditional or domestic violence cases. Wife beating affects
 an estimated 10 percent of married women and continues with impunity. Local
 houses of prostitution exist, and some trafficking in Togolese women for the pur-
 poses of prostitution or for exploiting women as domestic servants occurs with no
 visible effort by the Government to curtail these abuses. There is a Ministry of
 Feminine Promotion and Social Protection, which, along with independent women's
 groups and related nongovernmental organizations, have active campaigns to inform
 women of their rights.
 Despite a constitutional declaration of equality under the law, women continue to
 experience discrimination, especially in education, pension benefits, inheritance, and
 as a consequence of traditional law. A husband may legally oppose his wife's right
 to work and control her earnings, and he may also decide where his family will live.
 Employers are often reluctant to hire women, especially for higher-level positions.
 Far fewer women than men attend university, and fewer women graduate from sec-
 ondary school. Families traditionally give boys priority over girls when deciding who
 shall attend school. In urban areas, women and girls dominate local market activi-
 ties and commerce with neighboring countries. However, harsh economic conditions
 in rural areas, where most of the population lives, leave women with little time for
 activities other than taxing domestic and agricultural field work. Under traditional
 law, which applies to the vast majority of women, a wife has no rights of survivor-
 ship in the event of divorce, separation, or the death of her husband.
 
 
 295
 Children.-Although the Constitution and family code laws provide for the protec-
 tion of children's rights, in practice government programs often suffer from a lack
 of money, materials, and enforcement. The Government provides free education in
 state schools, and there are social programs to provide free health care for poor chil-
 dren. Orphans and other needy children receive some aid from extended families or
 private organizations but less from the State. There are few juvenile courts, and
 children are often jailed with adults. There are credible reports of trafficking in chil-
 dren for the purpose of forced labor (see Section 6..).
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health exprts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, remains a
 current, although diminishing, practice m Togo. Approximately 12 percent of Togo-
 lese girls and women have undergone FGM. Although many of the largest ethnic
 groups in Togo do not practice FGM, the practicing groups have rates ranging from
 40 to 98 percent. In theory women and girls are protected by the Constitution from
 FGM and the Government claims that it would protect any woman bringing a claim
 of FdM to its attention. However, in practice, the prohibition is not enforced, and
 traditional customs often supersede the legal system in various ethnic gr.ups.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate accessibility to pub-
 lic or private facilities for people with disabilities. Although the Constitution nomi-
 nally obliges the Government to aid disabled persons and shelter them from social
 injustice, the Government provides only limited assistance in practice. While there
 is no overt state discrimination against disabled persons and while some hold re-
 sponsible government positions, the disabled have no meaningful recourse against
 private sector discrimination, which compels many to beg.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Members of northern ethnic groups domi-
 nate the security forces, while southerners dominate most commerce and the profes-
 sions. With a few exceptions, southerners and northerners are also divided along po-
 litical lines. Civil unrest in recent years and inadequate or prejudicial law enforce-
 ment exacerbated ethnic rivalries dating from precolonial times. With the rise in
 north-south tensions, majority ethnic group members in those regions have harassed
 and attacked their neighbors belonging to minority groups, forcing them back to
 their home regions. In recent years, many Togolese, predominantly southerners, fled
 to neighboring Benin and Ghana, and members of northern ethnic groups were in-
 ternally displaced.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides most workers with the
 right to join unions and the right to strike. Security forces, including firemen and
 p)licemen, do not have these rights; government health care workers may join
 unions but may not strike. The work force in the formal (wage) sector is small, in-
 volving about 20 percent of the work force, of whom 60 to 70 percent are union
 members or supporters.
 The Constitution also prohibits discrimination against workers for reasons of sex,
 origin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution against
 strikers.
 There are several major trade union federations. These include the National Con-
 federation of Togolese Workers (CNTT), closely associated with the Government; the
 Labor Federation of Togolese Workers (CSTT); the National Union of Independent
 Syndicates (UNSIT); and the Union of Free Trade Unions.
 Federations and unions are free to associate with international labor groups. The
 CNTF and the UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code nominally
 provides workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal sec-
 tor employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However, true col-
 lective bargaining is limited by the Government's role in producing a single tri-
 partite bargaining agreement signed by the unions, management, and the Govern-
 ment. This agreement sets wage standards for all formal sector employees. Individ-
 ual groups in the formal sector can attempt through collective bargaining to nego-
 tiate a more favorable package, and some do, but this approach is not common.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor is
 charged with resolving labor-related complaints but does not always do so effec-
 tively.
 A 1989 law allows the establishment of export processing zones (EPZ's). Many
 companies have EPZ status, and about 20 are currently operating. The EPZ law pro-
 vides exemptions from some provisions of the Labor Code, notably the regulations
 on hiring and firing. Employees of EPZ frms do not enjoy the same protection
 against antiunion discrimination as do other workers.
 
 
 296
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically ad-
 dress this question, and children are sometimes engaged in forced labor, primarily
 as domestic servants. Credible sources have confirmed the international trafficking
 of children, most often to other West and Central African countries, but also to the
 Middle East and Asia. In rural areas, parents sometimes force young children into
 domestic work in other households in exchange for cash. The Government has done
 nothing to stop this practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial
 an   e       employment require a minimum age of 18. Inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce these age requirements but only in the formal sector in urban
 areas. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in farming and petty trading,
 very young children traditionally assist in their families' work.lUnder the Constitu-
 tion, school is mandatory for both sexes until the age of 15, but this requirement
 is not strictly enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The Government sets minimum wages for dif-
 ferent categories, ranging from unskilled labor through professional positions. Less
 than the of icial minimum wage is often paid in practice, mostly to less-skilled work-
 ers. Official monthly minimum wages, including the 5 percent nationwide increase
 implemented in July, range from approximately $30 to $46 monthly (cfa 14,700 to
 cfa 23,100). The July increase represents the first since 1987, despite the 50 percent
 devaluation of the cfa in 1994. Many workers cannot maintain a decent standard
 of living at the lower official minimum wages, and many must supplement their in-
 comes thugh second jobs or subsistence farming. The Ministry of Labor is osten-
 sibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage system but does not enforce
 the law in practice. The Labor Code, which regulates labor practices, requires equal
 pay for equal work, regardless of sex. However, this provision is generally observed
 only in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory, and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The law requires overtime compensation, and there are restrictions on excessive
 overtime work. The Ministry of Labor's enforcement is weak, however, and employ-
 ers often ignore these provisions.
 A technical consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor sets workplace health
 and safety standards. It may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 standards, and employees ostensibly have the right to complain to labor inspectors
 of unhealthy or unsafe conditions without penalty. In practice, the Ministrys en-
 forcement of the various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Large enterprises
 must legally provide medical services for their employees and usually attempt to re-
 spct ocupational health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
