TOGO
This year's report is a marked improvement over its predecessor since it clearly states that government security forces are responsible for most of the major human right violations and that President Eyadema controls the security forces. The report also correctly points out that the security forces are composed primarily of members from President Eyadema's northern ethnic group, the Kabyes, and that, "The President frequently benefited from the pattern of army violence."
Despite this improvement, however, certain sections of the report could have held President Eyadema more directly responsible for violations. The first line of the introduction states that, "During 1993, President Gnassingbe Eyadema continued to consolidate effective state power." This formulation may not fully convey the sense to which, as the report later says. President Eyadema "dominate[s]" the government. This domination is crucial because it serves as a focal point for discussing the extent to which he may be held personally responsible for the Togolese government's failure to investigate and punish those responsible for human rights abuses, especially members of the security forces. The report does state that the Togolese government has not effectively prosecuted rights violators, but has not given the issue the emphasis it deserved.
In this regard, the report should have fully discussed Amnesty International's October 5, 1993 report, "Impunity for Killings by the Military," which detailed the failure of the Eyadema government to take any action with respect to violations committed by the Togolese security forces since 1991. Instead of discussing Amnesty International's fmdings, the report merely states; "Amnesty International published a critical report on Togo's human rights situation on October 5. The Government responded publicly, asserting that Amnesty International favored the opposition and was engaging in a maladroit attempt to destabilize the country."
The State Department's instructions require more than a simple citation of reports by human rights organizations and the official response to them. Instead, the instructions demand the expression of opinion on the merits of such allegation. The report should have supported Amnesty International's conclusions and more vigorously condemned the Togolese government's failure to find and punish members of the security forces responsible for human rights violations. In addition, the report should have made it clear that the Togolese Government's response to the Amnesty International report was inadequate.
As the Amnesty International report points out, the Togolese government should be criticized not only for its failure to take action with respect to violations that occurred in 1993, but also violations that took place in previous years. Last year's Critique criticized the 1992 report for failing to note that the Togolese
356
_TOGO
government had not yet investigated the deaths of 28 persons whose bodies were found in the Be Lagoon on April 11, 1991. The 1993 Amnesty International report says that there has still been no investigation, despite credible evidence suggesting that the bodies were those of persons killed by government security forces. The Be Lagoon victims should not be forgotten; the State Department should bring up the incident until the Togolese government takes effective action to find and punish the guilty parties.
In addition, the Amnesty International report, like th& 1992 Critique, notes the evidence implicating President Eyadema's son, Ernest Gnassingbe, in serious violations, including the attempted assassination of prominent government critic Gilchrist Olympio. The State Department report states that, "It was unknown whether these extrajudicial killings . . . variously attributed to elements of the Government or opposition were specifically directed by higher authorities on either side." But surely evidence of the involvement of President Eyadema's own son in violations has a direct bearing on the question of whether the President himself has not only condoned but directed attacks by security forces. At a minimum, the report should have discussed this evidence.
The report should also have discussed the extent to which the Togolese government may have encouraged or directed other human rights abuses. For example, it mentions that when four members of the security forces were killed or wounded between January 26-30, 1993, "The military and the Government blamed COD-II [the coalition of opponents to President Eyadema] for the killings." Clearly, the report should have discussed the extent to which this statement, as well as other less public governmental actions, may have encouraged the subsequent rioting by the security forces, which resulted in a minimum of 12 deaths and 31 wounded.
The State Department's instructions provide that, "in the unlikely event that there is almost nq evidence as to why human rights abusers go unpunished," the report should at least indicate the extent to which the goveniment "A) secretly instigates, B) tacitly condones, C) is unable to control those responsible or D) some combination of A-C." In the case of Togo, the report has failed even to discuss the extent to which the available evidence demonstrates that the government, and President Eyadema in particular, may "secretly instigate" or "tacitly condone" human rights abuses by the military. Indeed, given the report's acknowledgment that President Eyadema exercises personal control over the security forces, the report should have direcdy criticized the president for his failure to punish human rights violations by the security forces.
The attitude of the Togolese government toward human rights violations by the military is demonstrated by its response to an investigation by the United Nations. In a December 2, 1993 note to the UN Commission on Human Rights, the Togolese Foreign Affairs Minister said that violations were "solely" the result of
357
CRITIQUE 1993
incomprehension and misunderstandings between the different protagonists in Togolese poHtical life. With that note verbale, the Togolese government sent two docmnents entitled "Violent Acts by the Militant Opposition toward the Togolese Army and Security Forces." The minister's response did not assign any responsibility to the Togolese security forces for any human rights violations. Nor did it give any examples of investigation and/or prosecution of members of the security forces.
The report should have also discussed more fully the possibility that the military is engaging in "ethnic cleansing" within its own ranks. This allegation was made by a member of the Togolese armed forces who fled after the military carried out an internal purge following an attempted coup against President Eyadema's govemment. In reprisal, at least 20 Togolese soldiers were executed extrajudicially. According to the report, the victims "appear to have included soldiers suspected of involvement in the March 25 attack, those thought to have opposition or democratic tendencies, and some simply belonging to southern ethnic groups." While the Togolese govemment has denied that the killings had any ethnic basis, the report should have at least discussed the charge.
The report accurately discusses the flawed August 25 presidential election, correctly pointing out that the authorities did not faithfully implement the agreement between the govemment and the opposition on the best way to conduct the elections. The report also alleges, without support, that the opposition "generally failed to demonstrate a commitment to prepare seriously for the elections." The report should have explained what it meant by this statement, and cited evidence to support it. For example, it would be unfair to criticize the opposition candidates for failing to campaign in the northern part of Togo, when their security could not have been guaranteed. In this connection, the report should have mentioned here the attempted assassination of Gilchrist Olympic in the north in 1992, the likely involvement of the army, and the fact that the Togolese govemment had taken no action to apprehend the assassins. Viewed in this light, the failure of opposition candidates to mount a meaningfiil campaign in certain parts of the country is understandable.
In addition, it was a mistake to discuss the government's issuance of an arrest warrant to Gilchrist Olympio as an example of an action taken to punish human rights abuses. Rather, the warrant was clearly a ploy to inhibit Olympio from running for election to the presidency, and as the report admits, it was quickly withdrawn when Olympio and the opposition protested. Indeed, the arrest warrant and the Supreme Court's decision to exclude Olympio from rurming for President on a technicality should have been reported in the section on denial of fair public trial, since both incidents support the widespread claims that President Eyadema has compromised the independence of the Togolese judiciary.
358
_TOGO
The section on freedom of speech and the press sends an unfortunately mixed message. At first, the report states that while the press was hara^ed and intimidated, "Forces sympathetic to the Eyadema Government were most likely responsible for these actions." Elsewhere in the same section, however, it admits that, "In the last quarter of 1993, oSicial harassment of the opposition press increased, including through the courts." As the evidence cited in the report makes clear, there should have been a clear statement at the outset that the Togolese government itself — rather than merely "forces sympathetic" to it — was responsible for abuses against press freedom.
Finally, the report paints an unwarrantedly rosy picture in its discussion of freedom of movement. In particular, it fails to discuss the extent to which the mostly southern Togolese fled to avoid persecution by the armed forces. The report says only that these refiigees fled "after the January and March events" — an allusion to the attacks by government troops on an opposition demonstration and on neighborhoods in Lome, which resulted in scores of deaths. The report then goes on to state that "many Togolese, with government encouragement," returned to the country. This statement leaves the false impression that these Togolese refugees returned because of governmental actions, when the most likely reason was the intolerable conditions in the camps where they had sought refiige in Ghana and Benin.
Togo remains in a state of fransition. While President Eyadema won the 1993 Presidential election and continues to dominate the country, legislative elections are still to come and the independent press is still struggling to survive. Given this, it is especially important for future reports to state clearly that responsibility for the deplorable human rights situation lies squarely with the Togolese government, and especially with President Eyadema. While the 1993 report was certainly an improvement over the previous year's, it still falls short in this crucial area, especially where the Togolese Government's failure to punish human rights violators in the security forces is concerned.
359
CRITIQUE 1993
