 TOGO
 Since seizing power in a bloodless military coup in 1967,
 President Gnassingbe Eyadema has maintained firm control and
 molded Togo into an authoritarian, one-party state. In
 addition to serving as Head of Government, President Eyadema
 is Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces
 and head of the only legal political party, the Rassemblement
 du Peuple Togolais (RPT). While all Togolese are considered
 members of the RPT and are obligated to vote, only active
 party members can gain political office. The Eyadema
 Government considers its legal authority to be based on the
 Constitution of 1979, which was formally adopted by referendum.
 One-candidate presidential elections held every 7 years have
 confirmed a continuation of President Eyadema's rule. The
 President dominates all branches and functions of Government.
 The Government's control over the organs of state security--the
 military, the national police (Surete), and the special police
 (Gendarmerie)--prevents active opposition. In the past, the
 Government has not hesitated to use its full authority to keep
 political opponents within very narrowly defined boundaries.
 The Togolese economy continued to encounter difficulties
 during 1987, although the agricultural sector, which still
 represents the largest gross national product component, had
 an excellent year, with above average crops and abundant rains.
 Foreign exchange earnings were down because of low commodity
 prices and reduced phosphate exports, and shortfalls in
 revenues, and sometimes extravagant government expenditures
 aggravated the burden of debt repayment. Togo has continued
 actively to pursue reprivatization of unprofitable state
 enterprises.
 There were some positive developments in Togo's human rights
 situation during 1987, but civil and political rights continue
 to be severely restricted. In conjunction with his 20th
 anniversary celebration in January, President Eyadema amnestied
 Togo's two well-known political prisoners, who had been
 arrested in the summer of 1985 and tried and convicted in 1986
 for possession and distribution of pamphlets critical of the
 regime. (Another arrested and tried at the same time was
 pardoned earlier.) In March a law was passed abolishing
 unlimited detention and requiring the authorities once again
 to bring charges against detainees within 48 hours. In July
 the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was
 authorized for the first time to begin visiting Togo's
 civilian prisons and interviewing prisoners. An autonomous
 National Human Rights Commission, empowered by law to hear,
 investigate, and report on complaints by individuals, was
 formally established on October 21. Also in October, the
 Government authorized ratification of the Optional Protocol to
 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
 adopted by the U.N. General Assembly in December 1966.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings.
 
 
 323
 TOGO
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There is no specific Togolese law prohibiting torture and no
 effective protection against such acts in Togo. In certain
 cases the President is known to prohibit the use of harsh
 treatment against particular prisoners. Amnesty International
 reports torture of both political and criminal prisoners,
 including beatings and electric shock treatments during
 interrogation. The public believes that torture is practiced,
 especially by the Gendarmerie and military, in political cases
 and against terrorists, and there are reliable eyewitness
 accounts of torture, including electric shock, at the
 Gendarmerie camp in Lome in past years. Public perception
 also holds that beatings are administered routinely when
 suspects are interrogated by the Gendarmerie. There were no
 specifically confirmed cases of torture.
 Prison conditions remain poor--unsanitary, with improper
 lighting and ventilation, and seriously inadequate food and
 medical care. After the interrogation phase, prisoners
 generally are not maltreated. The general quality of prison
 administration is poor. In July the Government authorized the
 ICRC to begin inspecting civilian prisons and interviewing
 prisoners at will. Prisoners in civilian prisons are permitted
 family visits, since it is the family which usually has to
 assume responsibility for providing much of the prisoner's
 food, clothing, and linen. Family visits are sometimes'not
 permitted until after the period of investigation of the
 prisoner is over. Those foreign prisoners who have no family
 members in Togo to supply extra food often suffer from severe
 malnutrition. Military prisons to date have remained closed
 to inspections. Only military and paramilitary personnel are
 granted access to these prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 On March 4, the Togolese Government adopted a law which
 reinstated a 48-hour limit on the length of time a person may
 be held without charge. The original.48-hour law had been
 revoked'in December 1985 to permit unlimited detention
 following several bomb explosions in Lome and the Government's
 arrest of several persons possessing antigovernment pamphlets.
 The March 4 law provides for an additional 48-hour extension
 if the case is deemed serious or complex. It is, nevertheless,
 too early to know how widely this law is being respected in
 practice. It appears that a substantial number of prisoners
 are held for long periods of time even after being charged--in
 some cases 6 months or more--before being brought to trial,
 owing to a shortage of judicial personnel. Those arrested are
 not generally allowed access to lawyers during the period of
 initial ditention.
 Prefects evidently have the authority to order detention at
 will, although they sometimes have been removed for abusing
 this authority. The power to arrest in cases involving
 national security is arbitrary and practically unlimited. Any
 permanent officer of the Gendarmerie may arrest and temporarily
 detain any person without seeking prior approval or submitting
 a subsequent report. Persons arrested and detained by the
 military are processed through the military judicial system.
 
 
 324
 TOGO
 The Gendarmerie is believed to be holding persons outside the
 structure of the judicial process, and civilian prisons also
 appear to hold detainees who have never been charged. On
 October 21, the Government released a Ghanaian national who
 had been imprisoned since 1982 or 1983 without charges.
 The Ghanaian, an evangelist who had sought refuge in Togo, was
 released and repatriated with 10 other Ghanaians in
 conjunction with the formal inauguration of Togo's Human
 Rights Commission.
 The number of Togolese political exiles is unknown, but not
 considered large. There have been cases of the Government
 using economic pressures to force persons into exile. For
 example, some government employees amnestied in 1986 and 1987
 for political crimes (possessing and distributing
 antigovernment pamphlets in 1985) have been barred from
 returning to their jobs at the university and have been unable
 to find work since their release, and one has left Togo.
 There is no forced labor in Togo. There are, however,
 occasional early morning mobilizations of the population of
 Lome to clean the city's streets.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Exile groups in Ghana opposed to the Government of Togo claim
 that "hundreds" of political prisoners are held in Togolese
 jails, but proof of such has not been produced. The Government
 claims there are no longer any political prisoners in
 Togo--meaning persons tried and sentenced for political
 offenses--following the amnesty in January 1987 of the last
 two held for possession of antigovernment pamphlets. There
 are no figures available, however, of persons detained on
 political grounds without charge or trial.
 There is an established hierarchy for routine criminal and
 civil cases, which incorporates both traditional (African) and
 codified (French) practice. At the lowest level, the village
 chief or council of elders can hear criminal and civil cases
 by taking testimony, listening to evidence, interviewing all
 parties, and making a decision. Those who do not accept the
 traditional ruling can take their cases to the codified
 judicial system.
 In Togo's judicial system the investigative (pretrial) process
 is undertaken by a special judge who must examine the
 sufficiency of the evidence for trial and decide on bail. Due
 to an insufficient number of judges, this process can be
 protracted, with many months elapsing before the case actually
 comes to trial. Crowded court dockets, in turn, cause further
 delays. Trials, however, are public, and required judicial
 procedures are followed. Defendants have the right to counsel
 but only in potential capital punishment cases will the
 Government appoint counsel if the accused is unable to afford
 it. Special courts exist to handle cases related to public
 security, embezzlement of public funds, and violent crimes.
 Togo's judicial system is not independent from the executive
 branch, which possesses the ability to interfere in any case
 of interest to senior government officials. There is evidence
 of frequent interference by the executive in judicial
 proceedings to dictate sentences.
 Following their trial in December 1986, 10 persons are being
 held under death sentence and 7 in life imprisonment for
 participation in the September 1986 coup attempt against
 
 
 325
 TOGO
 the Government; 10 others were sentenced to death or life
 imprisonment in absentia. The death penalty, however, has not
 been carried out, and senior government officials have made
 known informally that it is not the intention of the
 Government to execute those sentenced to death.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Mail is routinely opened, and telephone conversations are
 frequently monitored. The Government also maintains an
 extensive network of informants which permeates all sections
 of Togolese society to keep check on actual or perceived
 opponents. Religious publications of the Jehovah's Witnesses
 often disappear in the mail. In routine criminal or civil
 cases, searches of. private residences are authorized in
 advance by a judge or senior police official. In cases
 involving national security concerns, searches take place
 without prior authorization. While all Togolese are
 automatically members of Togo's sole political party and are
 required to vote, no one is forced to take an active party
 role. There is no government interference in the right to
 marry or to have children, and there is no forced resettlement.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech exists in Togo only in very restricted
 form. Direct and open criticism of the Government, and
 especially of the President, is perceived as serious
 antigovernment activity and is not tolerated. Most Togolese
 are therefore careful to avoid any criticism of the Government
 or of the political system. Even indirect criticism of the
 Government and its policies may bring retribution in the form
 of temporary detention or interrogation. There are local
 forums, however, including at the university, where sometimes
 franker expressions of views are heard, but basically academic
 freedom and free speech do not exist in the political sphere.
 From time to time, individual officials, both at the national
 and local level, and local policies are subject to public
 comment. Thete have been cases of prefects (regional
 governors) dismissed as a result of public criticism.
 The Government owns, operates, and controls all sectors of the
 media, which it uses as a means for projecting a positive
 self-image and maintaining public support. Publication or
 circulation of any material criticizing or questioning its
 policies is not permitted. Cases of gross governmental
 malfeasance are not, however, immune from media scrutiny. In
 April 1987, a major scandal was uncovered in Togo's
 agricultural credit bank (a government institution), involving
 the theft of large sums by some of the major bank officials.
 The official media reported fully on the events and named the
 persons involved. There is government censorship of all
 films, books, plays, or other writings published in Togo.
 Intellectuals are aware that they must exercise careful
 self-censorship or else risk possible imprisonment, exile, or
 having their works banned. Some bookstores, however, sell a
 wide range of books, including those containing veiled
 criticism of the system of government.
 
 
 326
 TOGO
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled in Togo.
 Government approval must be obtained before any large group
 can meet. This process is an effective means for preventing
 any antigovernment groups from meeting. On the other hand,
 government permission for nonpolitical events is given
 routinely and expeditiously. Professional groups which do not
 undertake political activities are free to hold meetings.
 Although under the Togolese labor code all Togolese workers
 have the right to associate, actual labor organizing is
 permitted only under the auspices of the government-controlled
 Confederation Nationale de Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT). The
 CNTT is affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions and sends delegates to International Labor
 Organization conferences. Although the CNTT is not an
 independent union, and basically conveys the Government's
 views and requirements to workers, it does on certain issues
 represent the workers' economic interests to the Government.
 Strikes are authorized only as a means of last resort but
 rarely if ever take place. The Government acts as arbitrator
 in cases where labor and management cannot settle a dispute.
 The few strikes which have occurred in the past have been
 short and ended as a result of government arbitration. The
 Government has not used coercion, force, or arrests to end
 strikes. The CNTT maintains ties with the American Federation
 of Labor/Congress of Industrial Organizations, and an
 affiliate of the CNTT is a member of the International
 Federation of Commercial, Clerical, Technical and Professional
 Employees, which held its 21st World Congress in Lome in
 August 1987.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 With a few exceptions, the Government promotes a climate of
 openness for religious freedom. Although all religious groups
 must have government authorization to operate, only the
 Jehovah's Witnesses and the Apostolic Faith Mission are
 currently proscribed. They are not allowed to conduct
 services, proselytize, or otherwise carry out religious
 activities, although there are no known legal penalties for
 being a member of either group. All other groups are
 categorized under one of seven broad categories maintained by
 the Ministry of Interior and are unrestricted in their
 religious practices.. They are free to publish religious
 material, conduct services, and teach religion. Non-Togolese
 clergy of these religious groups are also free to proselytize
 and engage in religious activities. Local religious groups
 are free to maintain contacts with coreligionists in other
 countries. No restrictions exist on travel for religious
 purposes. The Government does not favor any specific
 religion, and membership in a religious group is neither a
 benefit nor a hindrance regarding personal advancement.
 Togo's open religious climate was one of the reasons why the
 All-African Council of Churches held its 1987 annual
 conference in Lome.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or work place,
 is generally allowed for Togolese. However, the Government
 restricts the issuance of passports in order to control the
 
 
 327
 TOGO
 emigration of professional Togolese and also to keep known
 political dissidents under close scrutiny. Exit visas are
 also required. Domestic travelers may encounter security or
 customs-related roadblocks. Except for the few political
 exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other countries
 may return at will.
 Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees, and the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recognizes some
 500 individuals in Togo with refugee status, but over the past
 few years some political refugees from Ghana, Benin, and
 Burkina Faso have been forcibly returned to their home
 countries, pursuant to informal agreement between the
 Governments of Togo and Benin, Ghana, and Burkina Faso. The
 UNHCR representative in Togo has not intervened in these cases.
 The Togo/Ghana border, which was closed in September 1986
 following the coup attempt, was reopened in May 1987.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 After seizing power in 1967, President Eyadema abolished all
 existing political parties. With the creation of the RPT in
 1969, Togo became a one-party state. All citizens are
 automatically party members but unable to change freely their
 one-party political system or the government in power. While
 active party members may debate minor issues at party meetings
 or even raise complaints against local officials, no
 challenges are permitted to the President's programs.
 Presidential elections were held in 1986, the second since
 1979. President Eyadema was again the only candidate and was
 elected for another 7-year term with 99.7 percent of the votes
 cast.        /
 A National Assembly, created ,pnrsuant to the 1979
 Constitution, h-as 77 members but does not have-the power to
 reject laws proposed by the executive. It is limited to
 debating certain categories of proposed legislation. In 1987
 at the behest .of the executive, the Assembly abolished the
 celebration of April 27 (the day Togo became independent) as
 Togo's National Day. The anniversary of President Eyadema's
 seizure of power, January'13, was declared the National Day.
 Reportedly few members of the Assembly favored this change,
 but acquiesced in the face of executive pressure. Assembly
 seats are held for a term of 5 years. In the first election
 to the Assembly, only a single party candidate was allowed to
 stand for each seat. In the 1985 Assembly elections and in
 elections held in July 1987 for municipal and prefectural
 councils, multiple candidates from the official party were
 permitted to run, but-each-candidate had to obtain party
 authorization and submit campaign literature for approval.
 Ethnic and religious groups are represented- in the National'
 Assembly in approximate proportion to their actual numbers in
 the country, and the Central Committee of the party has a fair
 north-south balance. Women, however, are seriously
 underrepresented there being none in the Cabinet and only 3
 in the 77-member National Assembly. The 46-member party
 Central Committee counts 10 women members.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 Togo is currently a member of the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission. It has ratified the international covenants on
 
 
 328
 TOGO
 human rights and the OAU's African Charter on Human and
 Peoples' Rights. In October the Cabinet approved a bill of
 law authorizing ratification of the Optional Protocol to the
 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights adopted
 by the U.N. General Assembly in December 1966. The Protocol
 enables citizens of adhering states to complain directly to a
 U.N. body for redress, after internal recourse has been
 exhausted, in cases of alleged violation of human rights.
 In April 1987, the Government proposed and the National
 Assembly approved a law calling for the creation of a National
 Human Rights Commission. The Commission, formally inaugurated
 on October 21, is an autonomous entity composed of 13 members,
 1 each elected by 13 private and public bodies, e.g., the bar
 association, judges, doctors, teachers, trade unions. The
 Commission is authorized by law to receive complaints from any
 Togolese citizen or foreign resident, to investigate and for
 that purpose to have access to government and police files.
 If a violation is found to exist, the Commission is also
 authorized to negotiate with the responsible governmental
 authority either to bring about rectification or to submit the
 case to the courts or to the President. Commission members
 enjoy immunity from arrest or prosecution during their term of
 office and for 1 year afterwards. This Commission is said to
 be the first of its kind in Africa.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based On Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is some discrimination in Togo in favor of northern
 ethnic groups over southerners. Prior to President Eyadema's
 seizure of power in 1967, political power was controlled by
 southern ethnic groups, and heads of state were drawn from
 southern political groupings. Because President Eyadema is a
 northerner and a military man, the situation has been reversed
 in the past 20 years. Northerners form the bulk of the armed
 forces, which are a mainstay of the regime, and in general
 northerners are viewed as a privileged group. At the same
 time, a serious effort has been made to integrate southerners
 into the power structure; 10 of the Government's 17 cabinet
 officers are southerners, and southerners predominate in
 senior civil service and technical jobs. Nonetheless,
 southerners often perceive themselves as second class
 citizens. There is no known discrimination on grounds of
 religion.
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled
 out in the "code de la famille" (family code) which was
 adopted in early 1980. Under this code, women's rights
 include maternity leave benefits. In the economic sphere,
 women dominate local market activities and commerce with
 Togo's neighbors and often amass considerable wealth. But
 formal equality under the law and economic power have not
 given women an effective role in political decisionmaking.
 Nor do formal equality under the law and success in the market
 place spell out economic or social equality for women. Unlike
 civil law, customary or traditional law gives all property to
 the male in the event of separation or divorce. Similarly,
 although women are legally allowed to acquire contraceptives
 and undertake family planning, custom and tradition prohibit
 women from access to contraception without the permission of
 their husbands or fathers. Far fewer women than men receive
 university education, and the number of women graduates from
 secondary schools is low.
 
 
 329
 TOGO
 Economic conditions in rural areas often leave women little
 time for-anything other than carrying water, finding firewood,
 cooking;' chiIdbearing, caring for the family and helping to
 raise food crops. The Government-has undertaken a campaign to
 make women throughout Togo aware of their expanded
 opportunities under the new family code. A government-
 sponsored women's organization, the Union Nationale des Femmes
 Togolaises, is active in the promotion of women's education
 and welfare.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Labor practices in Togo are set by the Togolese labor code
 adopted in 1974. The code specifically stipulates that there
 shoUld'be equal -pay for equal work, qualifications, and
 production for both sexes; working hours of all employees in
 any enterprise, except fbr agricultural enterprises, should
 not normally exceed 40 hours per week; the employment of-
 children under the age of 14 in any enterprise is prohibited;
 at least one period of 24 hours of rest per week is compulsory;
 and workers should receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 -There is a minimum wage in the agricultural sector of $0.21
 per hour and in thenonagricultural sector not covered by some
 other scale of $0.25 per hour. Enterprises must run a regular
 medical-service for their employees. Health and safety,
 standards -in'the work place are determined by a technical
 consulting' committee at the Ministry of Labor and instituted
 by decrees. There are penalties for employers who do not meet
 the conditions of the.decree. These provisions are believed
 to be respected by large state-owned and private enterprises
 but are probably ignored by many smaller firms and the large
 subsistence agricultural sector involving family units.
 
 
 330
