 TOGO
 Since seizing power in a military coup in 1967, President
 Gnassingbe Eyadema has molded Togo into a single-party,
 authoritarian state. The President dominates all branches and
 functions of government, serving as Head of State, Chief of
 Staff of the armed forces, and head of the only political
 party, the Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais (RPT). The
 Government considers all Togolese members of the RPT, and all
 citizens are obliged to vote. Only active party members can
 obtain high government posts. The Eyadema Government rules by
 decree and bases its legal authority on the 1979 Constitution,
 which was formally adopted by referendum. This Constitution
 established a National Assembly whose primary role is to adopt
 all governmental decrees sent to it. One-candidate
 presidential elections held every7 years have reconfirmed
 President Eyadema's rule.
 The Government's authority is reinforced through control of
 the state security apparatus: the armed forces, the National
 Police (Surete), and the Special Police (Gendarmerie). All of
 these forces have domestic security responsibilities.
 Togo ranks as a least developed country with an annual per
 napita gross domestic product of under $400. Approximately 80
 percent of its 3.4 million people are engaged in agriculture.
 With the aid of structural adjustment programs supported by
 the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, Togo in recent
 years has achieved moderate economic growth with low inflation.
 Human rights in Togo continued to be tightly circumscribed in
 1990. However, popular dissatisfabtion with the Government
 became more apparent, with increasing calls for a multiparty
 system, democracy, and freedom of expression. In the face of
 growing public pressures and demonstrations for change, the
 Government vacillated on specific issues. Initially, it
 denied that 4 of 13 students arrested in August and held for
 distributing antigovernment pamphlets had been tortured.
 However, in October the Government dismissed the head of the
 Surete (by transfer) for his participation in torture of 4 of
 them, and the President pardoned 11 of the 13 students. The
 remaining two students were tried, convicted, sentenced to 5
 years, and then pardoned by President Eyadema. The Government
 stopped publication of one issue of an independent newspaper
 and retained censorship procedures but subsequently issued a
 statement endorsing freedom of the press.
 The Government established a 109-member committee to draft a
 new constitution, with an overwhelming number drawn from the
 Government, RPT leadership, and the military. While holding
 out the promise of a new constitution, it failed to set a
 meaningful timetable for implementation. In the changing
 atmosphere, the government-organized Togolese Human Rights
 Commission was able to assume a more prominent role in
 addressing human rights abuses. Four new human rights groups
 were organized in 1990, providing independent monitoring of
 ipsues such as torture, freedom of press, and freedom of
 expression. Major human rights abuses in 1990 remained
 torture and abuse of prisoners and detainees, arbitrary
 detentions; lack of fair trial procedures in security cases;
 restrictions on freedom of speech, press, and assembly and the
 right of citizens to change their government; and
 discrimination against women.
 
 
 TOGO
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political or other extrajudicial
 killings in 1990.
 b- Disappearance
 There were unconfirmed reports of the disappearance of
 Dindiogue Nayone, a university student who criticized the
 Government during a May student association meeting. He was
 released from detention but not seen again. Uncorroborated
 press reports claimed he was living- in- exile in Chad. There
 were no reports as- i past years of abductions of persons from
 nefghboring cnuntries.
 r-- Torture anT Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Ifegradinc-
 Treatment or Punisb nt
 There is no Togolese- aw against torture; however. Toqo is a
 signatory to the International Convention- against Torture.
 Beatings of those arrested for criminal and political offenses
 are common. While the number of incidents appeared to- be
 fewer in 1990 than previousIy. torture of- suspected opponents
 of the Government remains- a problem. The-independent Human
 Rights League verified the torture by beating and electric
 shock of- 4 of the 13 persons- arrested in August for
 distributing antigovernment tracts and made a report to the
 Togolese Human Rights Commission. An independent newspaper
 published interviews with three of those concerned. The
 Commission subsequently issued a public report confirming the
 torture and recommending the victims be compensated and the
 electric shock equipment destroyed. Action on these
 recommendations was still pending, at the end of 1990
 However, the head of the Surete, Captain Pitalouna Laokpessi,
 was dismissed and returned to his former position as airport
 security chief as a result of-his role in the affair.
 The former chief of military procurement, Col. Seyi Memem, was
 convicted in a secret military proceeding on charges of
 embezzlement. There were numerous reports that he was
 tortured during his long pretrial imprisonment. Although
 abusive security officials may be arbitrarily punished by
 removal, loss of pay, or reprimand, no formal procedures for
 such cases exist, and punishment of officials for human rights
 abuses- is rare
 Prison conditions remained very harsh in 1990 with seriously
 inadequate food and medical care. Apparently as a result of
 the Amnesty International (AI) 1989 Report, the President
 attempted to improve the prison conditions of the defendants
 convicted in the December 1986 sedition trial. Conditions for
 detainees held in rural areas or military facilities have not
 improved.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Togolese law, persons arrested may be held incommunicado
 without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-hour
 extension if the case is deemed serious or complex. In
 practice, most detentions conform to this provision. However,
 
 
 424
 TOGO
 persons accused of "political crimes," such as defaming the
 President, can be arrested and detained without limit. Such
 persons have been routinely charged as "administrative
 detainees," a status which permits no recourse to normal legal
 remedies. Prefects (governors) have de facto authority to
 order detention at will. Security officers also have
 unrestricted arrest and detention powers in cases involving
 national security.
 Owing more to a shortage of qualified judicial personnel than
 intent to evade required judicial procedures, a substantial
 number of nonpolitical prisoners are held for long periods of
 time--in some cases 6 months or more--before being brought to
 trial. Although they are not guaranteed the right to counsel
 under law, detainees routinely retain counsel, if they can
 afford it.
 On October 5, the authorities detained approximately 170
 persons, 92 of whom the Government described as foreigners,
 for their part in public disorders that followed a mass
 demonstration of over 5,000 persons. The demonstrators had
 congregated to express support for the cause of 2 of the 13
 students arrested in August, the only members of the 13 to
 stand trial for distributing antigovernment pamphlets. Many
 of the original persons arrested were released within 48
 hours, but additional arrests were made. The remainder were
 pardoned by President Eyadema on October 15, which was the
 deadline for the Government to file charges for processing
 them as normal criminal cases.
 There was no precise figure for the small number of Togolese
 believed to be in detention for political reasons at the end
 on 1990. The investigations of the Human Rights Commission
 rarely involve political detainees.
 A number of opposition figures remained in exile, including
 Gilchrist Olympio, Edem Kodjo, Merlaud Lawson, Richard Aboki,
 Daniel Kouvei-Akoe, and Agbeghan Saloman. The Togolese Bar
 Association, leading human rights activists, some editorials
 in the independent -press, and a council of opposition groups
 in Paris have all called for a presidential amnesty to allow
 Togolese to return from overseas.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Fair public trial is not assured in political/security cases.
 The regular judicial system employs both African traditional
 law and the Napoleonic Code in trying criminal and civil
 cases. In rural areas, the village chief or council of elders
 can try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who reject the
 traditional ruling can take their cases to the regular court
 system, which is the starting point for cases in urban areas.
 The Supreme Court stands at the apex of the modern court
 system, but its decisions can be appealed to the President,
 the final arbiter.
 The judicial process begins with pretrial investigation by a
 special judge who examines the adequacy of the evidence and
 decides on bail. The number of judges is inadequate, but the
 court system functions well for most routine cases. Trials
 are open to the public, and judicial procedures are respected.
 Defendants have the right to counsel, but only in potential
 capital punishment cases will the Government provide counsel
 to those unable to afford this service. Lower court decisions
 may be appealed to two higher courts, then to the President.
 
 
 TOGO
 Procedural safeguards for fair trial are lacking in
 security/political cases. Special courts handle cases related
 to public security (State Security Court), embezzlement of
 public funds (Tribunal for Recovery of Public Funds), and
 violent crimes (Court of Assizes). The Security Court has not
 convened in 4 years. Persons who embezzle large sums
 generally remain in jail until the money is repaid.
 Togo's judicial system is not independent of the executive.
 The President can and does intervene in and determine the
 outcome of cases of interest. In January President Eyadema
 pardoned former Justice Minister Kpotivi Lacle only a few
 hours after Lacle was sentenced to 2 years in prison for his
 role in a fraud scheme involving his younger brother. Eyadema
 issued the pardon before Kpotivi had appealed the conviction.
 The President also pardoned Ii of the 13 students arreste. in
 August in connection with distribution of antigovernment
 pamphlets before their cases came to triaI. The other two
 were tried before the Criminal Court in September and October,
 found- guilty, and sentenced to 5 years in-prisom. They were
 subsequently pardoned by President Eyadema.
 Togolese exiles in Ghana claim that Togo presently-holds a
 number of political prisoners-. The 14 persons still
 imprisoned for alleged involvement in a September 1986 coup
 attempt remained in Kara in the north, where they were
 transferred in October 1989 from the Toikin barracks. They
 have been permitte& to receive visitors since 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In routine criminal or civil cases, searches of private
 residences are authorized by a judge or senior police
 official. In political/national security cases, the security
 forces need no prior authorization. The authorities routinely
 continue- to open mail and monitor telephones, and a government
 network of informants keeps track of actual or perceived
 opponents. Religious publications of the Jehovah's Witnesses
 often disappear in the mail. All Togolese are automatically
 members of Togo's sole political party and are required to
 vote, but no one is forced to take an active party role.--
 "European" first names are proscribed, and all Togolese are
 required to have Togolese or Muslim first names.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There is no law protecting freedom of speech and press in
 Togo. A new press code which appeared at the end of 199Z
 broke little new ground. A communique in July called for
 freedom of the press, but censorship continues. Direct
 criticism of the Government, and especially of the President,
 is perceived as antigovernment activity and not tolerated.
 The use of public forums to discuss limitations on executive
 power, multiparty politics, and freedom of expression received
 a setback in late 1989, when senior RPT officials verbally
 disciplined human rights activist Djovi Gally following his
 public lecture and discussion on America's independent
 judiciary. The officials threatened to bar Gally from his
 legal practice for 6 months. However, members of the Bar
 Association successfully challenged the threatened closing of
 Gally's practice.
 
 
 426
 TOGO
 In 1990 a growing number of pamphlets and tracts advocating
 multipartyism and basic democratic freedoms were circulated,
 primarily by students, despite government efforts to halt
 distribution. Jeune Afrique articles, including those
 covering the Gally incident, the October disorders, and the
 growing number of opposition groups, have been allowed
 distribution in Togo. However, they disappeared quickly from
 the newsstands, and many may have been bought up by the
 Government.
 The Government continues to dominate the print media and to
 control radio and television. The official media project a
 positive image of Togo and its President and simultaneously
 condemn corruption and abuse of public trust. Ten independent
 newspapers and the monthly journal of the Human Rights
 Commission supplement the government-controlled daily
 newspaper.
 In practice, independent newspapers must follow censorship
 procedures which require them to submit three copies of each
 proposed edition to the Ministry of Interior, which has 4
 hours to approve or disapprove distribution. There is a
 nominal fine for failing to submit papers prior to
 distribution, but more serious after-the-fact penalties may be
 levied if material is found to be offensive or untrue.
 In June Togolese authorities returned the sixth edition of the
 independent Forum Hebdo to its editor for rewriting on the
 basis of an 1881 French law which prohibits articles offensive
 to foreign heads of state. This issue also criticized single-
 party domination of Togo, including restrictions on labor
 unions and freedom of association. The Togolese Human Rights
 Commission issued a public report supportive of the
 Government's finding that the article was offensive to foreign
 heads of state but criticized the Ministry of Interior on
 procedural grounds. It" also called on the Ministry of
 Interior to ensure Forum-Hebdo's continued existence.
 The Government responded to the Forum Hebdo episode in early
 July by issuing a communique guaranteeing freedom of the press
 and expression but did not change the procedures. The
 Ministry of Interior subsequently approved all remaining 1990
 editions of Forum Hebdo, including one containing interviews
 with three of the student activists arrested in August who
 allegedly had suffered torture. Forum Hebdo also published a
 series of demands issued by the Bar Association in response to
 the Government's handling of the October demonstrations. The
 Government permitted in July the establishment of a
 nongovernmental association advocating press freedom.
 There is government censorship of all films, video cassettes,
 books, plays, and other writings published in Togo. Foreign
 video tapes carried by Togolese arriving at the airport are
 seized, reviewed, and normally returned after some delay and
 payment of fees equivalent to $6 per tape. Bookstores sell a
 wide range of books, including some containing veiled
 criticism of Togo's system of government. Foreign
 publications are openly sold in bookstores and on street
 corners.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled in Togo. .The
 organization of any official group or large group meetings
 requires prior government approval. This effectively prevents
 
 
 TOGO
 any antigovernment group from meeting, although nongovernmental
 human rights groups held meetings toward the end of the year
 without government interference.
 The authorities attempted to break up with nonlethal force a
 peaceful demonstration of some 5,000 people who gathered at
 the Lome Court House on October 5 in support of the two
 students tried on charges of distributing antigovernment
 pamphlets. In the process, the authorities touched off a
 major confrontation between the police and the crowd which
 resulted in 4 deaths and 34 wounded. Human rights activists
 claimed the number of casualties was higher. No independent
 confirmation was available. A number ofgovernment offices
 and vehicles were destroyed. Police, frequently outnumbered
 by demonstrators, were beaten and stoned but did not fire. It
 is unclear if this was due to restraint- or lack of
 ammunition. In protest of the actions of the security forces
 in dispersing the crowd, the Bar Association held a a-day
 strike and.demanded the punishment of the commanders of the
 security forces. The Government claimed- but offered- no
 proof, that the demonstration was an attempt hy foreigners to
 over-throw the Government.
 The Government routinely grants permission for nonpolitical
 events and the formation of professional or charitable
 societies.
 c. Freedom-of Religion
 The Government permits Togoiese- to participate in desired
 religious activities. However, in order to operate publicly
 all religious groups must qualify under one of seven
 categories listed by the Ministry of Interior. Upon obtaining
 Ministry permission, qualifying groups are then unrestricted
 -in their religious practices. They may publish religious
 material, conduct services, and teach-their faith.
 Non-Togolese clergy are welcome to reside in Togo,
 proselytize, and engage in other religious activities.
 Currently, the Jehovah's-Witnesses and several small
 apostolic/celestial groups have been denied official
 permission to practice their beliefs. While this has
 prevented these groups from publicized, open worship, in 1990
 they continued to practice their faith in private. Local
 religious groups are free to maintain contacts with
 coreligionists in other countries. There are no restrictions
 on travel for religious purposes. All official religious
 observances are ecumenical in nature, and the Government does
 not favor any specific religion. Membership in authorized
 religious groups has no bearing on civil service promotions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement (including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or workplace) is
 generally allowed. However, in issuing passports and visas,
 the Government controls the emigration of professional
 Togolese and keeps known political dissidents under scrutiny.
 The Government maintains customs and security checkpoints on
 all major routes throughout the country. Except for the few
 political exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other
 countries may return at will.
 
 
 428
 TOGO
 Togo has a small refugee population. The United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recognized some 500 refugees
 in Togo at the end of 1990, although the actual number is
 undoubtedly higher. The Government keeps a close watch on
 political refugees, and refugees from countries with which
 Togo enjoys good relations are reluctant to register with the
 UNHCR for fear that the Togolese will provide their
 governments with information about them. In May the
 Government expelled 27 Ghanians to Ghana despite their claims
 that they would be subject to arrest.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1990 citizens could not change their government through
 democratic means. However, a presidentially appointed
 commission is currently drafting a new constitution which will
 be subject to a national referendum in late 1991. It is
 expected to include authorization for a multiparty system.
 Under the present Constitution, all Togolese are automatically
 members of the RPT, and active party members may debate minor
 issues at party meetings or raise complaints against local
 officials. However, no one may challenge the Government's
 programs. In 1986 President Eyadema, the only candidate, was
 elected for another 7-year term with 99.7 percent of the vote.
 Pursuant to the 1979 Constitution, National Assembly elections
 were held in March. More than 200 candidates, including 7
 women, contested the 77 seats. As all citizens are required
 to vote, there was a high turnout, with voters casting their
 ballots (color-coded for each candidate) in public.
 Fifty-eight incumbents retained their seats. Although active
 participation in the RPT was not a prerequisite, candidates
 were required to submit their campaign literature for
 government approval before it was printed at government
 expense. Public gatherings were proscribed and candidates
 were denied access to the media.
 Theoretically, the Assembly has the right to reject laws
 originating in the executive branch. In fact, the Assembly
 has never rejected any proposed legislation, and most laws are
 carried by acclamation.
 In May the RPT party congress voted to increase discussion and
 democratic practices within the party, but it rejected
 multiparty democracy. The party congress also agreed in
 principle to support President Eyadema's proposal to separate
 the RPT from the State, but it later delayed implementation of
 this proposal to December 1991. On October 10, the Central
 Committee of the RPT announced a schedule for preparation of a
 new constitution which is to culminate in a referendum at the
 end of 1991. The schedule provided no firm dates. On October
 26, President Eyadema announced a list of 109 people to serve
 on the constitutional drafting committee. The majority are
 either members of the RPT leadership, present or former
 government officials, or military officers.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has shown increased awareness of human rights
 issues in recent years. In 1987 it approved and facilitated
 the establishment of the Togolese Human Rights Commission to
 investigate reports of human rights abuses. Despite some
 
 
 TOGO
 positive steps to help safeguard human rights, the Commission
 suffers important handicaps, chiefly its lack of independence
 from the Government. In October Chairman Yao Agboyibor
 resigned from the Commission. The Commission is composed of
 13 members elected by 13 private and public bodies and
 professions, including judges, doctors, teachers, and trade
 union officials. The Commission is legally authorized to
 receive complaints from any Togolese citizen or foreign
 resident of Togo and to investigate such complaints with
 access to government and police files. If a violation is
 found, the Commission is authorized to negotiate with the
 responsible governmental.authority either to rectify the wrong
 or to submit the case to the courts or to the President. In
 practice,. however, few of the cases dealt with by the
 Commission have pertained directly to human rights abuses and
 particularly to the issue of political prisoners.
 Commission members enjoy immunity from arrest or prosecution
 during their term of office and for 1 year thereafter, and
 this immunity has not been tested. Those filing petitions
 have no immunity, and activists report that some people have
 been deterred from filing by government pressure and/or fear
 of harassment. Perhaps most significantly, the Commission
 continues to take great care not to criticize the Government.
 However, as noted earlier, the Commission did issue a report
 confirming press reports of the torture of four government
 critics and, while avoiding criticism of government censorship
 of a particular issue of an -independent journal, did urge
 publicly that it be allowed to continue-publishing
 Four additional human rights organizations were formed in
 1990. The independent Human Rights League, founded in July,
 is open to all Togolese interested in the promotion of human
 rights and political freedom and actively pursued allegations
 of torture in connection with the August arrests of 13
 students accused of distributing antigovernment tracts. The
 Togolese League for the Defense of Human Rights is dedicated
 to educating the public and aiding in the defense of human
 rights. Its leadership is drawn from government, academic,
 and financial sectors. The Association for.the Promotion of
 the State of Law was founded by a group of private attorneys
 and worked to promote the rule of law and democracy. The
 Togolese Association for Freedom of the Press and the
 Committee for the Defense of Press.Freedom both advocate
 freedom of the press and civil liberties. A new committee
 opposed to torture has also been formed.
 The Bar Association continued its involvement in human rights
 issues. Hours after the Government's announcement of the
 schedule for a new constitution, the Bar Association adopted
 by overwhelming majority a list of demands which included a
 presidential declaration of support for multipartyism, release
 of persons charged with political acts, and an amnesty to
 allow Togolese to return from overseas. The Bar Association
 also issued a critique of the Government's mixed record on
 democratization and urged the formation of a national
 conference to debate Togo's future, followed by the formation
 of a transitional government to implement the conference's
 recommendations. The Committee for Democracy for the People
 of Africa-Togo also issued a tract calling for the creation of
 a neutral commission to investigate the October 5
 demonstrations. The Bar Association critique was published in
 Forum Hebdo.
 
 
 480
 TOGO
 International human rights organizations have communicated
 directly with the Togolese Human Rights Commission and the
 Human Rights League concerning individual cases. The
 President received a delegation from AI in October 1989 and,
 among other things, assured the Al members that prison
 conditions would be improved for those convicted in the 1986
 sedition trial.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Before President Eyadema's seizure of power in 1967, southern
 ethnic groups dominated Togo. A northerner, President Eyadema
 has made a serious effort to integrate all ethnic groups into
 the political structure. Ministers, governors, and other high
 level officials are appointed in proportion to the ethnic mix
 of the population. The exceptions are the security forces,
 which are dominated.by northern ethnic groups, and commerce
 and the professions, which continue to be the preserve of
 southerners.
 Togolese women have formal-equality with men under the law,
 and women's economic and social rights are spelled out in a
 "family code" adopted in early 1980. This code guarantees
 various women's rights, including maternity leave benefits.
 However, in practice, women continue to be subjected to
 discrimination, especially in education, pension benefits, and
 traditional law. Far fewer women than men receive university
 education, and the number of women graduates from secondary
 schools is low. In the urban economic sphere, women dominate
 both local market activities and commerce with Togo's
 neighbors, often amassing considerable wealth in the process.
 However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas leave women
 with little time for anything other than taxing domestic and
 agricultural work. A few women are involved in political
 party activities. Unlike civil law, customary or traditional
 law--which affects the vast majority of women--discriminates
 against women, e.g., it gives all property to the male in the
 event of separation or divorce. The Government has undertaken
 efforts to change customs which, among other things, prevent
 women from legally guaranteed access to contraception without
 the permission of their husbands or fathers.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs, but
 its extent is not known. Within the Togolese culture, such
 violence is outside the bounds of accepted behavior, and for
 this reason rarely comes to the public surface, including in
 the press. Mechanisms exist within both the traditional
 extended-family and formal judicial structures for redress,
 but the police rarely intervene in domestic violence cases.
 Female circumcision is practiced by a few northern ethnic
 groups but is gradually diminishing. While the Government has
 undertaken a campaign to make women throughout Togo aware of
 their expanded opportunities under the new family code, it has
 not specifically addressed the issue of violence against women
 or female circumcision. A government-sponsored national
 women's organization publicizes women's health, educational,
 and welfare issues.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is limited since the Government
 favors the National Confederation of Workers of Togo (CNTT),
 
 
 431.
 TOGO
 which is associated with the sole political party. The CNTT
 unites various individual trade unions into one national labor
 organization. Union membership is not compulsory, bt all
 wage earners-whether or not members of CNTT-affiliated
 unions--pay dues to the CNTT through an automatic check-off
 system. The CNTT returns to affiliated unions only a fraction
 of the dues paid by union members. Unions can and do exist
 outside of the CNTT, but they do not benefit from the
 automatic check-off qystem. The Committee of Experts (COE) of
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) has concluded that
 the effect of the compulsory dues system is to establish a .
 trade union monopoly for.the CNTT. The COE has requested that
 the Government remove this exclusivity and bring its
 legislation into conformity with ILO Convention 87 on Freedom
 of Association, which Togo has ratified.
 Strikes are authorized only as a means of last resort but in
 the past have rarely taken place, have been short, and have
 ended as a result of government arbitration. In November
 longshoremen struck for higher wages, and taxi drivers struck
 in protest of expensive new licensing requirements. Violent.
 clashes between the protesters and government security forces
 occurred when'the protesters blocked streets in Lome and two
 other cities. As in the past, the Government acted as
 arbitrator in these cases, negotiating with the strikers to
 resolve the dispute. Negotiations were still under way at the
 end of the year. Although security forces did clash with the
 strikers while maintaining public order, the Government did
 not resort to coercion, force, or arrests to end strikes.
 The CNTT is a member of the Organization of African Trade
 Union unity and the Organization of Trade Unions of West
 Africa. It is not otherwise affiliated~internationally,
 although it maintains ties with international and national
 trade union organizations in both the East and West.
 Individual Togolese unions are affiliated with
 Western-oriented international trade secretariats.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The CNTT is not an independent union and basically conveys the
 Government's views and requirements to workers. The CNTT does
 have a role in the wage bargaining process and does, on
 certain issues, represent the workers' economic interests to
 the Government. A law allowing the establishment of export
 processing zones (EPZ) was enacted in late 1989. Several
 companies received export processing zone status in 1990. The
 EPZ law provides exemptions from some provisions of Togolese
 labor law.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Although the law is silent on the question, forced or
 compulsory labor does not exist. There are, however,
 occasional early morning mobilizations of the populations in
 larger towns and cities to clean streets and pick up trash.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial and
 technical employment require a minimum age of 18. These age
 requirements are generally enforced in urban areas by
 inspectors from the Ministry of Labor. However, in rural
 
 
 432
 areas even very young children traditionally help their
 families with agricultural work or animal husbandry.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor practices are regulated by the Labor Code. The Code
 stipulates that there should be equal pay for equal work
 regardless of sex, and this provision is generally observed.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for
 agricultural enterprises, should not normally exceed 40 hours
 per week; at least one period of 24 hours of rest per week is
 compulsory; and workers should receive 30 days of paid leave
 each year. Minimum wages are set by the Government after
 discussions with the CNTT and officials of the Ministry of
 Rural Development. These discussions cannot be characterized
 as true bargaining agreements. The minimum wage in the
 agricultural sector is about 20 cents per hour, and in the
 nonagricultural sector about 25 cents per hour. Workers
 cannot maintain a decent standard of living on such wages, and
 minimum wage workers must often supplement their incomes
 through second jobs or through some subsistence farming.
 Larger enterprises must run a regular medical service for
 their employees.
 Health and safety standards in the workplace are determined by
 a technical consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor,
 which may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 conditions. In practice, the Ministry's enforcement of the
 various-provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Large
 enterprises usually attempt to respect these rules, but
 smaller firms and the large agricultural sector do not
 maintain them. Due to Togo's significant unemployment,
 workers seldom complain about conditions.
 
 
