 TOGO
 President General Gnassingbe Eyadema and his Assembly of the Togolese People
 (RPT) party, strongly backed by the military, continue to dominate the exercise of
 political power. During the year, the RPT used its parliamentary majority in the
 National Assembly to create a Constitutional Court, an Audio-visual and Commu-
 nications Authority, and a Supreme Council for the Magistrature. Despite the Gov-
 ernment's professed intention to move from an authoritarian legacy to democracy,
 in practice the new legislation ensures that President Eyadema and his supporters
 continue to maintain firm control over all facets of government. As all of these new
 bodies are filled with allies and supporters of President Eyadema, their authority
 is thus limited, and their autonomy and effectiveness is very much in doubt. The
 Government also moved forward unilaterally to update electoral lists and make
 preparations for the presidential election, scheduled for June or July 1998. Despite
 opposition demands to establish an electoral system free from government influence
 for the election, the RPT majority in the National Assembly passed a new Electoral
 Code that gives responsibility for organizing elections to the Minister of Interior, an
 army general. The National Electoral Commission, whose own independence is not
 guaranteed by the new legislation, is merely charged with confirming the results of
 the election. The Government also exerts control over the judiciary.
 The security forces consist primarily of the army (including the elite Presidential
 Guard), navy, air force, the Surete Nationale (including the national police), and the
 Gendarmerie. Approximately 90 percent of the army's officers and 70 percent of its
 soldiers come from the President's northern (Kabye) ethnic group. The Minister of
 the Interior is in charge of the national police, and the Defense Minister has nomi-
 nal authority over the other security forces. In practice there is little differentiation
 between civilian and military authorities. Security forces remain overwhelmingly
 loyal to their chief, President Eyadema, subject to his direct control, and carry out
 his orders. Some members of the security forces committed serious human rights
 abuses.
 About 80 percent of the country's estimated 4.25 million people are engaged in
 subsistence agriculture, but there is also an active commercial sector. The main ex-
 ports are phosphates, cotton, and cocoa, which are the leading sources of foreign ex-
 change. While there has been considerable recovery in the gross domestic product
 (GDP) since the severe political and economic crisis of the early 1990's, annual per
 capita GDP remains below $400. The country is slowly moving toward structural ad-
 justment under programs of international financial institutions and has resumed
 moderate growth.
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The Government re-
 stricted citizens' right to change their government. Security forces were responsible
 for extrajudicial killings, beatings, arbitrary detentions, and interference with citi-
 zens' movement and privacy rights. The Government did not, in general, investigate
 or effectively punish those who committed such abuses. Prolonged pretrial detention
 was commonplace, and prison conditions remained very harsh. The Government con-
 tinued to influence the judiciary; defendants' rights to fair and expeditious trials are
 not ensured, and some detainees wait years to be judged. The Government and the
 security forces restricted freedom of speech and of the press, often using investiga-
 tive detention and suspension of newspaper publication to harass journalists and po-
 litical opponents. Government intimidation limits freedom of assembly. The Na-
 tional Assembly renewed the mandate of the National Human Rights Commission,
 but it is dominated by supporters of Eyadema. Societal discrimination and violence
 against women, as well as abuse of children, continued.  I
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-A heavy security presence combined
 with habitual impunity enjoyed by members of the security forces has created a cli-
 mate in which excessive force can be used without legal consequences. There were
 two confirmed cases of extrajudicial killing by members of the security forces.
 Dosseh Danklou and Agbodjinshie Yakanou, supporters of prminent self-exiled op-
 osition leader and former Interior Minister Alphonse Kokouvi Masseme, were
 illed in detention by security forces following their arrest on June 15 on weapons
 charges in the border village of Akato. Two other men, arrested at the same time,
 were later released (see Section 2.d.).
 In addition to these confirmed incidents, opponents of the Government alleged
 other killings and attacks linked to security forces. Apetse Koffi Edem, a former
 member of the Togolese armed forces who had been living in Ghana as a refugee,
 was killed by heavily-armed men in an ambush on February 3 on the road to
 Kpalime. His body, along with that of another man, was found the next day in a
 field near the town of Notse, 90 kilometers north of Lome. On February 19 an un-
 identified young man was killed by members of the security forces, who knocked
 him off his motorcycle as he passed in front of a military checkpoint near the Ghana
 border. Komlan Hofia Pomeavo, a family member of Alphonse Kokouvi Masseme,
 was arrested by security forces on March 1. His body was found the next day in
 a ditch by the side of the road near his village of Akato.
 The bodies of two men were found on June 29 near a village close to the Ghana
 border. Reliable sources claimed that the two men were killed by members of the
 security forces in retaliation for a series of attacks on police in the Sanguera region,
 20 kilometers north of Lome.
 In December the Lome Court of Appeals sentenced Aleka Kpakou and Kouma
 Dolla the soldiers accused in the murder of German diplomat Thomas Rupprecht
 in February 1996, to 10 years in prison. There were, however, no developments in
 the 1996 murders of Captain Philippe Azote or Anthony Dogbo. Likewise there was
 no progress in solving the 1996 murders of Rose Woenagno, Amouzou Adjakly, or
 Komlavi Yebesse. Nor were there further developments in the 1995 murder in
 Ghana of opposition leader Lieutenant Vincent Tokofai, the 1994 killing of Gaston
 Edeh, or the 1992 killings of Marc Atidepe.and Tavio Amorin.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were, however, no developments in the 1994 disappearance of David Bruce,
 or in the disappearance of Afougnilede Essiba, Adanou Igbe, Kobono Kowouvi, and
 another companion, all four of whom were arrested by soldiers at an armed security
 checkpoint in Adetikope in 1994. In 1994 the Government began an investigation
 of the Bruce disappearance but has not reported any results.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these practices, but security forces often beat detainees imme-
 diately after arresting them. Some suspects have claimed credibly to have been
 beaten and denied access to food.and medical attention. The Government did not
 investigate, prosecute, or punish any officials for these abuses.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and inadequate
 sanitation and food. Medical facilities are practically nonexistent and disease is
 widespread. Despite these problems, there were no reported deaths of prisoners due
 to disease or inadequate medical facilities, unlike in 1996, when conditions led to
 an estimated 15 deaths. Prison guards in the overcrowded Civil Prison of Lome
 charge prisoners a small fee to shower, use the toilet, or have a place to sleep. Chil-
 dren are often incarcerated with convicted adults. Women are housed separately.
 Although international and local private organizations have access to prisons for
 monitoring purposes, the Ministry of Justice refused written requests from diplo-
 matic missions for monitoring visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law allows authorities to hold ar-
 rested persons incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-
 hour extension in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice detainees can be,
 and often are, detained without bail for lengthy periods with or without the ap-
 proval of a judge. Family members and attorneys officially have access to a detainee
 after the initial 48- or 96-hour detention period, but authorities often delay, and
 sometimes deny, access.
 Judges or senior police officials issue warrants. Although detainees have the right
 to be informed of the charges against them, police sometimes ignore this right. The
 law stipulates that a special judge conduct a pretrial investigation to examine the
 adequacy of evidence and decide on bail. However, a shortage of judges and other
 qualified personnel, plus official indifference, have resulted in lengthy pretrial de-
 
 
 357
 tentions-in some cases several years-and confinement of prisoners beyond their
 sentences. An estimated 50 percent of the prison population were pretrial detainees.
 The Government continued to use brief investigative detentions of less than 48
 hours to harass and intimidate opponents and journalists for alleged defamation of
 government officials (see Section 2.a.). The Government often resorts to false
 charges of common crimes to detain and intimidate opponents.
 There were instances of arbitrary arrests and detention. In the week preceding
 the January 13 anniversary celebration of President Eyadema's coup d'etat, security
 forces arrested a number of young men in the Nyekonakpoe and Adidogome Casa-
 blanca districts of Lome. These areas are reputedly strongholds of the opposition
 and are also adjacent to the border with Ghana. Security forces reportedly deployed
 and then conducted identity checks throughout the area, arresting those who could
 not produce identity cards. The security forces conducted a similar roundup in the
 Be quarter of Lome (the site of the anniversary parade) 2 days before the celebra-
 tion. All those detained were later released. Houssoukpe Kokou was detained on
 June 15 and held for 3 days on charges that his 8-year-old son was found carrying
 a gun. Security forces found no weapons when they conducted a search of his resi-
 dence. Dogbolo Sofahu and Agbodzalu Kemavo, arrested on June 15 along with
 Dosseh Danklou and Agbodjinshie Yakanou (see Section L.a.), were later released.
 In December security forces detained Jean-Pierre Fabre, the Secretary General of
 Gilchrist Olympio's Union of the Forces for Change (UFC) Party. Fabre was accused
 of plotting to take pictures of cadavers at Lome hospitals, supposedly of persons
 killed by security forces. The pictures reportedly were to be used in a London press
 conference by Olympio to attempt to defame the military. The Government did not
 produce any photographs, did not file charges, and released Fabre after a 36-hour
 detention.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, in practice the executive branch continued to influence the judici-
 ary. The Government established a Supreme Council for the Magistrature in Au-
 gust, but a majority of its members are strong supporters of President Eyadema.
 The Constitutional Court, established in March, stands at the apex of the court
 system. The civil judiciary system includes the Supreme Court, the Sessions (Court
 of Assizes), and Appeals Courts. A military tribunal exists for crimes committed by
 security forces, but its proceedings are closed. Traditional law discriminates against
 women, particularly in the area of inheritance.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.).
 Magistrates, like most government employees, are not always paid on time. The ju-
 dicial system employs both African traditional law and the Napoleonic Code in try-
 ing criminal and civil cases. Trials are open to the public, and judicial procedures
 are generally respected. Defendants have the right to counsel and to appeal. The
 Bar Association provides attorneys for the indigent. Defendants may confront wit-
 nesses, present evidence, and enjoy a presumption of innocence. In rural areas, the
 village chief or council of elders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who
 reject the traditional ruling may take their cases to the regular court system, which
 is the starting point for cases in urban areas.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 There have been no developments in the case of members of the radical opposition
 group M05, convicted and sentenced to prison for the 1994 attack on an electrical
 station owned by the Togolese phosphate parastatal. Although the crime appeared
 to have been politically motivated, the State Prosecutor refused to apply the Decem-
 ber 1994 general amnesty law to this case.
 f, Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, a judge or senior police official may authorize searches of private
 residences. In political and national security cases, the security forces need no prior
 authorization. Police conducted searches without warrants, searching for dissidents'
 arms caches as well as for criminals, often under the guise of searching for identity
 cards. Armed security checkpoints exist throughout the country, and security forces
 arbitrarily interfere with privacy by searching vehicles, baggage, and individuals in
 the name of security. The Government monitors telephones and correspondence and
 maintains the police and Gendarmerie as domestic intelligence services.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, but the Government regularly intimidated journalists through
 threats, detention, and persecution. Police and gendarmes frequently harassed
 newspaper vendors. Advertisers were often intimidated as well.
 
 
 358
 
 Despite Government interference, there is a lively independent press, some of
 which is often extremely critical of President Eyadema. Of the 10 independent news-
 papers identified in 1996, only 8 continue to publish with any regularity. There are
 four independent radio stations and two private television companies that retrans-
 mit international satellite stations, but none of the independent broadcasters pro-
 vides any reporting of local or national events. The official media consist of one
 radio station, one television station, and one daily newspaper. Although they were
 generally slanted in favor of President Eyadema and the Government, they allowed
 the opposition limited access.
 The High Authority for Audio-visual and Communications (HAAC), designed to
 provide equal access to state media, as called for in the 1992 Constitution, was cre-
 ated in June. In practice it operates as an arm of the Government, is filled with
 Eyadema supporters, and has not increased opposition access to government media.
 There were many instances of detention and censorship. Moreover, intimidation
 of the press leads to considerable self-censorship. The publishers of two independent
 weeklies, Le Regard and Tingo Tingo, were arrested in February for printing arti-
 cles that were critical of present and former members of the Government. Mikaila
 Saibou, publisher of Le Regard, was detained for 5 days and then freed after apolo-
 gizing in person to President Eyadema. Saibou was then instructed to publish a
 statement in his paper admitting that Le Regard violated basic principles of journal-
 ism. Augustin Assiobo, publisher of Tingo Tingo, was fined $100 (50,000 cfa) and
 served 3 months in prison for defaming the family of a deceased government min-
 ister. Tingo Tingo also issued a written apology for the story.
 Also inFebruary, the chief state prosecutor ordered the suspension of the opposi-
 tion paper Forum Hebdo for 6 months. The publisher, Gabriel Kouame Agah, was
 fined $2,000 (1,000,000 cfa) and sentenced in absentia to 1 year in prison on the
 charge of criminal libel and publication of false information likely to incite the pub-
 lic to unrest. Agah had been residing in self-imposed exile in Ghana since 1992.
 Forum Hebdo resurfaced in May with a new name (Le Nouvel Echo) but with the
 same editorial outlook and staff.
 In March the Government detained and questioned Lucien Messan, the publisher
 of Le Combat du Peuple. He was taken to the Minister of the Interior, General Seyi
 Memene, and questioned about an article the paper had written alleging that an
 Africa Numero 1 journalist had accepted a $20,000 (10,000,000 cfa) bribe from the
 Government to do a favorable story on the newly-installed Constitutional Court.
 When Messan refused to disclose his source, he was arrested and confined overnight
 at the headquarters of the Gendarmerie. Messan had also been briefly detainedin
 January, during which time he was brought in handcuffs before President Eyadema
 to hear complaints about an unflattering picture of the Togolese leader that the
 per        ublished. In this instance, he was released the same day. Although Le
 ombat du euple continues to publish regularly, Messan fled into exile in May.
 In December the Government arrested and detained Afatsao Siliadin and Basile
 Agboh, respectively the publishers of "Nouveau Journal" and "Crocodile", two inde-
 pendent weeklies, after the papers ran stories linking President Eyadema to pro-
 Mobutu rebels in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The two journalists were
 held for 48 hours, then released, after making private apologies to the president,
 followed by televised public confessions that their stories were false.
 At the University of Benin, the country's sole university, academic freedom is con-
 strained by concern among professors about potential harassment by the Govern-
 ment or antiopposition militants and the lack of a faculty-elected rector. Opposition
 student groups are intimidated by an informer system that has led in the past to
 government persecution. The only recognized student group is pro-Eyadema.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens are free to assemble, and in practice political parties are able to hold con-
 gresses and meet. However, fear of informants and harsh reaction from the Govern-
 ment has reduced public demonstrations, particularly outside the capital. In Feb-
 ruary the mayor of the northern city of Kara banned a seminar on civic education
 jointly organized by a Togolese nongovernmental organization and a German foun-
 dation. In March RPT political activists attempted to break up an Action Committee
 for Renewal (CAR) party rally in Mango. A local police official arrived on the scene
 at the same time and informed the organizers that the prefect had prohibited the
 meeting. In April RPT youth using tear gas and machetes broke up a political rally
 in the prefecture of Agou organized by the opposition CAR party. In the same
 month, the opposition alleged that the prefect of Oti had forced the area's tradi-
 tional chiefs to adopt a resolution calling on CAR party leader Yawovi Agboyibo to
 stay out of the area because his "security could not be assured." In October soldiers
 prevented the CAR from holding a political rally in the northern town of Bafilo.
 When the party again attempted to meet in Bafilo in November, two assailants,
 
 
 credibly alleged to be members of the security forces in civilian clothes, attacked
 CAR leader Agboyibo as he alighted from his vehicle. Agboyibo sustained minor fa-
 cial injuries, but the rally proceeded as planned. The security forces briefly detained
 the attackers but later released them and have filed no charges.
 The opposition held well-attended and incident-free protest marches in Lome in
 May, September, and October. In all three instances, unarmed police and gen-
 darmes acted professionally to provide security for the marchers, and appropriate
 crowd and traffic control.
 Under the Constitution, citizens are free to organize in associations and political
 parties. Parties are able to elect officers and register. There are many active non-
 governmental organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights; however, armed security
 checkpoints and arbitrary searches of vehicles and individuals are commonplace.
 The lack of discipline of the soldiers manning the roadblocks and their actions, such
 as firing at vehicles and frequently demanding bribes before allowing citizens to
 pass, impede free movement within the country.
 The Government generally cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in as-
 sisting refugees. While there is no legislated body to determine asylum or refugee
 status, the Government routinely accepts the decision of the UNHCR office resident
 in Lome. The Government provides first asylum (and provided it to approximately
 500 persons in 1997). Ogoni refugees complained that security forces subjected them
 to arbitrary arrest and intimidation, but the UNHCR discounts these allegations.
 There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where they feared
 persecution.
 The August 1995 agreement with the UNHCR for the repatriation of an estimated
 45,000 Togolese refugees living in Benin and 75,000 to 80,000 living in Ghana was
 formally terminated in June. The UNHCR estimates that approximately 15,000 ref-
 ugees remain expatriated. The Government also accommodates roughly 8,500 refu-
 gees, mainly Ghanaians.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens peacefully to change their gov-
 ernment. In recent elections, however, this right was only partly respected. The
 Government, under the authority of the Minister of the Interior, began to revise the
 voting lists and prepare for the August 1998 presidential election. The RPT majority
 in the National Assembly also passed legislation to create, and the Government es-
 tablished, institutions designed to play a key role in future elections. In each case,
 the opposition boycotted the vote in the National Assembly. The Government set up
 a Constitutional Court in March, and in June it established a High Authority for
 Audio-visual and Communication (see Section 2.a.). The former has power to rule
 in the event of a disputed election, and the latter is to oversee government and pri-
 vate media. Both bodies are controlled by President Eyadema's appointees. Addi-
 tionally, in August the National Assembly passed a new Electoral Code, which in-
 cluded a renewal of the mandate of the National Electoral Commission (NEC). The
 new code confirms that the Interior Ministry is to organize and supervise local, leg-
 islative, and presidential elections, and provides limited authority to the NEC. The
 method of nomination of members to the NEC creates an automatic majority for
 President Eyadema's supporters.
 Eyadema maintains a highly centralized government, including influencing impor-
 tant nominations of ministers, prefects, mayors, and traditional chiefs. The Govern-
 ment does not openly restrict the functioning of political opponents, but the Presi-
 dent uses the strength of the military and his government allies to intimidate and
 harass citizens and opposition groups. Eyadema also continues to influence the judi-
 UT e Constitution provides for universal suffrage and a secret ballot, and these
 provisions are respected in practice.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or members of ethnic
 minorities in politics or government. Although many women are members of politi-
 cal parties, there was only one female minister in the Government and one female
 deputy in the National Assembly.
 
 
 360
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several local private human rights groups, including the Togolese
 Human Rights League and the Center of Observation and Promotion of the Rule
 of Law. In general the Government allows groups access to investigate alleged viola-
 tions of human rights. However, the Government usually does not follow up on in-
 vestigations of abuses. Years of government threats and intimidation of human
 rights leaders, combined with a lack of results from human rights initiatives, have
 lea some human rights monitors to end their public activities.
 The Government includes a Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. The National
 Assembly voted in 1996 to enact a ministerial decree to reorganize the government-
 sponsored and government-funded National Human Rights Commission (CNDH).
 The Government named the members of the CNDH in August, and the majority are
 supporters of President Eyadema. The opposition, which had boycotted the National
 Assembly vote, criticized the law for allowin the President to control the composi-
 tion, and ultimately the actions, of the CND~H. In practice neither the Ministry of
 Justice and Human Rights nor the CNDH operate independently from the Presi-
 dent. The International Committee of the RedCross withdrew its permanent rep-
 resentative in late 1997.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family origin, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal political or other
 convictions. However, the Government does not provide effective redress for dis-
 crimination complaints, and discrimination based on both ethnic group and sex is
 common.
 Women.-Violence against women continues. Although mechanisms exist within
 both the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for redress, the
 police rarely intervene in traditional or domestic violence cases. Wife beating affects
 an estimated 10 percent of married women and continues with impunity. Local
 houses of prostitution exist, and some trafficking in Togolese women for the pur-
 poses of prostitution or for exploiting women as domestic servants occurs with no
 visible effort by the Government to curtail these abuses. There is a Ministry of
 Feminine Promotion and Social Protection, which, along with independent women's
 groups and related nongovernmental organizations, has active campaigns to inform
 women of their rights.
 Despite a constitutional declaration of equality under the law, women continue to
 experience discrimination, especially in education, pension benefits, inheritance, and
 as a consequence of traditional law. A husband may legally oppose his wife's right
 to work or control her earnings, and he may also decide where his family will live.
 Employers are often reluctant to hire women, especially for higher level positions.
 Far fewer women than men attend university, and fewer women graduate from sec-
 ondary school. Families traditionally give boys priority over girls when deciding who
 shall attend school. In urban areas, women and girls dominate local market activi-
 ties and commerce with neighboring countries. However, harsh economic conditions
 in rural areas, where most of the population lives, leave women with little time for
 activities other than taxing domestic and agricultural field work. Under traditional
 law, which applies to the vast majority of women, a wife has no maintenance rights
 in the event of divorce or separation, and no inheritance rights on the death of her
 husband.
 Children.-Although the Constitution and family code laws provide for the protec-
 tion of children's rights, in practice government programs often suffer from a lack
 of money, materials, and enforcement. The Government provides free education in
 state schools, and there are social programs to provide free health care for poor chil-
 dren. Orphans and other needy children receive some aid from extended families or
 private organizations but less from the State. There are few juvenile courts, and
 children are often jailed with adults. There are credible reports of trafficking in chil-
 dren for the purpose of forced labor (see Section 6.c.).
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, remains a
 current, although diminishing, practice. Approximately 12 percent of girls and
 women have undergone FGM. Although many of the largest ethnic groups do not
 practice FGM, the practicing groups have rates ranging from 40 to 98 percent. In
 theory women and girls are protected by the Constitution from FGM, and in Decem-
 ber the Government submitted draft legislation to the National Assembly to outlaw
 the practice completely. Under existing laws, the Government states that it would
 assist any woman who sought protection from infliction of FGM, but neither the
 
 
 361
 constitutional protection nor the new draft law address "whistle blowers" who bring
 FGM cases to the attention of legal authorities. In any event, in practice, the prohi-
 bition is not enforced; no cases have been brought to court, no one has been helped
 by the authorities to evade FGM, and traditional customs often supersede the legal
 system in various ethnic groups. The Government has sponsored seminars to edu-
 cate and campaign against FGM, and aired a documentary in April on national tele-
 vision that denounced the practice.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate accessibility to pub-
 lic or private facilities for people with disabilities. Although the Constitution nomi-
 nally obliges the Government to aid disabled persons and shelter them from social
 injustice, the Government provides only limited assistance in practice. While there
 is no overt state discrimination against disabled persons and while some hold re-
 sponsible government positions, the disabled have no meaningful recourse against
 private sector discrimination, which compels many to beg.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Members of northern ethnic groups domi-
 nate the security forces, while southerners dominate most commerce and the profes-
 sions. With a few exceptions, southerners and northerners are also divided along po-
 litical lines. Civil unrest in recent years and inadequate or prejudicial law enforce-
 ment exacerbated ethnic rivalries dating from precolonial times. With the rise in
 north-south tensions, majority ethnic group members in those regions have harassed
 and attacked their neighbors belonging to minority -groups, forcing them back to
 their home regions. In recent years, many Togolese, predominantly southerners, fled
 to neighboring Beai and Ghana, and members of northern ethnic groups were in-
 ternally displaced.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides most workers with the
 right to join unions and the right to strike. Security forces, including firemen and
 policemen, do not have these rights; government health care workers may join
 unions but may not strike. The work force in the formal (wage) sector is small, in-
 volving about 20 percent of the total work force, of whom 60 to 70 percent are union
 members or supporters.
 The Constitution also prohibits discrimination against workers for reasons of sex,
 origin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution against
 strikers.
 There are several major trade union federations. These include the National Con-
 federation of Togolese Workers (CN'IT), which is closely associated with the Govern-
 ment; the Labor Federation of Togolese Workers (CSTT); the National Union of
 Independent Syndicates (UNSIT); and the Union of Free Trade Unions.
 Federations and unions are free to associate with international labor groups. The
 CNTT and the UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code nominally
 provides workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal sec-
 tor employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However, true col-
 lective bargaining is limited by the Government's role in- producing a single tri-
 partite bargaining agreement signed by the unions, management, and the Govern-
 ment. This agreement sets wage standards for all formal sector employees. Individ-
 ual groups in the formal sector can attempt through collective bargaining to nego-
 tiate a more favorable package, and some do, but this approach is not common.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor is
 charged with resolving labor-related complaints but does not always do so effec-
 tively.
 A 1989 law allows the establishment- of export processing zones (E ts). Many
 companies have EPZ status, and about 30 are in operation. The EPZ law- provides
 exemptions from some provisions of the  Labor Code, notably the regulations on hir-
 ing and firing. Employees of EPZ firms do not enjoy the same protection against
 antiunion discrimination as do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically ad-
 dress the question of forced or bonded labor including that performed by children,
 and children are sometimes subjected to forced labor, primarily as domestic serv-
 ants. Credible sources confirm the international trafficking of children, who are sold
 into various forms of indentured and exploitative servitude, which amounts at times
 to slavery. This traffic often results in the children being taken to other West and
 Central African countries, the Middle East, or Asia. In rural areas, parents some-
 times force young children into domestic work in other households in exchange for
 cash. The Government has done nothing to stop this practice.
 
 
 362
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under the age of 14 in any enter-
 prise. The law, however, does not prohibit forced and bonded labor by children, and
 it is a significant problem (see Section 6.c.). Some types of industrial and technical
 employment rquire a minimum age of 18. Inspectors from the Ministry of Labor
 enforce these age requirements but only in the formal sector in urban areas. In both
 urban and rural areas, particularly in farming and petty trading, very young chil-
 dren traditionally assist in their families' work. Under the Constitution, school is
 mandatory for both sexes until the age of 15, but this requirement is not strictly
 enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets minimum wages for dif-
 ferent categories, ranging from unskilled labor through professional positions. Less
 than the official minimum wage is often paid in practice, mostly to less-skilled work-
 ers. Official monthly minimum wages range from approximately $25 to $39 monthly
 (cfa 14,700 to cfa 23,100). A 5 percent wage increase in July 1996 represented the
 first since 1987, despite the 50 percent devaluation of the cfa in 1994. Many Workers
 cannot maintain a decent standard of living at the lower official minimum wages,
 and many must supplement their incomes through second jobs or subsistence farm-
 hang. The Ministry of Labor is ostensibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum
 wage system, but it does not enforce the law in practice. The Labor Code, which
 regulates labor practices, requires equal pay for equal work, regardless of sex. How-
 ever, this provision is generally observed only in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory, and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The law requires overtime compensation, and there are restrictions on excessive
 overtime work. The Ministry of Labor's enforcement is weak, however, and employ-
 era often ignore these provisions.
 A tech cal consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor sets workplace health
 and safety standards. It may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 standards, and employees ostensiblyhave the right to complain to labor inspectors
 of unhealthy or unsafe conditions without penalty. In practice the Ministry's en-
 forcement of the various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Large enterprises
 must legally provide medical services for their employees and usually attempt to re-
 spect occupational health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
 Workers have the right to remove themselves from unsafe conditions without fear
 of losing their jobs.
