 TOGO
 Togo is a one-party state with a mixed socialist
 and private enterprise economy. The present regime
 came to power in a military coup in 1967. President
 Eyadema is the only military officer holding cabinet
 office. The country is small and its primary natural
 resource is phosphate. President Eyadema has developed
 a nationalist philosophy to unify an ethnically diverse
 population and has strongly promoted economic and
 social development. There are no known political
 prisoners. National unity and social progress are
 given precedence over individual civil and political
 liberties. Togo is ruled by decree.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The Togolese authorities are specifically enjoined by
 the President from torturing detainees. Some cases
 of unauthorized torture have probably occurred on the
 initiative of low-ranking personnel.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Prison conditions reflect the poverty of the country,
 but there is no evidence of cruel, inhuman or degrad-
 ing punishment. Adequate food, sanitation and medical
 care are provided at Lome's main detention facility.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrests or Imprisonment
 The Government in 1977 released the approximately 35
 political prisoners it acknowledged holding, and there
 are no known political prisoners still in detention.
 The Government sometimes detains individuals adminis-
 tratively for activities it considers corrupt or
 harmful to security. Such detentions are usually
 brief.
 (183)
 
 
 184
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Virtually all defendants receive due process, including
 fair, public trials under a legal system closely
 modeled on the French system. Public trials are
 reported in the press in detail and are frequently well
 attended. A shortage of legal cadres sometimes delays
 prosecution. In these cases, pre-trial detention is
 included as part of the sentence. The Government does
 detain individuals administratively in some political/-
 criminal cases for brief periods without a public trial
 or judicial determination.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 Security officials may conduct physical searches of
 private residences without warrants in both civil and
 criminal cases, but such searches are infrequent.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Togo's 1978 budget reflects the high priority accorded
 to education, health and agriculture. While the
 budget increase overall was ten percent in 1978, the
 budget allocations for education, health and rural
 development increased 29 percent, 42 percent and 16.5
 percent respectively. The budget allocations for the
 ministries concerned with education, health and rural
 development now comprise nearly 37 percent of the
 total. These allocations continue as a pattern begun
 in the 1976 budget and are consistent with the concen-
 tration in the third five-year plan (1976-1980) on
 meeting basic needs of the population. The budget
 increases include an additional 200 persons in the
 medical staff of the Ministry of Health, Social Affairs,
 and Women's Promotion, a major expansion in the tech-
 nical education program and, for the first time, a
 separate item for women's development. In November
 1978 a new Ministry of Social Affairs and Women's
 Promotion was created. Women's rights in Togo include
 the right to own property, to control all money earned
 and to receive maternity leave benefits.
 
 
 185
 The one national labor union, the Confederation Nationale
 Des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT), works to promote
 economic research, worker's education and labor coopera-
 tives. The CNTT in 1978 gained the right to have a
 membership fee check-off system for salaried workers.
 Workers are protected by a labor code, a minimum wage
 law, guarantees against termination without cause and a
 national social security system. The tax system is
 progressive. Taxes for salaried workers are deducted
 automatically. Non-salaried individuals are taxed on
 the basis of declared income.
 The Government in 1974 instituted a five-year land
 reform program, which has progressed slowly. The basic
 tenet of the program is that one must utilize the land
 or lose it. Within the context of land reform and the
 Government's right of eminent domain, property rights
 are observed. Some compensation is given in all cases.
 President Eyadema has endeavored to reduce traditional
 disparities among regional and ethnic groups. A key
 concept of the national party is the elimination of
 discrimination based on regionalism and tribalism.
 Many regional and ethnic groups have been placed in
 positions of responsibility in order to help remedy
 past disparities.
 The Government's strong opposition to corruption is
 of apparent in numerous cases of arrest and prosecution
 alleged offenders. Bureaucratic corruption does not
 appear to be widespread. The benefits of government
 programs which emphasize basic human needs evidently
 reach the poor.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of thought, speech and assembly are limited by
 the fact that political activities outside the sole
 political party are suppressed if incompatible with
 government goals. Freedom of religion is respected for
 major religious groups. In the spring of 1978 the
 
 
 186
 National Council of the single political party recom-
 mended that, in view of the growing number of religious
 groups in Togo, many of the smaller ones should be
 prohibited as possible threats to public order.
 It is uncertain how this recommendation will be
 implemented by the Government. The press is government-
 controlled. Labor unions are influenced but not
 directly controlled by the Government. Although the
 labor code establishes an elaborate mechanism for
 collective bargaining, arbitration and, as a last
 resort, the use of strikes, wage increases are general-
 ly the result of presidential decree.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel
 and emigration, is allowed with few exceptions. Travel
 of certain individuals who have allegedly posed a
 threat to national security has been curtailed.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There have been no elections since a plebiscite in
 1972 in which support for the President was expressed
 by almost one hundred percent of the popular vote.
 Within the single party system, active participants may
 express their views on such issues as the functioning
 of the Government and and its officials. An active
 role in party leadership is limited to those who have
 shown some leadership ability and support party objec-
 tives, but all Togolese including women are encouraged
 to demonstrate support for and to help implement party
 objectives. There are currently four women on the
 22-member central committee of the Party. The Minister
 for Social Affairs and Women's Promotion is a woman.
 While the regime is military-backed and came to power
 through a coup d'etat, the President is the only
 military man holding a cabinet position.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 
 
 187
 The Government's attitude toward international investi-
 gation of record of human rights observance was demon-
 strated by its invitation to a representative of
 Amnesty International to visit Togo in the fall of
 1977. The Department of State is not aware of the
 results of that visit.
 
 
