 TOGO
 
 The Government of Togo is authoritarian with power firmly in the
 hands of President Gnassingbe Eyadema, who is also head of the
 army and the only legal political party, the Rassemblement du
 Peuple Togolais. The Eyadema Government, in power longer than
 any in independent Togo, claims legal authority on the basis on
 a written Constitution adopted by National Referendum in 1979,
 which gave voters a choice between rejection and acceptance. The
 single party has the predominant political role in the country,
 and those who are not members have no real chance for political
 influence. The Government's control of the elements of coercion,
 and the generally held belief that it is willing to use them, are
 important factors in its maintenance of power. Nevertheless,
 there were no reported instances of killing for political motives
 in Togo during 1983 nor were there any reported instances of
 disappearances.
 Togo was officially designated by the U.N. General Assembly as one
 of the "least developed countries among developing nations* in
 1982. Its economy is heavily agricultural, although there is a
 vigorous local private trading sector. Togo's economy is expe-
 riencing the recession currently familiar to countries exporting
 a few primary products that do not include petroleum. With few
 natural resources and a rapidly growing population, Togo is less
 endowed than many African countries with the resources needed for
 appreciable economic growth. The right to own property individ-
 ually and in common is protected by the Togo Constitution and is
 respected by the Government in practice.
 The attitude of the Government towards human rights is influenced
 by its perception of a variety of security threats, both internal
 and external, some of which have been documented. There is no
 provision under Togolese law or judicial procedures for protection
 of the integrity of the person. Writ of habeas corpus is not
 recognized, no specific law prohibits torture, and the judiciary
 is not independent.
 At the same time, the Togolese Government is concerned over its
 international image and seeks a respected role in international
 fora. Late in 1982, the Government allowed the youth organ of the
 only political party to host an international conference on human
 rights. Although the agenda and discussion were limited, events
 such as this increase the awareness of international human rights
 standards and practices among Togo's educated elite and members
 of the judiciary.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 During 1983, there were no reported instances of killing for
 political motives in Togo. There were no reports of deaths
 perpetrated by opposition groups, insurgents, or terrorists.
 b. Disappearance
 In 1983 there were no reported instances of disappearances in
 Togo.
 (382)
 
 
 383
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Togolese authorities have been publicly enjoined by President
 Eyadema from torturing detainees. However, some released
 prisoners and trial defendants claim to have been beaten and have
 alleged their confessions to the police were obtained either by
 threat or application of physical coercion. There were no such
 reports in 1983. Prison conditions are poor. Lome's central
 prison is crowded, and facilities are rudimentary with limited
 space, light, and ventilation. Food and medical care are reported
 to be adequate by local standards, however. In prison facilities
 outside of Lome, reports describe overcrowding, poor sanitation
 and hygienic conditions, and inadequate food supplies. At these
 prisons, families are allowed to visit and to provide food. Only
 military and paramilitary personnel are granted access to Togo's
 three military prisons in Lome, Kara, and Temedja. In 1983 there
 were no new reports on prevailing conditions in these prisons, but
 past reports describe forced marches, hard labor, and beatings
 imposed on prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Togolese legal system does not include the writ of habeas
 corpus, and this right does not exist in practice. Detention
 without trial or administrative detention is used in Togo
 against those whom the Government considers guilty of *crimes
 against the public trust" (i.e., corruption, political opposi-
 tion thought to pose a security threat). Detainees held in
 administrative detention cannot usually obtain redress through
 the courts, and preventive detention has no fixed term. In
 practice, prisoners accused of crimes unrelated to political
 security are usually held for no longer than 48 hours prior to
 indictment or provisional release pending investigation. No
 legal basis exists, however, to prevent authorities from holding
 a person beyond that time without charge. In 1983 there was a
 case in which a foreigner who had initiated a court case against
 a Togolese was held without charge by the gendarmerie for two
 months, even after the court case had been decided in his favor,
 in anticipation of possible subsequent legal action against him.
 Administrative sanctions against officials have also included
 suspension from their jobs and assignment to residences in their
 home village where they are required to report weekly to the
 regional gendarmerie office. The number of detainees held by
 the gendarmerie in its Lome prison, outside the strictures of
 local judicial process, is reported to be approximately 50.
 Detentions made by the military are processed through the mili-
 tary judicial system. There is no functioning system of bail
 in Togo.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Pretrial proceedings are sometimes protracted, and a crowded
 court docket and shortage of judges inhibit speedy trials.
 Most defendants are accorded the right to a public trial and
 the right to be represented by counsel. When the defendant
 cannot afford the cost of an attorney, counsel is appointed by
 the Government. An attorney is accorded permission to see the
 defendant in person and to engage in private discussions with
 him. Defendants and counsel are formally notified of charges
 
 
 384
 in writing. Special courts to handle security, embezzlement of
 public funds, and violent crimes observe the same standards of
 justice as regular courts. Togo's judicial system is not inde-
 pendent of the executive branch and is open to political inter-
 ference in those trial cases important to the Government.
 President Eyadema publicly stated in 1980 that Togo had six po-
 litical prisoners. This referred to persons convicted of crimes
 against the state. In January 1982, President Eyadema announced
 the release of two of these persons, Kouassivi Alphonse De Souza
 and Abdo De Souza, who were convicted by Togo's State Security
 Court of conspiracy to overthrow the Government in August 1979
 and given 10 year prison sentences. Unconfirmed reports which.
 do not include names or any other case specifics estimate that
 approximately 200 political detainees are currently held in
 Togolese prisons. Among these alleged detainees, it is unknown
 what portion committed acts of violence. The number of polit-
 ical exiles is unknown, but is believed to number under 12.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Individuals who wish to have influence in the political process
 must be party members. Monitoring of correspondence and tele-
 phones exists. It is generally believed that the Government
 and political party maintain extensive networks of informants in
 all important sectors of Togolese society in order to monitor dis-
 sident activity. Authorization by a judge or senior police offi-
 cial is normally required for physical searches of private resi-
 dences in both civil and criminal cases. In matters determined
 by the Government to involve national security, searches with
 formal authorization are permitted. The Government encourages
 the use of Togo's two major indigenous languages in schools and
 in the government controlled media, but does not suppress minority
 lanuages or cultures.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is restricted, and a free press does not exist
 in Togo.  The Government owns and operates the media and does not
 permit publication or circulation of material criticizing its
 policies or officials. From time to time, however, some cabinet
 ministers and mid-level government functionaries are accused of
 ineffective implementation of programs and of corruption, and
 this is reported in the media. Authorities occasionally have
 confiscated issues of foreign publications containing articles
 considered to be critical of the Government, although this prac-
 tice has not occurred in 1983. Academic freedom is only per-
 mitted in nonpolitical fields.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of assembly is strictly controlled. Prior government
 approval must be obtained before any large groups may assemble.
 This requirement discourages protests of government actions. The
 single national trade union federation, La Confederation National
 des Travailleurs du Togo, is controlled by the national political
 party. All workers are required to organize under its banner.
 The federation serves to convey to workers the Government's views
 and requirements, but on some basic economic issues it represents
 
 
 385
 workers' concerns to the Government. All major sectors of the
 Togolese work force are unionized, and the right to strike exists
 and has been exercised on occasion in the past. During one
 recent strike, the Government counseled the striking workers,
 and the strike was ended without physical coercion or arrests of
 striking union members. Professional groups are not persecuted
 or intimidated, but are enjoined by the Government from espousing
 political causes. Professional groups and trade unions are
 allowed to maintain relations with recognized international
 bodies in their fields, both public and private. For instance,
 the Togolese union maintains close cooperative ties with the
 International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion usually prevails in Togo. Although Jehovah's
 Witnesses were banned by government decree in 1979, no specific
 religion is favored by the Government, and there is no require-
 ment for religious groups to be licensed by the Government. With
 the exception of Jehovah's Witnesses, open practice of, and
 teaching and training for, religion is permitted. Foreign clergy
 are allowed to proselytize. Religious affiliation is not an
 impediment to advancement in Togo.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement (including domestic and foreign travel, emigration,
 and the right to change residence or workplace) is allowed in
 principle for Togolese and foreigners. Domestic travellers
 encounter security and customs related official roadblocks
 throughout the country, however. Passport issuance is restricted
 by the Government in order to control the number of professional
 Togolese who emigrate and also to keep known political dissidents
 under close scrutiny. Except for a few political exiles,
 Togolese who have chosen to reside in other countries may return
 to Togo at will. Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees as
 well as displaced persons, and there are no reports of harassment
 of either.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 President Eyadema holds a monopoly of power in Togo, and there is
 no provision for democratic charge of authority. There are,
 however, institutions permitting somewhat wider participation
 in decision making on issues about which the President is not
 firmly resolved. The Political Bureau and the larger Central
 Committee, both party organs, discuss and decide such issues, and
 ratify all government decisions. The Political Bureau is chosen
 by the President with the concurrence of the Party Congress which
 meets every five years. The National Constitution specifies that
 members of the Central Committee include members who are chosen
 by the Party Congress, some who are cabinet members, and others
 drawn from the single trade union, youth and women's groups, and
 private commerce. Membership in the party as a whole is open
 to anyone of "good character," and is estimated at one million.
 Frequent meetings of the party at various levels appear to serve
 both as mechanisms to explain and gain acceptance of government
 policy and to a lesser degree as a consultative process to pro-
 
 
 386
 vide the Government with information about reactions to its
 decisions. Active participants in the party may express their
 views at party meetings on issues such as the implementation
 of policy and the behavior of subordinate officials. There is,
 however, no serious challenge to the President's political
 program or to the Central Committee's decisions on major policy
 issues, once they are declared.
 During the last election in December 1979, President Eyadema,
 the only candidate running for the office, received 99.7 per-
 cent of the votes cast. Togo has a 67-member National Assembly
 which debates certain categories of proposed legislation as de-.
 fined by the Constitution, but it has no real power to reject
 proposed laws. It can and does require ministers to explain and
 justify their budgets, and it gives sanction to policy decisions.
 The President of the National Assembly also holds office in the
 Party Central Committee. National Assembly members are elected
 on a national constituency basis, and are chosen from the single
 party slate presented to voters. All regional ethnic groups and
 both sexes are represented within the confines of the single party
 political system, and thus the Government claims that all groups
 participate in it. Women have not traditionally had a role equal
 to men in the political process in Togo, but the Government is
 encouraging greater participation by them. Currently four women
 serve on the 22-member Central Committee of the party. The
 Secretary of State of the Ministry of Public Health in Charge of
 Social Affairs and Women's Condition and the Minister Delegate at
 the Presidency in Charge of Relations with the National Assembly
 are women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In October 1982, the Togolese National Assembly ratified the
 African Charter on Human Rights. Togo also hosted in 1982 a
 conference on Human Rights Practices in Africa. Togo participated
 constructively in the Human Rights Commission in Geneva in 1983.
 In 1983 the International Committee of the Red Cross received
 government approval to establish a regional office in Lome and
 did so.
 The Government in the past has invited international organizations
 such as Amnesty International to visit Togo to investigate charges
 of human rights violations. Amnesty International sent an
 observer to the 1979 "mercenary" trial of those accused of parti-
 cipation in the 1977 coup plot, but did not have access to the
 file of evidence collected by the magistrate in charge of the
 preliminary judicial investigations. Since 1979, Amnesty Inter-
 national and the Government of Togo have exchanged public comment
 about human rights violations in Togo. In its 1983 report,
 Amnesty noted its main concerns in Togo to be detention without
 trial of suspected political opponents of the Government, the
 ill-treatment of detainees (known as "administrative detention'),
 as well as the 1979 trial and its results. Freedom House in 1983
 rated Togo "not free', and assigned its lowest rankings for
 respect for civil and political rights. There are no internal
 human rights organizations based within Togo that report on or
 observe human rights violations.
 
 
 387
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Togo is listed among the U.N. General Assembly's "least developed
 among developing nations." With a gross national product per
 capita of U.S. dollars 391.4 (1983) for a population of 2,823,000
 (1983) and a relatively resource poor land mass of only 56,000
 square kilometers, Togo faces many endemic economic problems and
 has in addition suffered from declining prices and/or sales of
 its major exports of phosphates, cocoa, and coffee. In the late
 1970's, the Togolese Government made major investments--many
 of which have been unprofitable--in industrial projects and
 tourist infrastructure, but the primary focus of governmental
 development policies over the past five years has been on
 increasing agricultural production. Togo is virtually self-
 sufficient in food in normal climatic conditions, and average
 diet provides 91.91 pecent of caloric requirements (1977).
 Among the more than 40 ethnic groups in Togo, the coastal
 southern tribes have historically been the most populous, best
 educated, and most prosperous due to contact with the West and
 to more favorable climatic and geographical conditions. One of
 the Government's major objectives over the past two decades has
 been to channel resources into the traditionally poorer northern
 areas of Togo. Despite these efforts, discrepancies persist in
 the level of economic and social development between the north
 and the south, but these relate more to relative lack of natural
 resources rather than to governmental policy.
 Inadequate governmental resources have limited efforts to improve
 health and sanitation levels in Togo, although ministries for
 Public Health, Social Affairs and Education typically receive
 large shares of the regular national budget (40 percent of the
 1983 budget for government ministries was devoted to these pur-
 poses). Life expectancy at birth is 47.08 years, and the infant
 mortality rate is 99 .20 per 1,000. On a nationwide basis,
 there is only one doctor for every 81,164.1 people (1977) and
 one nurse for every 1,735.1 people (1977), although the Govern-
 ment operates 21 hospitals and nearly 300 dispensaries or clinics
 throughout the country' s 21 prefectures. For the country as a
 whole, 16 percent of the population has access to safe water
 (1975); in urban areas, the figure rises to 49 percent (1975)
 while dropping to 10 percent for rural areas. An estimated
 42 percent of the urban population lives below the absolute
 poverty income level (1978-80).
 Education has also been a major emphasis of government policy,
 and school attendance is theoretically compulsory until age 15.
 The adult literacy rate was cited by the World Bank as 18 percent
 in 1977. In 1981-82, government statistics show 10,089 primary
 school classrooms. Since many children beyond normal primary
 school age (6-11) typically are still enrolled in primary
 schools, the overall primary school enrollment ratio is 110
 percent (1979). For males, this ratio is 136 percent (1979) and
 is 85 percent for females (1979), although governmental policies
 call for equality of the sexes.
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled out
 in the "family and individual code" which was adopted in early
 1980. Under this code, women's rights include the ownership of
 property, control of all money earned, and maternity leave
 
 
 388
 benefits. Article 88 of the Labor Code stipulates equal pay for
 equal work, qualifications, and production for both sexes. Women
 dominate local market activities and commerce with Togo's neigh-
 bors, and they often amass considerable wealth. Formal equality
 under the law and success in the local market place do not mean
 total equality for all women throughout Togo, however. Tradi-
 tional law places barriers on the path of women seeking to break
 with custom. Civil law, for example, recognizes a woman's
 property rights, but customary law gives all property to the male
 in the event of separation or divorce. Economic conditions in
 rural areas also often leave women little time for anything other
 than carrying water, finding firewood, cooking and caring for the
 family, and helping to raise food crops. The Government has
 undertaken a campaign to make women throughout Togo aware of their
 expanded opportunities under the new family code; it has published
 and is distributing a pamphlet in French, with future editions
 planned in Togo's two primary ethnic languages. The Government
 also hopes in the near future to combine distribution of these
 pamphlets with seminars which explain the basic rights outlined
 in the code. The Government of Togo's priority emphasis on
 developing water resources in rural Togo should also help to
 mitigate one of the most onerous burdens on rural women, that
 of carrying water over long distances.
 
 
 389
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TOGO
 1981     1982    1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       10.0      7.7      7.7
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   10.0     7.7      7.7
 A.AID  ... ............... ......  4.6  3.4      3.4
 LOANS.......               0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       4.6      3.4      3.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FOOD  FOR  PEACE ...... .    3.1      1.9      1.9
 LOANS .............. .... . .0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....     3.1      1.9      1.9
 TITLE I=TQTAL ..:,.,,         0,0      0,0      0.0
 REPAY. IN SLOANS .....       O.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........     3.1      1.9      1.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.6      0.8      0.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       2.5      1.1      1.2
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        2.3      2.4      2.4
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       2.3      2.4      2.4
 PEACE CORPS ......       2.3      2.4      2.4
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-ExCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       10.0      7.7      7.7
 LOANS ..................  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   10.0     7.7      7.7
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..................  0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1946-83
 TOTAL ........    38.7    23.9     87.6    404,'8
 IBRO               0.0     0.0      0.0      315
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA               25.7     5.5     81.2    211.3
 IDB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               9.7    10.8      6.4     66.2
 UNDP               2.5     3.2      0.0     29 6
 OTHER-UN           0.8     0.0      0.0      3.8
 EEC                0.0     4.4      0.0     90.4
 
 
