 TOGO
 Togo is a republic dominated by President General Gnassingbe Eyadema, who has
 ruled since 1967, when he came to power in a military coup. Although opposition
 political parties were legalized following widespread prtests in 1991, Eyadema and
 is Assembly of the Togolese People (RPT) party, strongly backed by the armed
 forces, have continued to dominate the exercise of political power. Eyadema used his
 entrenched position to repress genuine opposition and to secure another 5-year term
 in an election held on June 21, which, like previous multiparty elections, was
 marred by systematic fraud. Serious irregularities in the Government's conduct of
 the election strongly favored the incumbent and appear to have affected the outcome
 materially. Despite the Government's professed intention to move from authoritar-
 ian rule to democracy, institutions recently established ostensibly to accomplish this
 transition, did not do so inpractice. For example, when the recently created inde-
 pendent National Electoral Collsion disbanded rather than declare Eyadema the
 winner of the June 21 election, the new Constitutional Court did not challenge the
 Interior Ministry's announcement that Eyadema had been reelected, even though
 the Court ruled that the Ministry had usurped the Commission's exclusive legal au-
 thority to validate election results. Eyadema and his supporters maintain firm con-
 trol over all facets and levels of the country's highly centralized government and
 have perpetuated the predominance of northern ethnic groups including Eyademas
 Kabye ethnic minority throughout the public sector, especially in the military. The
 RPT continues to hold a majority in the National Assembly, and the executive
 branch continues to influence the judiciary.
 The security forces comprise the army (including the elite Presidential Guard),
 navy, air force, the Surete Nationale (including the national police), and the Gendar-
 merie. Approximately 90 percent of the army's officers and 70 percent of its soldiers
 
 
 425
 come from the Kabye ethnic minority. Although the Minister of the Interior is in
 charge of the national police, and the defense minister has authority over most
 other security forces, all security forces effectively are controlled by President
 Eyadema. Members of the security forces continued to commit serious human rights
 abuses.
 About 80 percent of the country's estimated population of 4.25 million is engaged
 in widespread subsistence agriculture, but there is also an active commercial sector.
 The main exports are phosphates, cotton, and cocoa, which are the leading sources
 of foreign exchange. Recorded per capita Gross Domestic Product remains less than
 $400 a year. Although economic growth has resumed since a large currency devalu-
 ation in 1994, it slowed sharply during the year. Growth continues to be impeded
 by a large state-owned sector, high levels of spending on the security forces, and
 widespread corruption. Most major bilateral donors have suspended their aid due
 to the Government's poor human rights record, and some international financial in-
 stitutions have also halted financial assistance to the Government.
 The Government's human rights record continued to be poor. The Government re-
 stricted citizens' right to change their government. Security forces were responsible
 for extrajudicial killings, beatings, and arbitrary arrests and detentions. The Gov-
 ernment did not, in general, investigate or punish effectively those who committed
 such abuses, nor did it prosecute openly those persons responsible for extrajudicial
 killings and disappearances in recent years. Prison conditions reportedly remained
 very harsh, and prolonged pretrial detention was common. The Government contin-
 ued to influence the judiciary, which did not ensure defendants' rights to fair and
 expeditious trials. Some detainees wait years to be judged. Security forces infringed
 on citizens' privacy rights. The Government and the security forces restricted free-
 dom of speech and of the press, often using investigative detention to harass jour-
 nalists and political opponents. Intimidation by the Government and youth groups
 reported to be ruling RPT party supporters limited freedom of assembly. The Gov-
 ernment restricted freedom of association. Security forces restricted freedom of
 movement. The National Commission for Human Rights (CNDH) continued to be
 dominated by supporters of the President, and the Government restricted and im-
 peded the work of independent human rights groups. Societal discrimination and vi-
 olence against women, female genital mutilation (FGM), and trafficking in children
 remained problems. Discrimination against the disabled persists. Ethnic and re-
 gional tensions and discrimination contributed to political violence. Forced labor by
 children remained a serious problem. Some persons were killed in mob violence re-
 lated to political and regional-ethnic differences.
 In October the National Assembly enacted a law that prohibited female genital
 mutilation; however, the Government had not brought any prosecutions under it to
 court by year's end. In February the National Assembly enacted a new press code,
 which, although still highly restrictive, reduced the prison terms and fines for jour-
 nalists convicted of criminal libel. In September the Government created a new Min-
 istry for the Promotion of Democracy and the Rule of Law.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-As in previous years, members of
 the security forces repeatedly committed extrajudicial killings. However, the respon-
 sibility and motives for many extrajudicial killings remained uncertain.
 Extrajudicial killings, primarily of criminal suspects, by the security forces contin-
 ued. The bodies of 10 men in military uniform were brought to the Lome morgue
 after extensive gunfire in the vicinity of the port during the early hours of April 6.
 There were credible reports that the shooting was part of an operation to cover up
 a narcotics trafficking ring that included some government officials. Up to 30 per-
 sons allegedly were killed, with many bodies taken to a mass grave outside Lome.
 On the evening of May 15, Dr. Tona Pierre Adigo, a founding member of the Togo-
 lese League for Human Rights (LTDH) and of the opposition Togolese Union for De-
 mocracy (UTD) party, was killed and burned in his car on a street in Lome, the cap-
 ital. A witness reportedly claimed that security personnel stopped Adigo's car and
 that a military jeep left the scene as the car burst into flames. Adigo, a physician,
 previously had filed reports at variance with official explanations after conducting
 autopsies of bodies exhumed from mass graves. During the days preceding his
 death, according to credible reports, Adigo had received and ignored repeated official
 requests to go to Gendarmerie headquarters for an unspecified purpose. Government
 media reported that Adigo committed suicide by burning himself in his car.
 
 
 On June 2, a law enforcement officer attempting to stop a taxi at a checkpoint
 in Lome shot and killed Ayele Akakpo, a child passenger. The case was still under
 investigation at year's end.
 On August 16, security forces in armored vehicles deployed in the largely pro-op-
 position Kodjoviakope neighborhood of Lome fired on the residence of UFC Sec-
 retary General Jean-Pierre Fabre, killing at least two persons. Although the Gov-
 ernment justified this deployment as a response to a raid by armed opposition forces
 based in Ghana on government facilities at Aflao, on the Ghanaian border, the Gov-
 ernment's account of the raid could not be verified, and opposition leaders dismissed
 the alleged border attack as a ruse to justify deploying the army in the capital (see
 Sections 1.f. and 3).
 On September 29, a group of armed men shot and killed Koffi Mathieu Kegbe,
 a local leader of the opposition Action for Renewal Committee (CAR) party at his
 home in the village of Dokpohoe in southeastern Togo. Kegbe's assailants reportedly
 stripped and tortured him in front of his family before killing him, then stole several
 household appliances, a generator, and a motorcycle. National CAR leader Yawovi
 Agboyibo reportedly suggested that RPT politburo member Agbeyome Kodjo may
 have ordered the attack in anticipation of National Assembly elections scheduled for
 February 1999 (see Sections 1.f. and 3). The killing was under investigation at
 year's end.
 There were no new developments in the 1997 deaths in detention of Dosseh
 Danklou and Agbodjinshie Yakanou, or the 1997 killings of Apetse Koffi Edem and
 Komlan Hofia Pomeavo. The 1997 killing in Ghana of former diplomat Ferdinand
 Romuard also remained unsolved. There was also no progress in the cases of the
 1996 deaths of Captain Philippe Azote, Anthony Dogbo, Woenagno, Amouzou
 Adiakly, and Komlavi Yebesse. Nor were there further developments in the 1995
 killing in Ghana of former government official Felix Amegan and opposition leader
 Lieutenant Vincent Djema Tokofal, the 1994 killing of National Assembly member
 Gaston Edeh, or the 1992 killings of National Assembly members Marc Atidepe and
 Tavio Amorin. The Interparliamentary Unions Human Rights Committee rec-
 ommended in January that the Government pay $20,000 to the family of each of
 the three legislators. In June the Gendarmerie held a press conference at which
 Drah Komlan, a Togolese with no known political affiliation, stated that an ac-
 quaintance in Ghana had instructed him to recruit Edeh's killers in exchange for
 1,000 (500,000 CFA Francs), a passport, and an airplane ticket to Germany.
 Human rights advocates regard the confession as not credible.
 Captain Baoubadi Bakali, the Deputy Director-General of Customs, was injured
 and his bodyguard killed on March 3 by unknown gunmen who ambushed Bakali
 outside his residence. Malou Borozi, a businessman and nephew of a prominent RPT
 personality, was shot and killed outside his home by several men on March 31. A
 progovernment newspaper blamed Borozi's killing on Ghana-based thugs, while the
 opposition speculated that both the Bakali and Borozi incidents were part of a set-
 tling of scores within the ruling party. The Governmenfs failure to explain incidents
 such as these created suspicion that elements of the security forces were involved.
 On June 26, shortly after the Government announced Eyadema's reelection, vio-
 lence between opposition and government supporters in Afagnan, 40 miles east of
 Lome, resulted in the hospitalization of four persons, one of whom died, hospital
 sources reportedly indicated.
 On August 29, trade unionist Liman Doumongue was shot and killed inside his
 home in Lome in a manner similar to that used in executions. Doumongue was the
 Deputy Secretary General of the National Association of Independent Unions of
 Togo, a pro-opposition labor federation which called for a general strike in 1992. As
 of year's end, the Government had not arrested or charged anyone in connection
 with this killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no specific reports of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. However, there were reports of mass burials in the vicinity of Lome
 both in 1997 and 1998.
 There were no developments in the 1994 disappearance of David Bruce, a high-
 level Foreign Ministry employee sympathetic to the opposition, or in the disappear-
 ance of Afougnilede Essiba, Adanou Igbe, Kobono Kowouvi, and another companion,
 all four of whom were arrested by soldiers at an armed security checkpoint in
 Adetikope in 1994. In 1994 the Government began an investigation of the Bruce dis-
 appearance but has not reported any results.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and physical abuse of prisoners and detainees, but secu-
 rity forces often beat detainees immediately after arresting them. Some suspects
 have claimed credibly to have been beaten and denied access to food and medical
 attention. Security forces also repeatedly beat demonstrators or opposition party
 
 
 427
 members without arresting or detaining them. The Government did not publicly
 prosecute any officials for these abuses.
 In January Gendarmes in Kpeme beat clothing merchant Dede Kpeti after she
 was accused of stealing $100 from another merchant. Kpeti suffered a fractured
 wrist and bruises on her back. The National Human Rights Commission (CNDH)
 recommended that the Government reimburse Kpeti for her medical expenses. The
 gendarme responsible for Kpeti's injuries reportedly compensated her.
 On January 19, gendarmes entered the campus of the University of Togo in Lome
 and beat students (see Section 2.b.). Among those beaten was Melessessou Edoh,
 president of the National Union of Togolese Students and Interns, which had re-
 fused to endore a conmmuniqu6 calling on students to end a strike and return to
 class. Edoh also suffered a fractured spine and arm afer falling from a second-story
 dormitory window (see Section 2.a.). The Government flew the injured student lead-
 er to Cote d'Ivoire for medical treatment.
 CAR party member Koffi Aglebe stated that while he was detained in Sokode and
 Lome from February 7 to February 23, gendarmes beat him repeatedly with sticks
 and cords (see Section 1.d.).
 On March 31, Gendarmes beat Clement Nyamikou, a UFC party officer from
 Badou, whom they had detained on suspicion of holding clandestine meetings and
 harboring weapons.
 On June 24, commandos wielding batons beat demonstrators in the town of
 Sokode who were protesting the Interior Ministry's announcement of Eyadema's re-
 election.
 On June 25, Gendarmes entered the headquarters of the UFC party in Lome and
 beat persons inside with batons, causing five persons to require medical attention.
 On June 26, security forces in Lome used batons as well as tear gas to disperse
 4,000 demonstrators who were protesting the Interior Ministry's announcement of
 Eyadema's reelection. At least 20 persons reportedly were injured; 12 injured dem-
 onstrators were observed in a single Red Cross clinic.
 In July Gendarmes reportedly beat and tortured three opposition party activists
 who were preparing to distribute leaflets asking the public to participate in a 1-day
 general strike to protest Eyadema's disputed reelection (see Section 3).
 On May 30, September 8, and September 24, armed men forcibly entered the
 Lome residence of Noagbenakope Gbekobou, a member of the National Assembly
 and the CAR party. On each occasion, the intruders sprayed the house with bullets
 and terrorized the occupants. Gbekobou said that he was told by security force offi-
 cers investigating one of these incidents that the kind of cartridges left behind was
 used by the armed forces. The case was under investigation at year's end.
 On January 9, youths beat and severely injured opposition CAR party officer Al-
 phonse Behim in Pagouda. On January 16, uniformed youths beat another CAR
 member who had notified the prefect of Kozah of Behim's beating (see Section 2.b.).
 In February three RPT youths in Kozah prefecture abducted and beat CAR party
 activist Koffi Sewovon.
 On April 6, two men ambushed Albert Atsakpa, an Action Committee for Renewal
 (CAR) party official, as he rode his motorcycle between Kpalime and Lome. Accord-
 ing to the account in an opposition newspaper, one of the assailants warned
 Atsakpa, "Stop or I shoot you... You stop here your political activities." Atsakpa
 was shot once in the thigh with a homemade gun before his aggressors escaped.
 In November RPT youth beat opposition activists in Gando. In August a gen-
 darme and several men in civilian clothes in Lome beat a fisherman who attended
 UFC party rallies (see Section 3).
 On August 17, explosions damaged the house of an official of the Party for Democ-
 racy and Renewal (PDR) in Bafflo, a town in the northern region, and the PDR's
 prefectural office in Sokode, a town in the central region.
 In September a group of armed men tortured and killed a local CAR party leader
 (see Section l.a.).
 Prison conditions reportedly remained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and
 inadequate sanitation and food. Medical facilities are practically nonexistent, and
 disease is widespread. Despite these problems, there were no reported deaths of
 prisoners due to disease or inadequate medical facilities for the second consecutive
 year. Prison guards in the overcrowded civil prison of Lome charge prisoners a small
 fee to shower, use the toilet, or have a place to sleep. The children of convicted
 adults often are incarcerated with them. Women are housed separately.
 President Eyadema ordered the release of 526 common criminals during the year.
 Although international and local private organizations have access to prisons for
 monitoring purposes, the ICRC did not visit the prisons during the year.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. The law allows authorities to hold arrested persons incommunicado with-
 
 
 428
 out charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-hour extension in cases deemed seri-
 ous or complex. In practice detainees can be, and often are, detained without bail
 for lengthy periods with or without the approval of a judge. Family members and
 attorneys officially have access to a detainee after the initial 48- or 96-hour deten-
 tion period, but authorities often delay, and sometimes deny, access.
 Judges or senior police officials issue warrants. Although detainees have the right
 to be informed of the charges against them, police sometimes ignore this right. The
 law stipulates that a special judge conduct a pretrial investigation to examine the
 adequacy of evidence and decide on bail. However, a shortage of judges and other
 qualified personnel, plus official indifference, have resulted in lengthy pretrial de-
 tention-in some cases several years-and confinement of prisoners beyond their
 sentences. An estimated 50 percent of the prison population were pretrial detainees.
 The Government continued to use brief investigative detentions of less than 48
 hours to harass and intimidate opponents and journalists for alleged defamation of
 government officials (see Section 2.a.). The Government has at times resorted to
 false charges of common crimes to arrest, detain and intimidate opponents.
 On January 19, while dispersing student demonstrators on the campus of the Uni-
 versity of Benin in Lome (see Sections 1.c. and 2.b.), security forces arrested 11 stu-
 dents and detained them for 9 days before releasing them on orders from President
 Eyadema.
 On February 7, the Gendarmerie in Sokode arrested Koffi Aglebe and two Libe-
 rian friends after Aglebe produced a CAR party membership card during a routine
 check of his identity papers. The three men were detained, interrogated and alleg-
 edly beaten in Sokode and Lame until February 23, when they were released (see
 Section 1.c.).
 On June 25, police reportedly arrested an unknown number of persons during
 house-to-house searches in the pro-opposition Be and Kodjoviakope neighborhoods
 of Lome and detained them for unknown periods.
 In July security forces arrested three UFC members who were passing out leaflets
 urging the public to stay at home to protest the fraudulent presidential election. At
 first, the Government charged Yaou Sassou Attiogbe, Gbadogbe Kodjo Adjiwonou,
 and Atsou Abaya, with violating the press code, but later it withdrew the charge.
 The UFC made the these detainees' release a precondition for UFC participation in
 government-opposition talks on national reconciliation. The Government released
 the three men on December 12 (see Sections 1.c. and 3).
 Members of the security forces arrested and detained journalists without charging
 them with any offense (see Section 2.a.).
 There were credible reports that Togolese government agents in Ghana, some-
 times pretending to be refugees, repeatedly have induced Ghanaian police to arrest
 Togolese refugees and to deliver them to Togolese security forces at the border with-
 out due process of law and reportedly without the knowledge of senior Ghanaian
 security officials. Fifteen refugees reportedly were forcibly repatriated from Ghana
 in this manner on December 31, 1997.
 Pharmacist Bozoura Gandi, a founding member of the Togolese Association for the
 Struggle against the Manipulation of Conscience (ATLMC), and 14 other persons
 have been detained since November 1997. They were arrested in Sokode following
 riots in the wake of the death of Djobo Boukari, Gandi's relative and a cofounder
 of the ATLMC. Gandi was transferred to Kara prison on April 4. Gandi is charged
 with having killed two persons suspected of having poisoned Boukari,.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government respects this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, in practice the executive branch continued to exert control over
 the judiciary. The Government established a Supreme Council for the Magistrature
 in 1997. A majority of its members are strong supporters of President Eyadema.
 The Constitutional Court, established in 1997, stands at the apex of the court sys-
 tem. The civil judiciary system includes the Supreme Court, Sessions (Court of As-
 sizes), and Appeals Courts. A military tribunal exists for crimes committed by secu-
 rity forces, but its proceedings are closed.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.).
 Magistrates, like most government employees, are not always paid on time. The ju-
 dicial system employs both African traditional law and the Napoleonic Code in try-
 ing criminal and civil cases. Trials are open to the public, and judicial procedures
 generally are respected. Defendants have the right to counsel and to appeal. The
 Bar Association provides attorneys for the indigent. Defendants may confront wit-
 nesses, present evidence, and enjoy a presumption of innocence. In rural areas, the
 village chief or council of elders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who
 reject the traditional ruling may take their cases to the regular court system, .which
 is the starting point for cases in urban areas.
 
 
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 There have been no developments in the case of members of the radical opposition
 group MOS, who were convicted and sentenced to prison for the 1994 attack on a
 state-owned electrical station. Although the crime appeared to have been politically
 motivated, the state prosecutor did not apply the December 1994 general amnesty
 law to this case, and they are still in prison.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Secu-
 rity forces repeatedly infringed on these rights. In criminal cases, a judge or senior
 police official may authorize searches of private residences. In political and national
 security cases, the security forces need no prior authorization. Police conducted
 searches without warrants, searching for dissidents' arms caches as well as for
 criminals, often under the guise of searching for identity cards. Armed security
 checkpoints exist throughout the country, and security forces arbitrarily interfere
 with privacy by searching vehicles, baggage, and individuals in the name of secu-
 rity.
 Once in May and twice in September, armed men entered the residence of a CAR
 party National Assembly member and terrorized the occupants with gunfire. The
 bullets used reportedly were the type used by the armed forces (see Section 1.c.).
 On August 1, Gendarmes raided the Akodessewa shanty town neighborhood in
 Lome, ostensibly searching for arms caches and rebel hideouts. Using crowbars,
 clubs and axes, the Gendarmes destroyed hundreds of the makeshift dwellings of
 Lome's poorest residents.
 On August 16, the home of a U.N. Children's Fund official in Lome was damaged
 heavily by rampaging soldiers.
 In August security forces ransacked the homes of UFC party leaders throughout
 the country. On August 16, members of the security forces in armored vehicles de-
 ployed in the largely pro-opposition Kadjoviakope neighborhood of Lome fired on the
 residence of UFC Secretary General Jean-Pierre Fabre, damaging several houses as
 well as killing at least two persons (see-Section L.a.).
 On August 17, a residence owned by PDR president Zarifou Ayeva was ransacked,
 and security forces searched the home of UFC officer Andre Kuevi in Lome and of
 the UFC's regional officer in Kpalime.
 The Government is widely believed to monitor telephones and correspondence, al-
 though no proof of this has been produced. The police and gendarmerie perform do-
 mestic intelligence functions. The Government maintains a system of informers on
 the university campus.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government restricts these rights in practice. The
 Government repeatedly harassed and intimidated print media journalists through
 threats, detentions, and criminal libel prosecutions. Police and Gendarmes fre-
 quently harassed newspaper vendors. Advertisers often were intimidated as well.
 However, despite government interference, there is a lively private press, most of
 which is heavily politicized and some of which is often highly critical of President
 Eyadema. As many as 16 private newspapers published with some regularity, com-
 pared with 8 in 1997. The country's only daily newspaper, Togo-Press, is owned and
 controlled by the Government, although a private Lome-based biweekly newspaper,
 Crocodile, published daily during much of the year.
 In January the National Assembly adopted a new Press and Communication
 Code. Article 1 declares that the media are free; most of the remaining 108 articles,
 some of them the subjects of strenuous objections by opposition legislators, restrict
 media freedom. Article 62 makes the intentional publication of false information a
 criminal offense, punishable by fines of $900 to $1,800 (500,000 to 1 million CFA
 Francs). Articles 90 to 98 make defamation of state institution or any member of
 certain classes of persons including government officials a crime punishable by im-
 prisonment for up to 3 months and fines of up to $4,000 (2 million CFA Francs).
 Article 89 makes it a crime, punishable by up to 3 months in prison for a second
 offense, to "offend the honor, dignity or esteem" of the President and other govern-
 ment leaders. The new law retained the previous code's provisions that editors and
 publishers, including legislators with parliamentary immunity, are liable for crimes
 committed through the press. The Togolese Union for Democracy and CAR party
 legislators charged that the new code violated the constitutional right to free expres-
 sion. However, the new Press Code is less repressive than the 1990 press code that
 it replaced, in that it reduced the sentences to be imposed on journalists convicted
 of criminal libel.
 
 
 There is no prepublication censorship of private print media in law or practice.
 However, security forces repeatedly detained private print media journalists (see
 Section 1.d.) and interfered with the distribution of private newspapers.
 On August 6 and 7, the Government arrested and detained journalists of three
 private newspapers based in Lome: Pamphile Gnimassou, editor of Abito, Augustin
 Assiobo, editor of Tingo Tingo, and Hounkanly Elias, reporter for Nouveau Combat.
 The three were accused of slandering the President and his wife by publishing re-
 ports alleging that the widow of the late President Mobutu of then-Zaire had asked
 the Togolese first lady, Badagnaki Eyadema, to return trunks of jewelry that dis-
 appeared in Lome while Mobutu was on his way into exile after being overthrown
 in 1997. Nouveau Combat also alleged that President Eyadema had written to
 French President Jacques Chirac to "beg for a letter of congratulations" on his con-
 troversial June election victory. Assiobo was detained for 2 days and Gnimassou for
 6 days. Hounkanly was detained for 18 days by the Gendarmerie before being trans-
 ferred to the main prison on August 25 to await trial. Hounkanly remained in cus-
 tody at year's end.
 On August 14, Messan Lucien Djossou, publisher of Le Combat du Peuple, was
 arrested and detained for several hours. Djossou was arrested again on September
 1 and kept for 48 hours at police headquarters. The authorities did not have an ar-
 rest warrant and did not file charges.
 On   October 21, Apollinaire Mewenemesse, editor-publisher of a     usually
 progovernment Lome-based newspaper, La Depeche, was arrested and charged with
 defamation of the armed forces in connection with his authorship and publication
 on October 15 of an article attributing various armed robberies to off-duty soldiers,
 gendarmes, and police. All charges against Mewenemesse were dropped on Decem-
 ber 3, midway through his trial, which had started on December 1. On December
 4, Mewenemesse apologized to President Eyadema on government television for his
 "unprofessional" article.
 On August 20, it was reported that members of the Presidential Guard seized and
 destroyed copies of the newspaper, Crocodile, and other private publications on sale
 at a major intersection in Lome. On August 21, members of the Presidential Guard
 returned to the same location, beat newspaper vendors, and chased them away. Se-
 curity forces also confiscated all the copies they could find of the October 15 issue
 of La Depeche, containing an article that attributed various robberies to off-duty
 members of the security forces.
 Since newspapers and television are relatively expensive, radio is the most impor-
 tant medium of mass communication. In addition to two government-owned stations
 including Radio Lome, there are 11 private radio stations in the country. Two of
 these, Radio Avenir and Galaxy FM, are associated with the ruling RPT party.
 Prior to the adoption of the new Press Code, the Government did not permit pri-
 vate radio stations to broadcast news programming. Some private radio stations re-
 cently began to broadcast some domestic news, but private radio offered little of the
 political commentary and criticism of the Government that is widespread in the
 print media. Africa No.1, which domestically retransmits programming broadcast
 from Gabon, canceled an August 1 interview with opposition leader Gilchrest
 Olympio, allegedly at the request of the Government.
 The only domestic television station, Television Togo, is owned and controlled by
 the Government. There is also one private company that domestically retransmits
 foreign television programs broadcast by satellites.
 The Government was not known to restrict access to the Internet. There were 12
 Internet service providers in the country at year's end. Most Internet users were
 businesses rather than households.
 The official media, consisting of two radio stations, one television station, and one
 daily newspaper, generally slanted their programs in favor of the President and the
 Government. The High Authority for Audio-Visual and Communications (HAAC) is
 charged with providing the equal access to state media mandated by the 1992 Con-
 stitution. Although the HAAC is nominally independent, in practice it operates as
 an arm of the Government; it is filled with Eyadema supporters and has not in-
 creased opposition access to government media.
 During the presidential election campaign, media coverage remained skewed in
 President Eyadema's favor, according to Reporters sans Frontieres (RSF) surveys.
 In June, during the election campaign, the security forces wrote an open letter to
 the HAAC complaining that the opposition was attacking and insulting them. The
 letter warned the opposition not to provoke the military further. The official media's
 coverage of the presidential campaign improved slightly during its final week, due
 mainly to the efforts of the RSF to document the huge inequities in the time af-
 fordedopposition candidates.
 
 
 At the University of Benin, the country's sole university, academic freedom is con-
 strained by concern among professors about potential harassment by the Govern-
 ment or antiopposition militants and the lack of a faculty-elected rector. Opposition
 student groups are intimidated by an informer system that has led in the past to
 government persecution. The only recognized student groups, Hacame and Ugesto,
 are pro-Eyadema. Security forces violently restricted freedom of assembly on the
 university campus (see Sections 1.c. and 2.b.).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens are free to assemble; however, the Government restricts this right in practice.
 Although opposition political parties usually were able to hold public meetings in
 Lome, the capital, the Government systematically restricted the freedom of its politi-
 cal opponents to assemble in the central and northern regions. Government officials
 prohibited-and security forces forcibly dispersed--some public demonstrations criti-
 cal of the Government.
 In January gendarmes forcefully broke up a meeting of university students who
 had gathered to discuss the Government's plan to reinstate their study grants. Stu-
 dents had been striking since December 9, 1997 over nonpayment of study grants.
 Gendarmes chased the students across campus and into dormitories. Melessoussou
 Edoh, President of the National Union of Togolese Students and Interns, suffered
 a fractured spine and arm after falling from a second-story dormitory window (see
 Section 1.c.). Edoh's organization had refused to sign a communique calling on stu-
 dents to return to class. Security forces detained 11 students for 9 days (see Section
 1.d.).
 In February the Minister of Interior banned political rallies during the period
 when voter lists were being updated; however, this ban was not applied to pro-
 Eyadema demonstrations (see Section 3). Government officials in the central and
 northern regions systematically banned and harassed both public and private meet-
 ings of opposition party members, effectively forcing opposition party members to
 meet and conduct party business clandestinely. For example, the prefect of Tone,
 in the northern region, prohibited the UFC party from holding a rally in Dapaong
 on February 28, and threatened to seize and wreck a UFC official's private vehicle.
 The prefect in Sokode barred an opposition party, the African People's Democratic
 Convention, from using the municipal stadium for a rally on March 22. The prefect
 of Blitta reportedly ordered a local restaurant closed after it hosted a meeting of
 UFC supporters. On March 31, gendarmes detained and beat Clement Nyamikou,
 a UFC officer in Badou, whom they suspected of holding clandestine meetings. On
 March 7, Eyadema supporters armed with rocks and clubs attacked and disrupted
 a meeting of CAR party officers in Zio prefecture, beating and injuring CAR member
 Kossi Sahara.
 On June 24, commandos wielding batons beat demonstrators in the town of
 Sokode who were protesting the Interior Ministry's announcement of Eyadema's re-
 election (see Section 1.c.).
 The Interior Minister banned a June 26 street march in Lome called by opposition
 UFC presidential candidate Gilchrist Olympio to protest President Eyadema's fraud-
 ulent reelection. Security forces used clubs, tear gas, and gunshots in the air to dis-
 perse roughly 4,000 persons who defied the ban, reportedly causing about 20 per-
 sons to be hospitalized with minor injuries. Security forces arrested and detained
 an unknown number of demonstrators (see Sections 1.c. and l.d.).
 However, many opposition rallies, protest marches, and sit-ins were well-attended
 and incident-free. During the presidential election campaign, a temporary 1,000-
 member "mobile security force" of gendarmes and police effectively and impartially
 secured polling places, protected all presidential candidates, and thwarted attempts
 to disrupt or provoke violence at political rallies.
 Under the Constitution, citizens have the right to organize in associations and po-
 litical parties; however, the Government restricted this right in practice. Prior to the
 June 21 presidential election, the Government generally respected this right in
 Lome. However, government officials restricted the operations and activities of oppo-
 sition parties in the central and northern regions even before the election.
 On June 25 and 26, gendarmes entered the headquarters of the UFC party in
 Lome and beat persons inside with batons, causing five persons to require medical
 attention (see Section 1.c.). On August 17, armored vehicles deployed in the largely
 pro-opposition Kadjoviakope neighborhood of Lome fired on the residence of UFC
 Secretary General Jean-Pierre Fabre (see Section L.a.).
 Few opposition party offices and no pro-opposition newspapers operate in most
 towns in the central and northern regions. The CAR and UFC closed their offices
 in Sokode after government officials repeatedly harassed and threatened the owners
 of the buildings m which they were located.
 
 
 Government authorities in the northern region's Kozah prefecture on several occa-
 sions denied the right of association to members of the opposition CAR party and
 violently harassed CAR officials and activists. On January 9, in the town of
 Pagouda, a group of about 20 youths armed with clubs and whips attacked and se-
 verely injured CAR activist Alphonse Behim (see Section 1.c.). On January 16, also
 near Pagouda, a group of uniformed youths assaulted another CAR member, Abai
 Tamouka, who had reported Behim's beating to the prefect of Kozah . The uni-
 formed youths stripped Tamou a, then beat him unconscious with sticks and clubs.
 The police report on the two incidents concluded that Behim was beaten by fellow
 CAR party members who learned that he was planning to use party funds to build
 a private telephone business, and that Tamouka was attacked by village youths
 whose sisters he was attempting to seduce. In February the prefect of Kozah refused
 to recognize the existence of the CAR party in his district. In the same month, three
 RPT youths abducted and beat CAR member Koffi Sewovon (see Section 1.c.) after
 pearty president Yawovi Agboyibo dispatched him to Kara with a letter for the pre-
 ect of Kozah.
 Most opposition rallies, protest marches, and sit-ins were well attended and inci-
 dent-free. In anticipation of trouble during the election campaign, the Government
 created a 1,000-member "mobile security force" of Gendarmes, police, and
 prefectorial police. Identified by their white armbands, these special units effectively
 thwarted provocation, secured polling places, and protected candidates, including
 Gilchrist Olympio during his two brief visits to Lome from his self-imposed exile in
 Ghana.
 Political parties are able to elect officers and register. There are many active non-
 governmental organizations; they are required to register with the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights; however, armed security
 checkpoints and arbitrary searches of vehicles and individuals are common. The
 lack of discipline of some soldiers manning roadblocks and their actions, such as fir-
 ing at vehicles and frequently demanding bribes before allowing citizens to pass, im-
 pede free movement within the country.
 The Government instituted strict documentation requirements for citizens who
 apply for a new passport or a renewal. Beyond the normal identity papers, appli-
 cants were asked to provide an airline ticket, business documents, an invitation let-
 ter, a parental authorization letter (even for adults), proof of study grant for stu-
 dents, and husband's permission for married women (see Section 5). The head of the
 Gendarmerie was the final adjudicator. In 1997 the Government transferred the
 passport office from the police to the Gendarmerie, which falls under the Defense
 Ministry. The Government stated that the purpose of the transfer was to take pass-
 port issuance away from corrupt police officials. The Gendarmerie's strict passport
 requirements, published in September, prevented some citizens from traveling
 abroad and were widely criticized. However, a national identity card can be used
 for travel to other member countries of the Economic Community of West African
 States (ECOWAS).
 There is no domestic law relating to provisions for granting refugeelasylee status
 in accordance with the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. The Government generally cooperates with
 the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. While there is no legislated
 body to determine asylum or refugee status, the Government routinely accepts the
 decision of the UNHCR office resident in Lome. The Government provides first asy-
 lum (and provided it to approximately 750 persons during the year). Ogoni refugees
 from Nigeria complained that security forces subjected them to arbitrary arrest and
 intimidation, but the UNHCR discounted these allegations. There were no reports
 of the forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 The UNHCR estimates that approximately 6,000 Togolese refugees still remained
 outside the country at year's end. The Government hosts roughly 11,500 refugees
 from other countries, mainly from Ghana.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens peacefully to change their gov-
 ernment; however, the Government restricts this right in practice. In the June pres-
 idential election, as in all previous elections since Eyadema seized power, the Gov-
 ernment prevented citizens from exercising this right effectively. Although the Gov-
 ernment did not obstruct the functioning of political opponents openly, the President
 
 
 433
 used the strength of the military and his government allies to intimidate and harass
 citizens and opposition groups. The Government and the State remained highly cen-
 tralized: President Eyadema's national government appointed the officials and con-
 trolled the budgets of all subnational government entities including prefectures and
 municipalities, and influenced the selection of traditional chiefs.
 The second multiparty presidential election of Eyadema's 31-year-long rule was
 held on June 21. This was a first-round election in which six candidates including
 the incumbent competed; absent a majority for any candidate in such an election,
 the Constitution requires a second election between the two candidates receive the
 most votes. The Government limited campaigning to a period of 2 weeks, beginning
 on June 6.
 On June 24, the Interior Ministry declared President Eyadema reelected for an-
 other 5-year term. According to the official tabulation, 1.56 million votes were cast,
 of which 52 percent were cast for Eyadema, 34 percent for UFC party candidate Gil-
 christ Olympio, and 10 percent for CAR party candidate Yawovi Agboyibo. Olympio,
 the son of elected President Sylvanus Olympio who was killed in a 1963 coup in
 which Eyadema participated, returned to the country briefly on April 27, May 11,
 and June 14 in order to accept the UFC's nomination, submit to the medical exam-
 ination required of all candidates, and campaign. Gilchrist has lived in exile for rea-
 sons of personal security since an attempt on his life in northern Togo in 1992. The
 Government never openly arrested or prosecuted anyone in connection with this at-
 tack.
 The Constitution provides for universal sufferage and secret ballot. However, seri-
 ous irregularities in the Government's conduct of the election strongly favored the
 incumbent and appear to have affected the outcome materially.
 The Government's Interior Minister, General Seyi Memene, banned political ral-
 lies during the period, in February, when voter lists were being updated. This ban,
 which was not applied to pro-Eyadema demonstrations, limited the opposition's abil-
 ity to register potential supporters. Prior to the election, the NationalElection Com-
 mission (NEC), which was created in 1997 and most of whose members were chosen
 by the Government or the ruling party, did not act on several recommendations of
 international observer groups, including a recommendation to distribute registration
 cards to all registered voters well before the election.
 Despite a law requiring the state-owned media to provide equal coverage of the
 campaigns of all candidates, both the state-owned broadcast media monopoly and
 the country's only daily newspaper, also state-owned, gave preferential treatment to
 the campaign of the incumbent president. During the first week of the campaign,
 the state-owned media gave between 40 and 80 percent of their total news coverage
 to Eyadema but gave between no coverage and 3 percent of their coverage to
 Olympio. State-owned media coverage became more balanced during the final week
 of the campaign, after strong public criticism by RSF monitors (see Section 2.a.).
 Nevertheless, the High Authority for Audio-visual and Communications (see Section
 2.a.), which was created in 1997 to oversee media and to ensure their compliance
 with the law, failed conspicuously to make the state-owned media discharge their
 legal obligation to provide equal coverage for opposition candidates.
 On election day voting proceeded without incident in largely pro-Eyadema areas.
 However, in largely pro-opposition areas, many polling stations opened late or never
 opened, and many experienced shortages of election materials, including both voter
 registration cards and ballots for opposition candidates. In some largely pro-opposi-
 tion precincts, a shortage of ballots for opposition candidates forced a suspension of
 voting. Both in largely pro-opposition quarters of Lome and in Sokode, a largely pro-
 opposition town in the central region, many voters could not vote because they did
 not receive registration cards. Three peaceful demonstrations protesting voting
 irregularies occurred in Lome on the afternoon of June 21.
 During the evening of June 21 and the early morning of June 22, members of the
 armed forces confiscated ballot boxes in some largely pro-opposition precincts of
 Lome prior to the legally required on-site vote count. Thirty ballot boxes were
 burned near the airport, and at least 24 were taken by members of the armed forces
 to the mayor's office and to government property not controlled by NEC officials.
 Similar events were reported in some largely pro-opposition areas outside the cap-
 ital. A private newspaper reported that in East Mono prefecture a government offi-
 cial and three members of the armed forces in civilian attire seized ballot boxes and
 results sheets in order to give more than 90 percent of the vote to the incumbent
 president.
 At midday on June 22, officials suspended the vote count for Lome, sealing and
 locking ballot boxes and tally sheets, after European Union (EU) observers refused
 to leave the premises to permit unmonitored counting of the votes. On June 22 and
 23, telephone lines serving facsimile machines by which local vote counts were to
 
 
 434
 be transmitted to NEC headquarters in Lome failed at electoral locations through-
 out the largely pro-opposition southern region but not in largely progovernment
 areas; six out of the seven telephone lines serving facsimile machines at NEC head-
 quarters were cut; and the state-owned firm that supplied computer systems opera-
 tors to the NEC withdrew them and did not inform NEC personnel of their pass-
 words without which NEC computer systems could not be used. Only 2,000 polling
 stations, mostly from the central and northern regions, out of 4,600 precincts na-
 tionwide, were able to count their votes and report their tallies to NEC head-
 quarters. On June 23, Madame Awa Nana, chairperson of the NEC, and four other
 NEC commissioners, complained of harassment and intimidation and resigned rath-
 er than declare that Eyadema was reelected; their resignations left the NEC inoper-
 ative for lack of a quorum.
 The tabulation of the election results announced by the Government appeared to
 undercount substantially both votes cast for Olympio nationwide and total votes cast
 in the largely pro-opposition southern regions, including the Maritime region, in
 which more than 40 percent of eligible voters resided, and Lome. Informed observers
 estimated that the proportion of eligible voters who were recorded as having voted
 in the official results ranged from 38 to 56 percent in the largely pro-opposition
 southern regions, but from 84 to 114 percent in the largely pro-Eyadema northern
 regions. According to an international observer present at NEC headquarters on
 June 22 and 23, the results from the 2,000 precincts that arrived at NEC head-
 quarters (largely from the northern and central regions) indicated a tight race be-
 tween Eyadema and Olympio. Both international and national observers estimated
 that Olympio's share of votes cast in precincts in the Maritime region and Lome
 substantially exceeded the 50 to 66 percent shown in the official results. Election
 results announced on state-owned radio on June 24 and in the state-owned news-
 paper on June 25 showed exactly the same percentages of votes cast for each can-
 didate, even though the newspaper reported 40,000 (or about 3 percent) fewer votes
 cast than the radio had reported.
 The Government rejected an offer by the EU to provide a technical advisor to the
 NEC. The Government refused to accredit 500 national observers trained by a con-
 sortium of nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) funded by the EU until 2 days
 before the election, too late to enable many of them to reach their posts. Govern-
 ment officials ordered a British member of the EU Election Observation Mission to
 leave the town of Kara to which she had been posted and where official results sub-
 sequently showed 95 percent of votes cast going to Eyadema. The Government re-
 peatedly attempted to evict from the mayor of Lome's office three EU observers who
 protested and sought to monitor the illegal off-site vote count at that location. On
 June 25, the Government publicly criticized the EU observers, who had issued a
 highly unfavorable report on the election, and the RSF observers who had monitored
 state media coverage of the election campaign (see Section 2.a.). Several other
 groups of international observers issued favorable assessments of the election-day
 vote-casting process. However, these favorable reports did not address the registra-
 tion, local voting-counting and national vote-tabulation processes, and were issued
 before the results were-announced; some were based on cursory observations of a
 small and unrepresentative number of polling places.
 The President's continued influence over the judiciary was apparent in the Con-
 stitutional Court's refusal in July to challenge the Interior Ministry's announcement
 that Eyadema had been reelected. The Constitutional Court has specific jurisdiction
 over disputed elections. Even though the Court ruled that the Ministry's usurpation
 of the NEC's exclusive authority to validate and announce election results was
 "manifestly" illegal, it found that the Ministry's action was nevertheless justified on
 the grounds that reconstituting an election commission to restart the vote count
 would have resulted in a further delay in the release of results, which might have
 "created a climate of uncertainty with unpredictable consequences."
 Both before and after the election, security forces waged an often brutal intimida-
 tion campaign against certain opposition groups.
 On June 25, following the Government's announcement of the election results,
 small groups of demonstrators peacefully protesting fraud in Eyadema's reelection,
 as well as barricades and burning tires, appeared on the streets of Lome. The Inte-
 rior Minister announced a ban on all street demonstrations, and security forces used
 tear gas to disperse the demonstrators. On June 26 security forces in Lome used
 clubs, tear gas, and gunshots in the air to disperse roughly 4,000 persons who par-
 ticipated in a banned street march called by UFC candidate Olympio to protest
 Eyadema's fraudulent reelection, arrested and detained an unknown number of
 demonstrators, and reportedly inflicted minor injuries requiring hospital care on
 about 20 demonstrators (see Sections 1.c., l.d. and 2.b.).
 
 
 435
 On June 25 and 26, gendarmes attacked UFC headquarters in Lome, injuring
 hundreds of persons (see Sections 1.c. and 2.b.). UFC members reported harassment
 and intimidation in Afagnan, Kpalime, Sotouboua, Agotime, and Atakpame. In
 Afagnan political violence ended with several persons injured and 1 person shot and
 killed (see Section l.a.).
 Prohibited from protesting with active demonstrations, the opposition resorted to
 passive demonstrations to protest Eyadema's reelection. The UFC, for instance
 called general strikes for 1 day in July and for 2 days in August, which were widely
 observed in the southern region, including the capital. On July 23, gendarmes ar-
 rested UFC activists Kodjo Gbadegbe, Sassou Attiogbe, and Atsou Abaya in Keve
 for distributing literature calling on the public to observe a general strike (see Sec-
 tion 1.d.). They were beaten and tortured while in detention in Keve for 1 day, ac-
 cording to a nongovernmental organization that followed their case (see Section 1.c.).
 They were transferred to the Gendarmerie barracks in Lome where they stayed for
 1 week before being transferred to the main jail. At first the Government accused
 them of inciting civil disobedience, but later dropped the case after defense lawyers
 successfully argued that the case had no legal basis.
 On June 14, in the northern community of Debouri, a group of youths reportedly
 beat local CAR party members Bidjengui Micel N'Sarma,        on Gazaro, and
 Omorou Sanwogou 1'Sarma because of their party affiliation. Bidjengui N'Sarma
 was told to switch his allegiance to the RPT, and Omorou N'Sarma was accused of
 atta     an RPT member. N'Sarma was detained at the prison in nearby Mango
 until Juy 3. On June 24, youths in the northern community of Gando beat CAR
 party official Soulemane Ousmane because of his party affiliation. On November 19,
 gendarmes reportedly arrested up to eight of the Gando area youths after receiving
 complaints from citizens that the youths were harassing them with impunity. The
 youths were liberated after spending 1 week in the Mango city jail. According to a
 credible report, the authorities released the youths under pressure from Oti prefect,
 Ahor Atinde    okoe, and National Assembly and EPT member, Ouattara
 Fambare Natchaba, who was reportedly the mastermind behind the intimidation
 campaign in Oti prefecture (see Section 1.c.).
 On August 16, during a reported rebel incursion across the Ghanaian border near
 Lome, security forces attacked UFC party headquarters in Lome as well as the
 homes of party vice presidents Amah Gnassingbe and Patrick Lawson and Sec-
 retary-General Jean-Pierre Fabre. At least two persons were killed by security
 forces (see Section L.a.). The Government accused UFC leader Gilchrist Olympio and
 businessman Marc Kponton, both of whom were out of the country, of mastermind-
 ing the reported raid. Opposition leaders dismissed the raid as a government fab-
 rication to provide a pretext to deploy armed forces in Lome. On August 17, there
 were attacks on Party for Democracy and Renewal (PDR) headquarters in Sokode,
 on a PDR officer's residence in Bafilo, and on a residence owned by PDR president
 Zarifou Ayeva, which was ransacked. Security forces also searched the homes of
 UFC officer Andre Kuevi in Lome and of the UFC's regional officer in Kpalime (see
 Sections 1.c. and 1.f.).
 On September 29, a group of armed men shot and killed a local leader of the oppo-
 sition CAR party at his home in the village of Dokpohoe in southeastern Togo (see
 Sections L.a. and 1.f.). The case was under investigation at year's end.
 The last legislative elections were held on February 6 and 20, 1994. The CAR won
 36 seats, the RPT 35, the UTD 7, the UJD 2, and the CFN 1. Two members from
 the CAR and one from the UTD left their parties and joined RPT. Also, UJD affili-
 ated itself with the RPT, and CFN declared its pro-RPT stance. This gave the RPT
 a majority. The National Assembly has no power or influence on President Eyadema
 and has limited influence on the Government. The National Assembly can control
 its programs and activities and request amendments. The RPT majority acts as a
 rubber-stamp for the President and the Government. Criticism directed at a cabinet
 member is considered an attack on the President.
 The National Assembly voted on a decentralization plan in 1998, but the plan's
 implementation has been slow. Togo is divided into 5 economic and administrative
 regions, 30 prefectures, and 4 subprefectures. These subdivisions may change in the
 future, with some subprefectures becoming prefectures and some districts becoming
 subprefectures. Administratively, the prefect, nominated by the Interior Minister, is
 the local government representative. Some government agencies have nominated re-
 gional representatives. Within the prefecture, a council elected from the districts ad-
 vises the prefect and manages programs. Each city has a mayor elected by a munici-
 pal council. The last mayoral elections were held before 1990. Those mayors' terms
 have expired and are thus serving illegally.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or members of ethnic
 minorities in politics or government; however, both women and members of south-
 
 
 436
 ern ethnic groups were underrepresented in government. Although many women are
 members of political parties, there were only two female ministers in the Govern-
 ment and 1 female member of the 81-niember National Assembly. No ethnic group
 including the President's was conspicuously overrepresented in the Presidents Cabi-
 net.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several local private human rights groups, including the Togolese
 Human Rights League and the Center of Observation and Promotion of the Rule
 of Law. In general, the Government allows groups access to investigate alleged vio-
 lations of human rights. However, the Government keeps human rights advocates
 under close observation, threatens them, hinders their activities, and usually does
 not follow up on investigations of abuses. Years of government threats and intimida-
 tion of human rights leaders, combined with a lack of results from human rights
 initiatives, have led some human rights monitors to end their public activities.
 During the presidential election in June, government officials repeatedly re-
 stricted and impeded the work of election observers from the Europdan Union, and
 refused to accredit national observers trained at EU expense until 2 days before the
 election, too late for many of them to reach their posts (see Section 3).
 On December 1, a court security officer assaulted Amnesty International rep-
 resentative  Gaetan  Mootoo, who     was attending   the trial of Appollinaire
 Mewenemesse (see Section 2.a.), for carrying a camera; court rules prohibited
 photographing the proceedings. The officer in charge subsequently apologized to
 Mootoo.
 During the year, the International Committee of the Red Cross, which withdrew
 its permanent representative in 1997, offered 3 seminars on human rights to 20
 members of the armed forces.
 In September the Government formed a new Ministry for the Promotion of De-
 mocracy and the Rule of Law, headed by Octavianus Olympio, a cousin of Gilchrest
 Olympio. The National Assembly voted in 1996 to enact a ministerial decree to reor-
 ganize the government-sponsored and government-funded National Human Rights
 Commission (CNDH). The majority of commissioners are supporters of President
 Eyadema. The CNDH conducted a public awareness campaign during the year. In
 practice neither the Ministry for the Promotion of Democracy nor the CNDH oper-
 ates independently of the President.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family origin, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal, political, or
 other convictions. However, the Government does not provide effective redress for
 discrimination complaints, societal discrimination based on both ethnic group and
 sex is common. Members of President Eyadema's Kabye ethnic group and other
 northern ethnic groups dominate much of the public sector, including the military.
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem. Although mecha-
 nisms for redress exist within both the traditional extended family and formal judi-
 cial structures, the police rarely intervene in traditional or domestic violence cases.
 Wife beating has been estimated to affect an estimated 10 percent of married
 women and continues with impunity. There is some trafficking in young women for
 the purposes of prostitution or for exploiting them as domestic servants.
 Despite a constitutional declaration of equality under the law, women continue to
 experience 'discrimination, especially in education, pension benefits, inheritance, and
 as a consequence of traditional law. A husband legally may restrict his wife's free-
 dom to work or control her earnings. The Government requires a married woman
 to get her husband's permission to apply for a passport (see Section 2.d.). In urban
 areas, women and girls dominate market activities and commerce. However, harsh
 economic conditions in rural areas, where most of the population lives, leave women
 with little time for activities other than domestic and agricultural field work. Under
 traditional law, which applies to the vast majority of women, a wife has no mainte-
 nance rights in the event of divorce or separation, and no inheritance rights on the
 death of er husband.
 There is a Ministry of Feminine Promotion and Social Protection, which, along
 with independent women's groups and related nongovernmental organizations, has
 active campaigns to inform women of their rights.
 Children.-Although the Constitution and family code laws provide for the protec-
 tion of children's rights, in practice government programs often suffer from a lack
 of money, materials, and enforcement. The Government provides free education in
 
 
 state schools, and school attendance is mandatory for both boys and girls until the
 age of 15. There are social programs to provide free health care for poor children.
 Although the law protects children, there are many practices that point to a pat-
 tern of discrimination against children, especially girls. In education, about 61 per-
 cent of Togolese children 6 to 15 years of age attend school. Of that group, about
 89 percent of the boys and 66 percent of the girls start primary school; about 39
 percent of the boys and 13 percent of the girls reach secondary school; about 3 per-
 cent of the boys and .6 percent of the girls reach university level. Literacy rates are
 57 percent for adult men and 31 percent for adult women. About one-third of the
 national budget is spent on education.
 Orphans and other needy children receive some aid from extended families or pri-
 vate organizations but less from the State. There are few juvenile courts, and chil-
 dren are jailed with adults. In rural areas, the best food is reserved for adults, prin-
 cipally the father.
 There are confirmed reports of trafficking in children, particularly girls, for the
 purpose of forced labor, which amounts at times to slavery (see Section 6.c.).
 Female genital mutilation, which is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, remains a current
 practice. Approximately 12 percent of all girls and women in Togo have undergone
 FGM. Many of the largest ethnic groups do not practice FGM; however, the practic-
 ing groups have rates ranging from 40 to 98 percent. In theory women and girls
 are protected by the Constitution from FGM. In October the Government enacted
 a law prohibiting the practice. However, the Government had not brought any cases
 to court by year's end. Traditional customs often supersede the legal systems in var-
 ious ethnic groups. Nevertheless, the Government continued to sponsor seminars to
 educate and campaign against FGM.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate accessibility to pub-
 lic or private facilities for the disabled. Although the Constitution nominally obliges
 the Government to aid disabled persons and shelter them from social injustice, the
 Government provides only limited assistance in practice. While there is no overt
 state discrimination against disabled persons and while some hold responsible gov-
 ernment positions, the disabled have no meaningful recourse against private sector
 discrimination, which compels many to beg.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The country's population of less than 5 mil-
 lion includes members of nearly 40 ethnic groups that generally speak distinct pri-
 mary languages and are concentrated regionally in rural areas. Major ethnic groups
 include the Ewe (between 20 and 25 percent of the population), the Kabye (between
 10 and 15 percent), and the Gen-Gbe or Mina (about 5 percent). The Ewe and Gen-
 Gbe are the largest ethnic groups in the southern region, where abundant rainfall
 and access to the sea have been conducive to farming and trade; the Kabye are the
 largest group in the drier, landlocked, less populous and less prosperous northern
 region.
 Although prohibited by law, societal discrimination on the basis of ethnicity is
 practiced routinely by members of virtually all ethnic groups. In particular, dis-
 crimination against southerners by northerners and against northerners by south-
 erners is evident in private sector hiring and buying patterns, in patterns of de facto
 ethnic segregation in urban neighborhoods, and in the relative paucity of marriages
 across the north-south ethnic divide. There are no effective impediments to the ex-
 tension of such discrimination into the public sector, where the centralization of the
 State allows little scope for regional or ethnic autonomy, except through the cir-
 cumscribed authority of traditional rulers and dispute resolution systems.
 The domination of private sector commerce and professions by members of south-
 ern ethnic groups, and the domination of the public sector and especially the secu-
 rity forces by members of President Eyadema's Kabye group and other northern
 groups, are major sources of political tension. Political parties tend to have readily
 identifiable ethnic and regional bases: The ruling RPT party is much stronger
 among northern ethnic groups than among southern groups, while the reverse is
 true of the UFC and CAR opposition parties.
 In recent years north-south tensions repeatedly have erupted into violence of a
 clearly interethnic character: Majority ethnic group members in each region have
 harassed and attacked members of ethnic groups originating from the other region,
 forcing them back to their home region. In recent years, during times of crisis, many
 Lome residents sent family members to their village for security reasons. Some To-
 golese also sent family members to neighboring Ghana and Benin. In addition, due
 to the congruence of political divisions and ethnic and regional divisions, many
 human rights abuses clearly related to political conflict during the year (see Section
 3) also were related closely to ethnic and regional conflict.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides most workers with the
 right to join unions and the right to strike. Security forces, including firemen and
 policemen, do not have these rights; government health care workers may join
 unions but may not strike. The work force in the formal (wage) sector is small, in-
 volving about 20 percent of the total work force, of whom from 60 to 70 percent are
 union members or supporters.
 The Constitution also prohibits discrimination against workers for reasons of sex,
 origin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution against
 strikers.
 There are several major trade union federations. These include the National Con-
 federation of Togolese Workers (CNTT), which is closely associated with the Govern-
 ment; the Labor Federation of Togolese Workers (CSTT); the National Union of
 Independent Syndicates (UNSIT); and the Union of Free Trade Unions. In February
 a dozen educators' groups formed the National Teachers Union of Togo.
 Federations and unions are free to associate with international labor groups. The
 CNTT and the UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions. The CSTT is an affiliate of the World Labor Confederation.
 On August 29, Liman Doumongue, Deputy Secretary General of the National As-
 sociation of Independent Unions of Togo, a pro-opposition labor federation, was shot
 and killed inside his home in Lome in a manner similar to that used in executions
 (see Section l.a.).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code nominally
 provides workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal sec-
 tor employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However, the Gov-
 ermnent limits collective bargaining to producing a single nationwide agreement
 that must be negotiated and endorsed by representatives of the Government as well
 as of labor unions and employers. This agreement sets nationwide wage standards
 for all formal sector employees. The Government participates in this process both
 as a labor-management mediator and as the largest employer in the formal sector,
 managing numerous state-owned firms that monopolize many sectors of the formal
 economy. Individual groups in the formal sector can attempt through sector-specific
 or firm-specific collective bargaining to negotiate agreements more favorable to
 labor, but this option rarely is used.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor is
 charged with resolving labor-related complaints, but does not always do so effec-
 tively.
 A 1989 law allows the establishment of export processing zones (EPZ's). Many
 companies have EPZ status, and about 36 are in operation. The EPZ law provides
 exemptions from some provisions of the Labor Code, notably the regulations on hir-
 ing and firing. Employees of EPZ firms do not enjoy the same protection against
 antiunion discrimination as do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically ad-
 dress the question of forced or bonded labor, including that performed by children,
 and children sometimes are subjected to forced labor, primarily as domestic serv-
 ants. The Government acknowledged the international trafficking of-children, par-
 ticularly girls, who are sold into various forms of indentured and exploitative ser-
 vitude, which amounts at times to-slavery. This traffic often results in the children
 being taken to other West and Central African countries, especially Gabon and Ni-
 geria, to the Middle East, or to Asia. In rural areas, parents sometimes force young
 children into domestic work in other houieholds in exchange for cash. The Govern-
 ment conducted a public awareness campaign, and security forces arrested child
 traffickers on a number of occasions. In January gendarmes arrested three traffick-
 ers who were transporting 22 children from Tchaoudjo prefecture into Benin, where
 they were to be taken to Nigeria. In March police arrested four traffickers of
 Beninese minors in Tohoun. The traffickers were taking 22 Beninese children to
 Cote d'Ivoire via Togo.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under the age of 14 in any enter-
 prise. Some types of industrial and technical employment require a minimum ae
 of 18. Inspectors from the Ministry of Labor enforce these age requirements but o y
 in the formal sector in urban areas. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in
 farming and petty trading,-very young children traditionally assist in their families'
 work. Under the Constitution, school is mandatory for both sexes until the age of
 15, but this requirement is not enforced strictly (see Section 5). However, the law
 does not prohibit forced and bonded labor by children, and it is a significant problem
 (see Section 6.c.).
 
 
 439
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets minimum wages for dif-
 ferent categories, ranging from unskilled labor through professional positions. Less
 than the official minimum wage often is paid in practice, mostly to less-skilled work-
 ers. Official monthly minimum wages range from approximately $25 to $39 (14,700
 to 23,100 CFA Francs) per month. A 5 percent wage increase in 1996 was the first
 since 1987, despite a 50 percent currency devaluation in 1994. There has been no
 wage increase since 1996. Many workers cannot maintain a decent standard of liv-
 ing for themselves and their families at the official minimum wages, and many must
 supplement their incomes through second jobs or subsistence farming. The Ministry
 of Labor is ostensibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage system but
 does not enforce the law in practice. The Labor Code, which regulates labor prac-
 tices, requires equal pay for equal work, regardless of sex. However, this provision
 generally is observed only in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory, and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The law requires overtime compensation, and there are restrictions on excessive
 overtime work. However, the Ministry of Labor's enforcement is weak, and employ-
 ers often ignore these provisions.
 A technical consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor sets workplace health
 and safety standards. It may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 standards, and employees ostensibly have the right to complain to labor inspectors
 of unhealthy or unsafe conditions without penalty. In practice the Ministry's en-
 forcement of the various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Large enterprises
 are obliged by law to provide medical services for their employees and usually at-
 tempt to respect occupational health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do
 not.
 Workers have the legal right to remove themselves from unsafe conditions without
 fear of losing their jobs. In practice, however, some reportedly cannot do so.
