 Since seizing power in a military coup in 1967, President
 Gnassingbe Eyadema has molded Togo into a single-party,
 authoritarian state. The President dominates all branches and
 functions of government. In addition to serving as Head of
 State, President Eyadema is Chief of Staff of the armed forces
 and head of the only political party, the Rassemblement du
 Peuple Togolais (RPT). All Togolese are considered members of
 the RPT and are obligated to vote, but only active party
 members can gain high government posts. The Eyadema
 Government rules by decree and considers its legal authority
 to be based on the Constitution of 1979 which was formally
 adopted by referendum. This Constitution established a
 National Assembly whose role, while continuing to evolve, is
 still primarily to adopt all governmental decrees sent to it.
 One-candidate presidential elections held every 7 years have
 reconfirmed President Eyadema's rule.
 The Government's authority is reinforced through control of
 the state security apparatus: the armed forces, the National
 Police (Surete), and the Special Police (gendarmerie). All
 these forces have domestic security responsibilities.
 Approximately 80 percent of Togo's 3.3 million people are
 involved in agriculture. In 1989 excellent rains produced an
 abundant food crop, and prices for two of Togo's major
 exports--phosphates and cotton--were higher. Cocoa and
 coffee, however, continued to suffer from depressed prices,
 and overall government receipts were lower than projected,
 leading to a budget deficit. Nevertheless, by continuing to
 control expenditures and comply with performance criteria
 under a World Bank-sponsored third structural adjustment
 program, Togo remained attractive to foreign donors for
 essential grants and loans.
 Human rights in Togo remained tightly controlled in 1989.
 Major concerns included abuse of prisoners and detainees,
 arbitrary detentions, lack of fair trial procedures in
 security cases, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press,
 and assembly and the right of citizens to change their
 government. Amnesty International (AI) raised the issue of
 torture in several cases, and the Government again forcibly
 repatriated several persons. On the other hand, the
 2-year-old Togolese Human Rights Commission, with the
 President's support, continued its high-profile campaign to
 familiarize all Togolese with their rights under the law and
 the limitations on official authority. In addition, the
 Commission continued to receive and investigate individual
 complaints (115 cases in 1989, though many did not pertain to
 human rights issues), with most being resolved after the
 Commission's intervention, including cases involving police
 brutality. President Eyadema also continued his personal
 campaign against high-level corruption and abuse by dismissing
 the Justice Minister and his security chief for malfeasance.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of such killings in 1989.
 
 
 395
 TOGO
 b. Disappearance
 In 1989 there were no reports of disappearances. Prior to
 1989 there were several abductions of persons opposed to the
 regime in neighboring countries who were forcibly returned to
 Togo, presumably by Togolese security agents. The 1988 case
 of John Pass has never been clarified. The Government claims
 he was killed by Ghanaian border guards. AI has received some
 reports that he was returned to Togo and tortured.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture of suspected opponents of the Government has been a
 seri6us problem. AI's 1989 Report details several 1988 cases,
 including the case of Celestin Zekpa who had been sentenced to
 death in absentia in 1986 for security offenses and who had
 been forcibly returned to Togo in October 1988 from Benin.
 Under the continuing campaign by the Togolese Human Rights
 Commission against official abuses, reports of beatings of
 detainees (once considered normal practice) have dropped to a
 few isolated cases. With President Eyadema's backingl the
 Commission now reports well-founded allegations to s6curity
 commanders who reportedly actively investigate the cases and
 punish officers found guilty through methods such as loss of
 pay or reprimand in front of colleagues. No formal procedures
 for the punishment of abusive.officers have yet been
 established. Conditions probably have not improved
 significantly for detainees in rural areas or for detainees in
 military facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Togolese law, persons arrested may be held for 48 hours
 incommunicado without charge, with an additional 48-hour
 extension if the case is deemed serious or complex. Most
 detentions follow this requirement. However, persons accused
 of "political crimes," such as defaming the President, can be
 arrested and detained incommunicado without limit. Such
 persons have been routinely charged as "administrative
 detainees,"-a status not permitting recourse to normal legal
 remedies.
 After being charged, prisoners are often held for long periods
 of time--in some cases 6 months or more--before being brought
 to trial,-owing more to a shortage of judicial personnel than
 an intent to evade required judicial procedures. Although not
 guaranteed a right to counsel under law, detainees are
 routinely-permitted to retain counsel, if they can afford it.
 Prefects (governors) continue to have the de facto authority
 to order detention at will. Security officers also continue
 to have unrestricted arrest and detention powers in cases
 involving national security.
 Arrested and detained members of the military and Special
 Police are processed through the military judicial system.
 While in the past this system had no'outside appeal mechanism
 (aside from the President), military detainees now have the
 right to bring their cases before the Togolese Human Rights
 Commission.
 
 
 396
 The number of political detainees was unknown but believed to
 be small at the end of 1989. There are a number of political
 exiles in neighboring countries and in Europe.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Procedural safeguards needed to ensure fair trial are lacking
 in security/political cases. The regular judicial system for
 criminal and civil cases uses both African traditional law and
 the Napoleonic Code. In rural areas, the village chief or
 council of elders can try minor criminal and civil cases.
 Those who do not accept the traditional ruling can take their
 cases to the regular court system, which is also the starting
 point for urban cases. The Supreme Court stands at the apex
 of the court system, but decisions can be appealed to the
 President, who is the final arbiter.
 The judicial process includes pretrial investigation
 undertaken by a special judge who must examine the adequacy of
 the evidence and decide on bail. While the number of judges
 is inadequate, the system functions well and in as timely a
 manner as possible for routine cases. Trials are public, and
 judicial procedures are followed. Defendants have the right
 to counsel, but only in potential capital punishment cases
 will the Government appoint a counsel for those unable to
 afford it. Lower court decisions can be appealed to two
 higher courts, then to the President.
 Special courts exist to handle cases related to public
 security (State Security Court), embezzlement of public funds
 (Tribunal for Recovery of Public Funds), and violent crimes
 (Court of Assizes). While the State Security Court has not
 met in 3 years, a 1989 case involving malfeasance by Togo's
 ex-police chief may be tried there. Persons who embezzle
 money in large sums are generally not released from jail, even
 after serving their sentence, until the money is repaid.
 Togo's judicial system is not independent of the executive, as
 the President can and does intervene in cases of special
 interest and determine outcomes. For example, before the
 judicial process could be completed, President Eyadema gave a
 full pardon to the ex-Minister of Justice who had been
 sentenced by a lower court to 2 years, imprisonment for taking
 part in a scheme to rig the national lottery.
 Togolese exiles in Ghana claim that there are a number of
 political prisoners in prison. The 19 prisoners, who had been
 kept incommunicado at a military base since their alleged role
 in trying to overthrow the Government in September 1986, were
 transferred to the civilian prison in Kara in October 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In routine criminal or civil cases, searches of private
 residences are authorized in advance by a judge or senior
 police official. In national security cases, searches are
 undertaken without prior authorization. The authorities
 continue to open mail and monitor telephones. A Government
 network of informants keeps a check on actual or perceived
 opponents. Religious publications of the Jehovah's Witnesses
 often disappear in the mail. All. Togolese are automatically
 
 
 397
 TOGO
 members of Togo's sole political party and required to vote,
 but no one is forced to take an active party role.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Direct criticism of the Government, and especially of the
 President, continues to be perceived as serious antigovernment
 activity and is not tolerated. However, there is an
 increasing tendency for academicians, jurists, and human
 rights advocates to discuss in open meetings (usually
 sponsored by Western embassies) such once-forbidden topics as
 limitations on executive power, single-party politics, and
 freedom of expression. In addition, the President's      /
 high-profile anticorruptign campaign, which felled several
 high-ranking officials, has permitted a very vocal and
 widespread public discussion about official abuses and
 government corruption.
 The Government continues to dominate the pxint media and
 control radio and television. A new, privately published
 periodical appeared in Lome in November. This was made
 possible by the acquiescence of the Government and the
 high-profile campaign by the Togolese Human Rights Commission
 for broadening freedom of exression. The Government contines
 to use its media to project a positive image of the President
 and Togo, while at the same time participating fully in
 condemning public corruption and abuse of public trust.
 There is government censorship of all films, video cassettes,
 books, plays, and other writings published in Togo. Some
 bookstores, however, sell a wide range of books, including
 those containing veiled criticism of the system of
 government. Foreign publications are offered for sale openly
 in bookstores and street corners, and even editions which
 criticize Togo or portray negative images of the Government or
 Head of.State are sold.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled in Togo.
 Government approval must be obtained for the formation of any
 official groups and for large group meetings. This process is
 an effective means for preventing any antigovernment groups
 from meeting. Government permission for nonpolitical qvents
 and the formation of professional or charitable societies is
 given routinely and expeditiously.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c.- Freedom of Religion
 The Government's policy is to permit Togolese to participate,
 if desired, in religious activities. To operate officially,
 religious groups must receive permission from the Ministry of
 Interior by qualifying under one of seven broad categories.
 Qualifying groups are not restricted in their religious
 practices. They are free to publish religious.material,
 conduct services, and teach their faith. Non-Togolese clergy
 are welcome to reside in Togo, proselytize, and engage in
 other religious activities.
 Currently, the Jehovah's Witnesses and several small
 Apostolic/Celestial groups have been denied official
 
 
 398
 TOGO
 permission to practice their beliefs. While this has
 prevented these groups from publicized, open worship, they
 continued in 1989 to exercise their faith in private without
 government interference. Based on a complaint from the
 Jehovah's Witnesses, the Togolese Human Rights Commission was
 involved at the end of 1989 in discussions with the Government
 regarding the certification process.
 One publisher was prevented from selling calendars which used
 Christian names instead of African names.
 Local religious groups are free to maintain contacts with
 coreligionists in other countries, and no restrictions exist
 on travel for religious purposes. All official religious
 services are ecumenical in nature. The Government does not
 favor any specific religion, and membership in any authorized
 religious group is neither a benefit nor a hindrance in civil
 service promotions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or workplace, is
 generally allowed. However, the Government controls the
 issuance of passports and exit visas to discourage the
 emigration of professional Togolese and to keep known
 political dissidents under close scrutiny. The Government
 maintains customs and security checkpoints throughout the
 country on all major routes. Except for the few political
 exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other countries
 may return at will.
 Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees, and the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) currently
 recognizes some 420 refugees in Togo. However, some refugees
 from countries with which Togo enjoys good relations are
 reluctant to register with the UNHCR for fear that their
 government will receive information about them. In 1988 the
 Government forcibly returned a Chadian recognized by the UNHCR
 as a refugee. According to AI's 1989 Report, he was
 extrajudicially executed shortly after return to Chad.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Togolese cannot change their government through democratic
 means. While all Togolese are members of the single political
 party, and active party members may debate minor issues at
 party meetings and raise complaints against local officials,
 no challenges are permitted to the Government's programs.
 Presidential elections were held in 1986, the second since
 1979. President Eyadema, the only candidate, was elected for
 another 7-year term with 99.7 percent of the votes cast.
 The National Assembly, created pursuant to the 1979
 Constitution, has 77 members and has the right, in theory, to
 accept or reject laws originated by the executive branch. In
 fact, the Assembly has never rejected any proposed
 legislation, and most laws are by acclamation. Nevertheless,
 members of the Assembly see their institution in evolution,
 with a gradually increasing national role. In the 1985
 National Assembly elections and in elections held in January
 1987 for municipal and prefectural, councils, multiple
 
 
 399
 TOGO
 candidates were permitted to run, but each candidate had to
 obtain party authQrization and submit campaign literature for
 approval.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has shown increased awareness of human rights
 issues in recent years, largely by facilitating the
 establishment of the Togolese Human Rights Commission. The
 Commission continued in 1989 to increase the scope of its
 activities and the range of its investigations with the
 support of President Eyadema. The Commission is composed of
 13 mefnbers, one each elected by 13 private and public bodies,
 e.g., judges, doctors, teachers, trade union officials. It is
 authorized by law to receive complaints from any Togolese
 citizen or foreign resident, to investigate such complaints,
 and to have access to government.and police files. If a
 violation is found to exist, the Commission is also authorized
 to negotiate with the responsible governmental authority
 either to bring about rectification or to submit the case to
 the courts or to the President. Commission members enjoy
 immunity from arrest or prosecution during their term of
 office and for 1 year afterwards. The Commission is careful
 not to criticize the Government as such, but it has been
 helpful in specific cases (see Section l.c.).
 International human rights organizations have been able to
 communicate direptly with the Commission concerning individual
 cases. In 1989 the Commission received three inquiries from
 AI--one concerning an alleged disappearance in 1986 and two
 allegations of torture during 1989.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Before President Eyademals seizure of power in 1967, all
 influential groups within Togo were dominated by southern
 ethnic groups. The President, himself a northerner, has
 advocated a strong affirmative action policy within the
 Government--ministers, governors, and other high-level
 officials are appointed pr6portionally to the ethnic mix of
 the population. The exceptions are the security forces, which
 are dominated by northern ethnic groups, and commerce and the
 professions, which continue to be the preserve of
 southerners. There is no known discrimination on grounds of
 religion.
 Togolese women have formal equality with men under the law,
 and women's economic and social rights are spelled out in the
 "Family Code" Wihich was adopted in early 1980. In the
 economic sphere, women dominate local market activities and
 commerce iith Togo's neighbors and often amass considerable
 wealth. Unlike civil law, however, customary or traditional
 law giveg all property to the male in the event of separation
 or divorce. Similarly, although women are legally allowed to
 acquire contraceptives and undertake family planning, custom
 and tradition prohibit women from access to contraception
 without the permission of their husbands or fathers.
 Far fewer women than men receive university education, and the
 number of women graduates from secondary schools is low. In
 addition, the pensions of working women who die do not go to
 their families, unlike those of working men. Although working
 
 
 400
 women pay into the pension fund in the same proportion as men,
 their children receive no funds in case of death, creating a
 special-hardship for families with no father. Economic
 conditions in rural areas often leave women little time for
 anything other than carrying water, finding firewood, cooking,
 childbearing, caring for the family, and helping to raise food
 crops.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, is outside the
 -bounds of accepted behavior, and mechanisms exist within both
 the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures
 for redress. Female circumcision is practiced by a few
 northern ethnic groups but is gradually diminishing. While
 the Government has undertaken a campaiqn to make women
 throughout Togo aware of their expanded opportunities under
 the new family code, it has not specifically addressed the
 issue of violence against women or female circumcision. The
 UNFT, the government-sponsored women's organization, is the
 principal means of publicizing women's health, educational,
 and welfare issues.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Togolese are not free to form or join unions of their own
 choosing since such organizing is permitted only under the
 auspices of Togo's sole official labor union, the National
 Confederation of Workers of Togo (CNTT). The CNTT is one of
 the three components of Togo's only political party and unites
 various independent trade unions into one national labor
 organization. All wage earners are automatically members of
 the CNTT, and all pay dues through an automatic check-off
 system. At the end of the year, this automatic dues payment
 was still suspended; and the account remained frozen while the
 Minister of Finance investigated financial mismanagement by
 the CNTT.
 The International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of
 Experts (COE) for a number of years has criticized the fact
 that Togolese law names the CNTT as the exclusive beneficiary
 of the compulsory deduction of trade union dues. While
 recognizing that the Labor Code places no obstacle in the way
 of trade union pluralism, the COE conluded that the effect of
 the compulsory dues provision for the CNTT is to establish a
 trade union monopoly. The COE has requested that the
 Government remove this exclusivity so as to bring its
 legislation into conformity with ILO Convention 87 on Freedom
 of Association, which Togo has ratified.
 Strikes are authorized only as a means of last resort but
 rarely, if ever, take place. The Government acts as
 arbitrator in cases where labor and management cannot settle a
 dispute. The few strikes which have occurred in the past have
 been short and ended as a result of government arbitration.
 The Government has not had to use coercion, force, or arrests
 to end strikes.
 The CNTT is a member of the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity and the Organization of Trade Unions of West
 Africa. It is not otherwise affiliated internationally
 although it maintains ties with international and national
 trade union organizations in both East and West. Individual
 Toglese unions are affiliated with- Western-oriented
 international trade secretariats.
 
 
 401
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 .Workers do not have the right -to organize outside the CNTT.
 The CNTT is 2ot pn independent union and basically conveys the
 Government's views and requirements to workers. It does have
 a role in the wage bargaining process and does, on certain
 issues, present the workers, economic interests to the
 Government. It also takes the workers' side in disputes with
 private employers. Labor legislation and practice is uniform
 throughout the country. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Although the law is silent on the question, forced or
 compulsory labor does not exist. There are, however,
 occasional early morning mobilizations of the populations in
 larger towns and cities to clean streets and pick up trash.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Under the Togolese Labor Code, the employment of children
 under the age of 14 in any enterprise is prohibited. Some
 types of industrial and technical employment Tequire a minimum
 age of 18. These age requirements are generally enforced in
 urban employment by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor.
 However, in rural areas even very young children traditionally
 help their-families with agricultural work or animal husbandry.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor practices in Togo are regulated by the 1974 Labor Code.
 The Code stipulates that there should be equal pay for equal
 work regardless'of sex. Working hours of all employees in any
 enterprise, except for agricultural enterprises, should not
 normally exceed 40 hours per week; at least one period of 24
 hours of rest per week is compulsory; and workers should
 receive 30 days of paid leave each year. Minimum wages are
 set by the Government after discussions with CNTT and
 officials of the Ministry of Rural Development. These
 discussions cannot be characterized as true bargaining
 agreements. The minimum wage in the agricultural sector is
 about 20 centsper hour, and in the nonagricultural sector
 about 25 cents per hour. The amounts are not sufficient for
 workers to maintain a decent standard of living, and minimum
 wage workers supplement their incomes through second jobs or
 through some subsistence farming. Larger enterprises must run
 a regular medical service for their employees.
 Health and safety standarasIn the workplace are determined by
 a technical consulting committee at the Ministry of Labor, and
 there are penalties for employers who do. not meet the
 conditions. Ministry enforcement of the various provisions of
 the Labor Code is limited. These provisions are respected by
 large enterprises, but smaller firms and the large
 agricultural sector do not maintain them. Due to Togo's
 significant unemployment, few workers complain about
 conditions. ,
 
 
 402
