TOGO
Although the report on Togo describes many serious human rights violations, it makes the human rights situation in Togo look much more positive than it is. The report puts too much trust in the ability of the two-year-old Togolese Human Rights Commission to monitor human rights and assumes that all stated goals of the Commission can be accepted as accomplishments. The report also downplays cases of reported torture in Togo and neglects to report several incidences of human rights abuses that were reported by other reputable human rights organizations. There are two instances in which the 1987 or 1988 reports gave accurate and thorough descriptions of certain abuses, while the 1989 report neglects them. Finally, on a number of issues, the report begins with an optimistic statement and proceeds to describe a situation that offers little assurance of improvement.
The Togolese Human Rights Commission was set up in 1987 with the agreement of President Gnassingbé Eyadema to investigate reports of human rights violations, and it has taken a number of notable steps to promote and protect human rights. But, considering the severe suppression of free speech that has existed in Togo for most of President Eyadema's 23 years in power, and specifically the intolerance for any criticism of the government, it is unlikely that the Togolese Human Rights Commission, a governmental body subject to executive pressure, would be capable of acknowledging and eradicating abuses within two years.
The State Department report states that the Commission is "authorized by law to receive complaints from any Togolese citizen," and that military detainees "have the right to bring their cases before the Togolese Human Rights Commission." The report, however, makes clear that "persons accused of 'political crimes,' such as defaming the President, can be arrested and detained incommunicado without limit" and that "[t]orture of suspected opponents of the Government has been a serious problem." While the report correctly acknowledges the existence of such grave abuses without qualification, it fails to draw the logical inference that Togolese citizens will most likely be afraid to report abuses to a governmental body and that the governmental body too will be afraid to act in direct opposition to the head of state. Thus, the ability of the Commission to act independently and effectively is open to question, which the report should have addressed.
221
Togo
Furthermore, the State Department points out that members of the Togolese Human Rights Commission have immunity from arrest during their service on the Commission and for one year after their term expires. There is no promise, however, of immunity for citizens who register complaints with the Commission. With a government that instills in its citizens a fear of bringing any negative views to light, such immunity must be promised and demonstrated before citizens can speak out freely about abuses.
The State Department reports that the Togolese Human Rights Commission received three inquiries from Amnesty International and 115 other individual complaints. However, the State Department itself admits that many of the 115 complaints did not pertain to human rights issues. In addition, the report does not say whether the Amnesty cases were taken up and resolved. The 1989 annual report of the Commission in fact mentions several of the cases on which the Amnesty inquiries were based, although in a number of cases, the Commission does not fully respond to Amnesty's allegations. The report should have discussed these issues.
The State Department also fails to report on a number of allegations of specific cases of human rights aljuse and the response of the Togolese Human Rights Commission to these cases. While it mentions the case of Aballo Celestin Zekpa (referring to him only as Celestin Zekpa), who was reportedly abducted by Togolese authorities from Benin and forcibly repatriated to Togo and imprisoned, it neglects to report allegations of his torture while in police custody in Lomé. The report neglects to mention the similar case of Richard Ahiable who, unlike Mr. Zekpa, was not tried and convicted (Mr. Zekpa was tried in absentia), but was abducted by Togolese authorities from Nigeria and forcibly returned to Togo where he too was imprisoned and allegedly tortured. Moreover, the State Department does not acknowledge other allegations of torture, such as the cases of Lawoé Folly Sossou and Kubah Otsiguey who were convicted in absentia, sentenced to eight years' imprisonment and were then abducted from Ghana, forcibly returned to Togo, held incommunicado and allegedly tortured. In its 1989 annual report, the Togolese Human Rights Commission discussed, in varying degrees, all four of these cases.
The State Department's report, after neglecting to discuss these specific cases, states that reports of beatings of detainees have dropped to a few isolated cases. It also seems to contradict itself when in the same paragraph it notes that "conditions have probably
222
Togo
not improved significantly for detainees in rural areas or for detainees in military facilities." In addition, the report neglects to mention that although Togo has ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention against Torture, the government still does not have a law explicitly prohibiting torture.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile, the report attributes long pre-trial detentions to a shortage of judicial personnel. This statement is misleading. The report should specify that it is referring here to non-political prisoners, since it states earlier that political prisoners are held indefinitely without trial as a policy. In that section, there is a statement that the number of political detainees was unknown but was believed to be small. Again, the report does not explain who believes the number to be small and on what evidence. Considering that the State Department neglected to report some significant cases, its belief that the number of political detainees is small is not necessarily accurate.
The section dealing with emigration generally provides correct information, but both paragraphs begin with deceptively positive sentences. The statement that "Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees," glosses over the fact that the Togolese government has a practice of providing certain governments with information on their political refugees and also of forcibly returning political refugees to their countries of origin. In 1987, the State Department reported that there is "an informal agreement between the Governments of Togo, Benin, Ghana, and Burkina Faso," but the 1989 report simply states that, "some refugees from countries with which Togo enjoys good relations are reluctant to register with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for fear that their government will receive information about them," without explaining the basis for that fear. In addition, the use of the term "good relations" implies that the practice of providing information about refugees and forcibly returning them is acceptable under these circumstances. Even if this were so, Togo has a long history of extremely tense relations with both Ghana and Benin. Togolese practice violates provisions of the UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and should have been so highlighted and addressed.
Furthermore, this section states that, "[ejxcept for the few political exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other countries may return at will." The 1988 arrest and detention of Jacob Dessen Lawson --a Togolese expatriate living in France who was arrested during a visit to Togo, held 11 days and allegedly tortured -- is surely
223
Togo
instructive. It certainly must deter the return of other exiles and thus contradicts the State Department's assertion. While the Togolese government claimed that Mr. Lawson was involved in opposition activities, he was never tried or convicted of any crime and he was in Togo to attend his father's funeral.
Although both the 1988 and the 1987 reports gave descriptions of substandard prison conditions, the 1989 report fails to describe prison conditions at all. The 1987 and 1988 reports stated that prison conditions in Togo are "poor — unsanitary, with improper lighting and ventilation, and seriously inadequate food and medical care." The
1988	report went on to explain that since relatives of prisoners provided much of the prisoners' food, clothing and linen, prisoners without relatives nearby, such as the 18% of prisoners who are from foreign countries, "suffer from severe malnutrition." Prison conditions did not improve in 1989 and the report should have said so. The report's omission is particularly glaring in light of the fact that in
1989	the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was permitted to visit non-military prisons and subsequently provided the Togolese government with a report, as is its practice. In addition, the ICRC was permitted to visit military prisons and "prisoners detained for security reasons." The reports on these visits were also submitted to the Togolese government.
The section on discrimination based on sex begins with a deceptively optimistic description of the laws protecting women from discrimination. While the laws do promise women many rights, the report fails to point out that the government makes no effort to enforce these rights and in many cases they go unenforced. Furthermore, even the laws do not ensure that in case of a woman's death, her children will have access to her pension funds. While the State Department acknowledges this problem, it is buried in the middle of a section that begins with the statement, "Togolese women have formal equality with men under the law. . . ."
The report acknowledges the authoritarianism of President Eyadema's one-party state. It describes the absolute control the president exercises over the press and the use of the judicial system to enforce his absolute rule. Nevertheless, there are flaws in this year's report. Despite the formation of the Togolese Human Rights Commission, the State Department must remain vigilant in monitoring human rights abuses in Togo, particularly with regard to the arrest, detention and treatment of political prisoners and the treatment of political refugees. The State Department should monitor the
224
Togo
effectiveness and independence of the Commission and not allow the government to use the Commission to deflect criticism of Togo's human rights practices.
225
