 TOGO
 In 1991 rapidly escalating demands for political and economic
 change dramatically altered Togo's political system. In power
 for 24 years, Gnassingbe Eyadema was still President at the end
 of the year but with greatly reduced de jure authority as the
 National Conference, which met in July and August, installed a
 new transitional Government, headed by Prime Minister Joseph
 Kokou Koffigoh, with the objective of establishing a
 democratic, multiparty system. The Conference's 971 members
 were nominated by the Government, opposition political parties,
 traditional elites, socioprofessional groups, and geographic
 regions.
 Among the Conference's many actions was the adoption of an
 interim Constitution which established the Prime Minister as
 Head of Government and in charge of the military. The
 Constitution also incorporated many fundamental rights,
 including freedom of speech, assembly, and association. It
 placed ultimate power in a legislative body--the High Council
 of the Republic--and created an independent judiciary. The
 final delineation of powers between the President and Prime
 Minister remained to be determined. The Conference set a
 timetable for a constitutional referendum and presidential and
 legislative elections for the period from February to June 1992.
 The transition to a multiparty democratic system was thrown
 into turmoil by actions of the military in October and again in
 November and December. In October elements of the military,
 including the Presidential Guard, occupied the radio station
 and attempted to kidnap Prime Minister Koffigoh. At least
 five, and probably more, civilians were killed in the first
 takeover of the radio station on October 1. Following the
 attack on the Prime Minister, unarmed civilian militias
 attacked and looted the houses of supporters of President
 Eyadema.
 On November 28, elements of the Togolese army again took over
 the radio station, surrounded the Prime Minister's office, and
 randomly shot civilians. On December 3, after the troops
 physically attacked his offices, the Prime Minister surrendered
 and was taken unharmed to the President's residence. Many
 Togolese believe that President Eyadema played a role in the
 military uprisings, even though he denies it and worked on all
 three occasions to restore calm.
 Prime Minister Koffigoh announced and the High Council of the
 Republic approved a 23-member government of national unity on
 December 30. Thirteen members of the previous government were
 retained, and three members of President Eyadema's former
 government party, the Rassemblement du Peuple Togalaise (RPT),
 were added along with two human rights advocates.
 The state security apparatus--the armed forces, the National
 Police (Surete), and the Gendarmerie--were called upon
 frequently by the Eyadema Government in the first 6 months of
 1991. The National Human Rights Commission (CNDH) estimated
 that 100 people were killed and 1,000 injured in the 10 months
 of demonstrations and strikes before the Conference began.
 With rare exceptions, security forces respected orders given by
 President Eyadema not to use live ammunition against
 demonstrators but still used with deadly effect tear gas,
 concussion grenades, and wooden clubs. Members of the Togolese
 army are believed to be responsible for most of the deaths of
 28 civilians whose bodies were recovered from a Lome lagoon in
 April. Neighborhood militias, organized to counter possible
 
 
 TOGO
 military action against the civilian population before the
 National Conference, in some cases turned into vigilante groups
 following the Conference in the absence of-an effective police
 presence. By the end of 1991, they were believed to have
 killed in Lome as many as 30 persons suspected of theft and
 other crimes.
 Togo has an annual per capita gross domestic product of under
 $500. Approximately 80 percent of its 3.4 million people are
 engaged in subsistence agriculture, but Togo also has a lively
 commercial sector. Togo's economy stagnated in 1990 and 1991
 due to uncertainty over the political situation as well as
 inadequate rainfall and declining terms of trade for its
 principal exports, coffee, cocoa, and cotton.
 The Eyadema 'regime committed serious human rights abuses as it
 attempted to counter the rising public demands for change.
 These abuses included the excessive use of force by security
 forces, resulting in many deaths, and the harassment of
 government critics. There were also abuses by those
 demonstrating against the regime, including attacks on police
 facilities and vehicles, individual policemen and soldiers, and
 general destruction of property. The President gradually made
 concessions to the opposing forces, notably in April with the
 promulgation of a political party charter and a general amnesty
 and subsequently in June by cooperating with the convening of
 the National Conference. Following the announcement of the
 political party charter, 22 parties were registered, and
 several hundredpolitical opponents of the Eyadema Government
 returned to Togo. By midyear, Togo's human rights situation
 had improved significantly with the installation of the
 transitional Government and institution of a democratic interim
 Constitution.' The National Conference brought out the
 extensiVe human rights violations committed in the past under
 the Eyadema regime. For example, witnesses asserted that 109
 persons had died from torture over a period of years in the
 prison at D'Agombio. An important task facing the new
 Government in 1992 will be to change the laws and practices
 that permitted the previous extensive human rights abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 'Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other-Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political killing, but there were
 numerous instances of extrajudicial killings. As demands for
 political change and economic betterment escalated in 1991, the
 number and severity of clashes between 'security forces and
 opponents of the Government increased and spread throughout the
 country. The most serious disturbances occurred in Lome, Keve,
 Sokode, Tsevie, Atakpame, Kpalime, Aneho, Notse, Vogan, and
 Dapaong.- With the exception of President Eyadema's home
 region, few areas of the country were left untouched by
 violence. The CNDH informed the National Conference that 100
 were killed and 1,000 injured in the disturbances which began
 in October 1990 and continued through June 1991. The CNDH has
 accounted for 74 of the deaths by name or cause of death.
 Prior to November 1991, the security forces repeatedly used
 excessive force in countering demonstrations for political
 reform. In March the security forces disrupted the
 opposition's first major rally and touched off violent
 
 
 416
 TOGO
 disturbances, in which at least two persons were killed,
 including a policeman. Shots fired by Presidential Guard
 members resulted in at least two deaths in Lome on April 5, and
 another fatality in Keve during an April demonstration was
 caused by nervous gendarmes firing into a hostile crowd.
 Nearly all other casualties apparently occurred as a result of
 beatings and the indiscriminate use of tear gas and concussion
 grenades.
 On April 11, following several days of violent clashes between
 demonstrators and security forces, 28 bodies, including two
 children and a pregnant woman, were recovered by local
 residents from a lagoon in the Be section of Lome. Two
 international human rights groups and an Eyadema government-
 appointed commission initiated inquiries, but had not reported
 by year's end. The CNDH unanimously concluded that the army
 was responsible for the deaths. Subsequently, two members of
 the military publicly admitted their participation in the
 deaths. According to the CNDH's report, security forces
 clashed with government opponents forcing many people
 (demonstrators and bystanders alike) off a narrow bridge into
 the shallow lagoon. Deaths resulted from beatings, close-range
 explosions of tear-gas and concussion grenades, and drowning.
 Other deaths were attributed to beatings by security forces at
 other locations in Lome with the corpses later deposited in the
 lagoon. The President continues to deny any wrongdoing by the
 military.
 Violent clashes took place on the campuses of the University of
 Benin and the Technical Lycee on March 12-14. Rival student
 and ethnic groups clashed with each other and with security
 forces. Traditional weapons--clubs, bows and arrows, and
 machetes--were used in the melees which left at least 4
 students dead and countless injured. On November 28, after
 surrounding the office of the Prime Minister and taking over
 the radio station, soldiers opened fire on civilians in various
 neighborhoods of Lome. According to hospital reports, 19
 civilians were kiIled and 54 seriously injured; there were
 additional unreported casualties.
 b. Disappearance
 No disappearances were reported during 1991. Dindigoue Nayone,
 reported missing after speaking out against the Government
 during a May 1990 student union meeting, returned to Togo in
 April from Chad. His welfare and whereabouts was an issue with
 striking university students. His return was facilitated by
 the French and Togolese Governments and .the CNDH. He remained
 in protective custody for several months after his return,
 reportedly at his own request, but met frequently with
 journalists and human rights activists.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reported incidents of torture in 1991. However,
 delegates to the National Conference, as well as witnesses
 organized by the CNDH, presented extensive and detailed
 accounts of torture administered during the past 24 years of
 the Eyadema Government at military camps and prisons,
 especially at Yade (Otadi), Mandouri, D'Agombio (Kaza), and
 Mango. The majority of those tortured were held for political
 offenses or on charges of sorcery. Witnesses asserted that 109
 persons had died from torture during incarceration at
 D'Agombio. Most, but not all, of the deaths appeared to have
 
 
 TOGO
 occurred prior to 1986. Practices included beatings, forced
 labor, sexual abuse, denial of food and water, drowning, and
 exposure to poisonous insects and snakes. Punishment of
 officials for human rights abuses under the Eyadema Government
 was rare. The National Conference demanded that offenders be
 held accountable, but no action had been taken by year's end.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh in 1991 with serious
 overcrowding and inadequate food and medical care.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under current Togolese law, which has 'not yet been amended by
 the new Government, persons arrested may be held incommunicado
 without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-hour
 extension if the case is deemed serious or complex. In
 practice, most detentions conform to this provision. Although
 persons accused of "political crimes," such as defaming-the
 President, may be arrested and detained without limit, such
 action was not taken during 1991. Prefects (governorsY have de
 facto authority to order detention at will, a power which was
 exercised in some areas against antigovernment demonstrators..
 Security officers also haveunrestricted arrest and detention
 powers in.cases involving national security.
 Owing more to a shortage of qualified judicial personnel than
 intent to evade required judicial procedures, a substantial
 number of nonpolitical prisoners are held for long periods of
 time--in some cases 6 months or more--before being brought to
 trial.
 The Eyadema Government frequently used, as a harassment
 technique. both arbitrary arrest and intensive interrogation 6f
 journalists and others (see Section 2.a.Y. For example, in
 mid-January, Eassirou Ayeva, a journalist with the government
 newspaper, representing Sokode citizens resident in Lome, sent
 a letter to the independent newspapers explaining why his
 organization believed that Sokode-was underdeveloped.  He was
 held by gendarmes for about 48 hours'for questioning, then
 released.
 A general amnesty covering political acts, a key opposition-
 demand, was promulgated on April 12. Several hundred opponents
 of the Eyadema regime returned from self-imposed exile, some
 with the cooperation of the CNDR, and many participated in the
 National Conference. A government decision to arrest, under
 defamation laws, Andoch Bonin, an outspoker Eyadema critic,
 following his return under the amnesty was reversed after the
 National Conference-expressed its opposition, and after the-
 general public threatened- civil unrest.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Under Eyadema the judiciary was not independent of the
 executive, and the President intervened repeatedly- in the
 judicial process (see Section 2.a.). The interim-Constitution
 declares the judicial system independent of the executive apd
 legislative branches. It remains, therefore, to be seen what
 practical effect this constitutional provision will have for.
 the conduct of justice in Togo.
 The judicial. system employsboth African traditional law and
 the Napoleonic Code in trying: criminal and civil cases. The
 Supreme Court stands at the apex of the Napoleonic court
 system. The criminal process begins with pretrial
 
 
 418
 TOGO
 investigation by a special judge who examines the adequacy of
 the evidence and decides on bail. The number of judges is
 inadequate, but the court system functions well for most
 routine cases. Trials are open to the public, and judicial
 procedures are respected. Defendants have the right to
 counsel, and lower court decisions may be appealed to two
 higher courts. In rural areas, the village chief or council of
 elders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who
 reject the traditional ruling may take their cases to the
 regular court system, which is the starting point for cases in
 urban areas.
 Under statutes which remain in effect but unused, procedural
 safeguards for fair trial are lacking in security and political
 cases. Special courts handle cases related to public security
 (State Security Court), embezzlement of public funds (Tribunal
 for Recovery of Public Funds), and violent crimes (Court of
 Assizes). The State Security Court has not convened in 6
 years. Persons who embezzle large sums generally remain in
 jail until the money is repaid.
 Under the general amnesty, the Government released 19 persons
 convicted of participation in the 1986 coup/invasion attempt.
 Seven of the 19 had received death sentences and another 3 life
 imprisonment. At the end of the year, there were no political
 prisoners or detainees being held.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In criminal cases, searches of private residences are
 authorized by a judge or senior police official. In political
 and national security cases, the security forces need no prior
 authorization. In the months preceding the National
 Conference, security forces routinely and randomly entered
 residential compounds without search warrants. The new
 Government has ended the former practice of opening mail and
 monitoring telephones. During the transition, the police and
 gendarmerie continue to maintain domestic intelligence
 services, but they are no longer focused on the political
 opposition. The transitional Government's efforts to eliminate
 the domestic activities of military intelligence have not been
 completely successful.
 According to credible reports, members of the army in civilian
 clothes set fire to the residence and automobiles of opposition
 leader Yao Agboyibo on March 16 following the disturbances.
 Mrs. Agboyibo was manhandled, but she and her children were
 allowed to leave before the house was burned. A residence
 belonging to opposition leader Edem Kodjo was burned on
 December 3. No one was injured.
 The practice since 1974 of requiring all persons to have
 Togolese or Muslim first names in order to qualify for
 government benefits was abandoned. Many people, including the
 Prime Minister, have reverted to their Christian names.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While Togo achieved freedom of speech and of the press in 1991,
 the military rebellion in November and December led to
 harassment of the independent press. The independent press
 expanded from two papers in early 1990 to approximately 26 at
 
 
 419
 TOGO
 the end of 1991. The majority were weekly or biweekly. In
 all, over 30 independent newspapers appeared in 1991, but a
 number suspended publication due to financial and market
 realities. The two radio stations, one televisiqn station, and
 one newspaper remain government owned.
 In the official media, coverage of local political developments
 became 'considerably more balanced after the start of the
 National Conference. Beginning in April, a weekly program
 featured government representatives and leading members of the
 opposition debating freely on government television. Radio and
 television provided live coverage of almost all of the National
 .Conference proceedings.
 Prior to midyear, the Eyadema Government took steps to limit
 press freedom. In late 1990, the Government introduded a new
 press code which covered all printed materials destined .to be
 distributed, sold, or rented, as well as records, audio and
 video-cassettes, photographs,. and films. The code introduced
 numerous fines and penalties for journalists, editors,
 printers, and vendors if a published article was found by court
 officials to be untrue or defamin4.
 While the Government presented the code as a long overdue
 updating of French law, it was used twice in January, when
 press articles were considered as antigovernment. In one case,
 Koffi Kpe Homawoo, editor of Courrier du Golfe, was questioned
 extensively about articles written about the army and the
 .government newspaper. The charges against him were dropped on
 the day before the scheduled trial. "A second editor, Komi
 Gabriel Agah, of Forum Hebdo, was suimnoned for 2. days of
 questioning about two seri'es of articles, one alleging, military
 brutality and the second about underdevelbpment in 'a "regiona"
 capital. That investigation was later suspended-  Finally,
 approximately 1,000 copies of Forum Hebdo were seized, without
 the authorizations required by law, although additional copies
 were distributed the next day with difficulty.
 In  early-April, the'Eya dema .Governmenr again used the new code,
 to file charges against Kangni Foly,- editor of La-,Parole, for
 an editorial which discussed the President's 61stribution lof
 pub-lic funds. 'Charges were again drond* on the day before the
 trial.
 Uniformed men ransacked the offices of Forum Hebdo on December
 9, following distribution of its postrebellion editior.
 Employees were injured by the 'intruders and by their efforts to
 escape the two-story building. - Sidewalk vendors of. the paper
 were also reportedly harassed by the military.
 Teachers and students were tr the forefront of efforts to
 expand freedom: of association and- expressidr as- well as to
 secure more general political reform. Concerns about academie
 freedom were not central to campus protests- However, some
 professors expressed reservations' about university
 self-censorship which developed as a result of disciplinary
 actions against professors who in previous years addressed
 human rights and other sensitive issues.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Associatidn
 Freedom of assembly and association, except for religious
 purposes, was tightly controlled i.n pre-1991 Togo. Permits
 were required for all nonreligious organizations and public
 gatherings. Only one political party, the government-sponsored
 
 
 TOGO
 Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais (RPT), was permitted. During
 early 1991, various human rights activists and organizations,
 without government authorization or challenge, held public
 meetings to publicize their organizations and to educate the
 public on various human rights topics.
 Government control was further eroded by students who formed
 action committees and organized strikes to press political and
 campus refbrms and by the formation of the Front of
 Associations for Renewal (FAR). FAR was one of three umbrella
 organizations of human rights organizations, political parties,
 and student groups which negotiated with the Government prior
 to the National Conference. Government attempts to prevent
 FAR's first public rally on March 16 resulted in a violent
 confrontation between the security forces and opponents of the
 Government.
 Following negotiations between FAR and the Government on March
 18, which resulted in the legalization of political parties,
 party meetings and scheduled public rallies were held without
 government interference. Opposition gioups held two large
 public meetings in the governmeni stadium in May and June, the
 latter in the midst of a general strike, with the Government's
 concurrence.
 The National Conference ended the automatic membership of ali
 Togolese in the former government political party, disbanded
 the party itself, and required that its assets be returned to
 the State. When the party was reconstituted. under the same
 name but complying with the terms of the Political Pariy
 Charter, it was banned by the High Council of the Republic. It
 was this banning which led to ethnic violence and the military
 rebellion against the transitional Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The interim Constitution provides for religious freedom. It
 remains unclear whether the transitional Government will
 enforce existing statutes that require all religious groups to
 qualify under one of seven categories listed by the Ministry of
 Interior. Upon obtaining Ministry permission, qualifying
 groups are then unrestricted in their religious practices.
 They may publish religious material, conduct services, and
 teach their faith. Non-Togolese clergy are welcome to reside
 in Togo, proselytize, and engage in other religious activities.
 The ehovah's Witnesses and several small apostolic/celestial
 groups in the past have been denied official permission to'
 practice their beliefs. While this has prevented these groups
 from publicized, open worship, in 1991 they continued to
 practice their faith in private.
 Local religiouq groups are free to maintain contacts with
 coreligionists in other countries. There are no restrictions
 on travel for religious purposes. All official religious
 observances are ecumenical in nature, and the Government does
 not favor any specific religion. Membership in authorized
 religious groups has no bearing on civil service promotions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement (including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, the right to change residence or workplace, and the
 right to return to the country) is generally allowed. In the
 past, in issuing-passports and visas, the Government controlled
 
 
 TOGO
 the emigration of professional Togolese and kept known
 political dissidents under scrutiny. Since the advent of the
 transitional Government, there has been a relaxation of these
 controls.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 recognized some 433 refugees in Togo on June 30, 1991, although
 the actual number is undoubtedly higher. In the past, the
 Government kept a close watch on political refugees, and
 refugees from countries with which Togo enjoys good'relations
 were reluctant to register with the UNHCR for fear that the
 Togolese Government would provide their governments-with
 information about them.
 Section 3- Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens'
 to Change Their Government
 Although people did not use the electoral process, in 1991 they
 changed their government from a one-party state to A multiparty
 state under the transition Government. President Eyadema and
 his party, the RPT, still remained forces on the scene, but
 throughout the year they had to make concessions to growing
 opposition forces supported by public opinion,., This
 transformation was accomplished after 10 months of
 negotiations, strikes, large demonstrations, and street
 violence. The National Conference's 971 members, nominated by
 the Government, opposition political parties, traditional
 elites, socioprofessional groups, and geographic regions,
 adopted the interim Constitution, elected an interim Prime
 Minister and Legislative Assembly, and scheduled a '
 constitutional referendum and legislative and presidential
 elections for the period between February and June 1992.
 The interim Constitution. provides for basic political and human-
 rights, includin4 freedoms of expression, assembly, speech, and
 religion. A constitutional drafting committee was announced in
 mid-October. It will write a new permanent constitution to be
 submitted to the people. The political party charter enacted
 in April after negotiations between the Government and
 opposition- forces also remains in effect. The interim
 Constitution greatly reduces the power of the President*,
 transfering most of his previous powers to the transition
 Prime Minister, who is Head of Government and head of the'
 military forces. The Legislative Assembly during this period
 is responsible for implementation of the decisions of the
 National Conference.
 The role and loyalty of the-military remained unclear at year's
 end, but it generally supported the President throughout 1991.
 The key cadres are from the President's northern region.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and-
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Eyadema Government in 1987 approved and facilitated the
 establishment of the National Human Rights Commission (CNDH to
 investigate reports of human rights abuses. During 1991 the
 CNDH acted virtually independently in investigating charges of
 abuses by government agents, including the lagoon deaths and
 other killings. It assisted in the return of Dindigoue Nayone
 (see Section l.b.) and several former regime opponents under
 the general amnesty. The CNDH also organized a presentation to
 the National Conference to highlight human rights abuses during
 the Eyadema regime.
 
 
 422
 TOGO
 Activists reported that during the CNDH's early years some
 people were deterred from filing complaints by government
 .pressure or fear of harassment.
 Other independent human rights organizations proliferated in
 early 1991, both as human rights watchdogs and as
 protopolitical parties before the adoption of the political
 parties charter. International human rights organizations have
 communicated directly with the CNDH and the Human Rights League
 concerning individual cases.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Beforb President Eyadema took power in 1967, southern ethnic
 groups dominated Togo. A northerner, President Eyadema made a
 serious effort to integrate all ethnic groups into the
 political structure. The important exception was the security
 forces, -which are still dominated by northern ethnic groups.
 Commerce and the professions are the preserve of'southerners.
 Ethnic rivalries, dating from precolonial times, have been
 exacerbated by the civil unrest of the preconference period and
 by the subsequent lack of effective law enforcement. During
 the spring, threats against northerners residing in both rural
 and urban areas of the south resulted in some injuries,
 particularly in the Kpalime area, and in the decision of large
 numbers of northerners to return to their native area. In the
 north, two small groups attacked one another in October,
 leading to 28 deaths and over 100 serious injuries. There was
 a report of ethnic violence at Aneho, near the border with
 Benin. Much of the pro- and anti-Eyadema violence in October
 also had an ethnic cast, as northerners tended to support the
 President while southerners led the fight against him. Most
 political parties, except for the former government party, are
 dominated by southerners.
 Togolese women have formal equality with men under the law, and
 women's economic and social rights are set forth in the Family
 Code adopted in early 1980. While this Code guarantees various
 women's rights, including maternity leave benefits, in
 practice, women continue to be subjected to discrimination,
 especially in education, pension benefits, and traditional
 law. Far fewer women than men receive university education,
 and the number of women graduates from secondary schools is
 low. In the urban economic sphere, women dominate both local
 market activities and commerce with Togo's neighbors, often
 amassing considerable wealth in the process.
 However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas leave women
 with little time for anything other than taxing domestic and
 agricultural field work. Unlike civil law, customary or
 traditional law--which affects the vast majority of
 women--discriminates against women, e.g., it gives all property
 to the male in the event of separation or divorce. The new
 Government has pledged that it will review and strengthen the
 Family Code.
 Women participated in the political changes through membership
 in associations and political parties, teachers' unions, and
 protest groups. Only 20 to 25 women were delegates to the
 National Conference, and 5 are in the 79-member interim
 Legislative Assembly. One woman has been appointed as a
 minister in the transitional Government.
 
 
 428
 TOGO
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs, but its
 extent is not known, as it rarely comes tor public attention,
 including in the press. Mechanisms exist within both the
 traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for
 redress, but the police rarely intervene in domestic violence
 cases. Female circumcision is practiced by a few northern
 ethnic groups but is gradually diminishing. While the
 Government has undertaken a campaign to make women throughout
 Togo aware of their expanded opportunities under the new Family
 Code, it has not specifically addressed the issue of violence
 against women or female circumcision. A government-sponsored
 national women's organization publicized women's health,
 educational, and welfare issues, and private groups have now
 been formed to address similar concerns.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Prior to 1991, the right of association was effectively limited
 by the requirement that all workers pay dues to the National
 Confederation of Togolese Workers .(CNTT), which was formerly
 associated with the ruling party. This gave the CNTT a de
 facto monopoly on the labor movement, although trade unions
 could and did exist outside of the CNTT. In August the
 National Conference suspended the automatic withholding of CNTT
 dues for all workers, which had been criticized for years by
 the International Labor Organization, and it froze-CNTT's
 assets. A number of trade unions left the CNTT, some of which'
 have affiliated with two new federations.: The Labor Federation
 of Togolese Workers (CSTT) and the National Union of
 Independent Syndicates (UNSIT).
 Strikes were commonplace in 1991. Workers generally won
 significant pay raises and other concessions. Many of the
 strikes were in support of political reform. While some of the
 strikes did not comply with applicable laws, the Government did
 not prosecute strikers, although some people were convicted of
 charges related to strike-rerated violence. They were later
 pardoned.
 The various federations-and unions are free to associate with
 international labor groups.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain CoIlectively
 The Labor Code guarantees workers the- right to organize and
 bargain collectively The CNTT had T role in cnllective
 bargaininqwhen-it was the de- facto monopoly labor federation,
 but it acted more as a spokesman for labor interests within the
 Government and party than asT an independent labor fed-eratio-.
 In 1991 the- CNTT, as well as the newly createff labor
 federations and the independent unions, took more independent
 negotiating stances-. Collective bargaining took place in a
 number of sectors throughout the year.
 While the interim Constitution is silent on worker rights, the
 1974 Labor Code prohibit antiunion discrimination.
 A law allowing the establishment of export processing-zones
 (EPZ's) was enacted in late 1989. A number of companies have
 received EPZ status, and about a dozen have begun operations.
 The EPZ law provides exemptions from some provisions of
 Togolese labor law, notably the regulations on hiring and
 
 
 424
 TOGO
 firing workers. Employees of EPZ firms may not enjoy the same
 protection'against antiunion discrimination as do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Although the law is silent on the question, forced or
 compulsory labor does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial and
 technical employment require a minimum age of 18. These age
 requirements are generally enforced in the formal sector in
 urban areas by inspectors from the Ministry of Labor. However,
 in the urban informal sector and in rural areas even very young
 children traditionally help their families.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wages are set by the Government for different
 categories. Workers cannot maintain a decent standard of
 living at these wages and must often iupplement their incomes
 through second jobs or subsistence farming.
 Labor practices are regulated by the Labor Code. The Code
 stipulates that there should be equal pay for equal work
 regardless of sex, and this provision is generally observed in
 the formal sector. Working hours of all employees in any
 enterprise. except for agricultural enterprises, must not
 normally exceed 40 hours per week; at least one period of 24
 hours of rest per week is compulsory; and workers must receive
 30 days of paid leave each year. Enforcenient is weak and these
 provisions are not universally respected, however.
 Health and safety standards in the workplace are determined by
 a technical consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor,
 which may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 conditions. In practice, the Ministry's enforcement of the
 various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Larger
 enterprises are required to provide medical services for their
 employees and usually attempt to respect occupational health
 and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
 
 
 425
