 TOGO
 Togo is a one-party, authoritarian state. The economy is a
 mixture of government and private enterprise. Resources are
 limited. The Government places national unity and economic
 development over individual political and civil liberties.
 President Eyadema has developed a nationalist philosophy to
 unify an ethnically diverse population and has strongly
 promoted country-wide economic and social development.
 Political activities outside the sole political party are
 suppressed. Eyadema and his party's slate of national
 assembly delegates were "elected" on December 30, 1979,
 under a new constitution approved in a referendum on
 the same day. Women and minorities are encouraged to take
 an active role in economic and political life. Legislation
 has been by decree since 1967.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The Togolese authorities are specifically enjoined by the
 President from torturing detainees. Some cases of unautho-
 rized torture have probably occurred. Allegations that
 some detainees have been tortured by electric shock cannot be
 confirmed. Trial defendants sometimes claim that their
 confessions to the police were coerced. Such statements are
 difficult to confirm but are taken into account during the
 trial procedure.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Amnesty International reported in July 1979 that persons
 detained in connection with the plot to assassinate the
 president were subjected to rough treatment and extremely
 difficult conditions of detention. One Western corres-
 pondent, however, who visited the places of detention,
 claimed he saw no evidence of rough treatment and did not
 describe the conditions as extremely difficult. The pres-
 ident commuted the death sentences of two persons convicted
 in connection with the plot. The death penalty in Togo
 has been applied to persons convicted of violent homicide.
 Prison conditions reflect the poverty of the country, and
 detainees are sometimes subjected to harsh treatment.
 Families are allowed to visit prisoners and to provide food.
 Adequate food, sanitation and medical care are provided at
 Lome's main detention facility.
 c. Arbitrary Arrests or Imprisonment
 In mid-January 1980 the Government of Togo announced release
 of 34 of 45 political prisoners but did not identify any of
 the persons involved. The Government sometimes detains
 individuals administratively for activities it considers
 corrupt or harmful to national unity and security. Such
 detentions are usually brief but they have no fixed term.
 The Government usually does not publicize arrests. The
 Togolese legal system does not have habeas corpus.
 
 
 211
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Virtually all defendants are tried publicly under a legal
 system closely modeled on the French. Trials are sometimes
 reported in the press in detail and are often well attended.
 All defendants are entitled to counsel. Counsel is appointed
 by the Government if the defendant cannot afford the cost.
 The attorney is accorded permission to see the defendant
 in prison. Private discussions between counsel and defen-
 dant are allowed. Defendants and counsel are formally
 notified of charges in writing. Special courts (state
 security, embezzlement of public funds, violent crimes)
 observe essentially the same standards of justice as regular
 courts.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Authorization by a judge or police official is normally
 required for physical searches of private residences in
 both civil and criminal cases, although searches with-
 out formal authorization are permitted in some cases.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 The state owns major industries and controls natural re-
 sources. The private sector operates primarily in commerce
 and services. Togo depends heavily on phosphate, cocoa and
 coffee exports. The Overseas Development Council ranks Togo
 among the poorest of countries. From 75 to 80 percent of the
 population lives in rural areas. Salaried workers constitute
 only 10 percent of the labor force. Per capita income in the
 rural areas is only $100 compared to a national average of
 $300.
 In recent years Togo has concentrated on rapid economic
 development in such areas as tourism, infrastructure and
 industry. This concentration has diverted resources from
 projects more directly and immediately beneficial to the
 poor majority. Still, Togo devotes considerable resources
 and is giving increasing attention to the basic needs of the
 poor. All major cities are linked by good roads and have
 been furnished with electricity and running water. In the
 1979 operating budget, the ministries concerned with educa-
 tion, health and agriculture received 42 percent of all
 individual ministerial allocations. Togo has given the
 highest priority in its third five-year development plan
 (1976-1980) to providing water resources. In the 1979 in-
 vestment budget, rural development is allocated 34 percent of
 total investment, and 27 percent of the investment budget is
 devoted to providing funds for key projects in agriculture,
 feeder road construction and education. Prices paid to the
 farmer for agricultural products have been increased as much
 as 70 percent since 1974, and the Government has undertaken
 major agricultural programs for increasing cotton, cocoa and
 coffee production by its small farmers.
 Although the literacy rate may be as low as 15 percent,
 some 98 percent of Togo's school age children are receiv-
 ing a free primary school education. Many schools have
 been built in rural areas. A major effort is underway
 to encourage girls to attend school. The Government has
 
 
 212
 
 also increased the number of technically-oriented schools and
 is currently constructing an Institute of Agronomy in the
 poor north.
 Togo has also undertaken efforts to bring potable water,
 electrification and agricultural development to the poorer
 and, until recently, neglected northern part of the country.
 The majority of Togolese now have access to limited pre-
 ventive health care by paramedics. The Government is working
 with foreign donors to provide low-cost housing infras-
 tructure, such as water, power, and sewage facilities for
 urban dwellers.
 The consumer price index rose only 1.4 percent in 1978
 for the average Togolese family. Numerous basic staples are
 subject to Government price controls and subsidies. Follow-
 ing recent petroleum price increases, the Government set the
 price of kerosene, which is widely used by the poor for fuel,
 at a uniform rate throughout the country.
 Taxes for salaried workers are withheld. Non-salaried
 individuals are taxed on the basis of declared income. In an
 effort to ensure that non-salaried workers pay an adequate
 share of taxes, the 1979 budget added and refined a number of
 indirect taxes applying to non-salaried market women, pro-
 fessionals, and people in services. The tax system is
 progressive, and appears to be administered in such a way so
 as to minimize the tax burden on lower-income groups.
 In 1974, the Government instituted a five-year land reform
 program which has progressed slowly. The goals of the
 program are to increase agricultural production, redistribute
 unused land and slow urban migration. The basic tenet of the
 program is that one must utilize the land or risk losing it.
 In 1978-79, Government officials undertook an extensive
 education campaign designed to explain the goals of the
 program and to convince landowners of the benefits of coop-
 eration with the reform. Within the context of land reform
 and the Government's right of eminent domain, which provides
 for compensation, private property rights are observed.
 President Eyadema has endeavored to reduce traditional
 disparities of wealth and privilege among regional and ethnic
 groups. A key concept of the national party is the elimi-
 nation of discrimination based on either tribalism or region-
 alism. In an effort to remedy past disparities, members
 of many ethnic groups have been placed in positions of
 responsibility.
 The Government's strong opposition to corruption is apparent
 in numerous cases of arrest and prosecution of alleged
 offenders. In 1979 the Government strongly denounced the
 dishonesty of certain traditional chiefs who exercise their
 authority for personal gain. A decree was widely published
 listing the maximum fees traditional chiefs can charge for
 basic services. Bureaucratic corruption does not appear to be
 widespread, and the benefits of Government programs which
 emphasize basic human needs evidently reach the poor majority.
 
 
 213
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 Freedom of speech and assembly are limited. Freedom of
 religion is respected for major religious groups, but the
 Government has suppressed many sects. A free press does not
 exist. The press is Government controlled and does not
 allow publication or circulation or material criticizing its
 policies or personalities. Authorities occasionally confis-
 cate issues of foreign magazines containing articles con-
 sidered to be critical of the Government.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel and
 emigration, is allowed with few exceptions. Travel by
 individuals who have allegedly posed a threat to national
 security is curtailed.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Togo has an authoritarian government. All legislation
 is by decree. Meetings of the single political party at
 various levels frequently serve as a consultative process
 in the formation of legislation. The party's nominees
 ran without opposition in an election December 30, 1979.
 The voters also approved a new constitution on the same
 day. Within the single party system, active participants
 may express their views on such issues as the functioning
 of the Government and its officials. An active role in
 party leadership is reserved to those who have shown some
 leadership ability and support party objectives.
 Women have not traditionally had a role equal to that of men
 in the.political process, but the Government is encouraging
 greater participation by women. There are currently four
 women on the 22-member central committee of the Party. The
 Minister for Social Affairs and Women's Promotion is a
 woman.
 In Togo, women's rights include the right to own property,
 control all money earned and receive maternity leave bene-
 fits. Women participate actively in the labor union movement
 through the National Women's Labor Union (UNFT) and have
 developed agricultural and craft cooperatives. Women domi-
 nate commerce in the market place and can amass considerable
 fortunes in trading. Women have also received a sizeable
 share of the Togolese Development Bank's loans to medium and
 small sized enterprises. Article 88 of the Labor Code states
 that there is equal pay for equal work, qualifications, and
 output whatever the sex of the employee.
 Women face obstacles to equality posed by religion, custom
 and traditional law. For example, civil law recognizes a
 woman's property rights, but customary law gives all property
 to the male in event of separation or divorce. Also econo-
 mic conditions in rural areas leave women little time for
 anything other than carrying water, finding firewood, caring
 
 
 214
 for the family, and raising food crops. To overcome tra-
 ditional obstacles to women's participation in political and
 social activity, the Government has undertaken a continuing
 campaign to make women aware of their expanded opportunities
 in modern Togolese society. Regional Government officials
 regularly exhort fathers to send their daughters to school.
 The Government's current program of developing water resources
 in rural areas will help to mitigate one of the most onerous
 burdens on rural woman..
 The one national labor union, the Confederation Nationale
 des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT), works to promote economic
 research, workers' education and labor cooperatives. The
 CNTT has the right to have a membership fee check-off
 system for salaried workers. The Union is controlled by
 the one national political party. Workers are protected
 by a labor code, minimum wage law, guarantees against
 termination without cause and a national social security
 system. The labor code establishes an elaborate mechanism
 for collective bargaining, arbitration and, as a last resort,
 the use of strikes. Some wage increases occur as a result of
 collective bargaining, but wage increases are generally the
 result of presidential decree and strikes are strongly
 discouraged. The CNTT has pushed for economic and social
 reform.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 The Togolese Government has not commented on the Togo section
 of Amnesty International's 1978 report which followed a late
 1977 visit to Togo by an Amnesty International representative
 at the invitation of the Togolese Government. Amnesty
 International in July 1979 expressed concern about Togolese
 Government actions against persons accused of plotting to
 assassinate the president. The Togolese Government denied
 Amnesty International's allegations and invited international
 observers to attend the trial. An Amnesty International
 representative accepted the Government's invitation and
 stayed for the duration of the judicial proceedings.
 
 
 215
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - NILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TOGO
 1977     1978      1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL .           4.2       4.2      5.1
 LOANS.......a.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS     TS....        4.2      '4.2      5.1
 AAID *....     ..               0.5      1.3      1.2
 LOANS..o..o.oo.o*            0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.o.o    Soo  ..      0.5       1.3      1o2
 (SECSUPPASSISTo)o..          0.0       0.0      0oO
 BoFOOD FOR PEACEE,**,..           2.6      1.4      2.7
 LOANS....ooo .....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTSNoT....oo.          2o6       1.4      2.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL..o.o*..             0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.o**.           0.0      00      0.0
 TITLE IITOTALOTAL..***          2o6       1.4      2.7
 E.RELIEF.ECDEV & WFPo           1.8      1.0      0.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,...            0.8      0.4      2.3
 COTHER ECON. ASSIST~o,           1.1      1.5      1.2
 LOANS*****,*******.          00       0.0      0.0
 GRANTSN...***   S*.        1.1       1.5      1.2
 CONTR. TO IFI...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS     . .               1.5      1.2
 OTHER*....*.o             0.0       00      0.0
 !I.MIL. ASSIST-TOTALo*.          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANSoo**o*s***....          0.0       0.0      0,0
 GRANTS     T..So*.S     0.0       0.0      0.0
 AoMAP GRANTS.    TSoooo       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FS*.            .0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEDTRNG****          0.0       0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS.    T**S*..      000       0.0      0.0
 IIITOTAL ECON. L MIL:.            4.2       4.2      5.1
 LOANS ,  .. ..* *. , *.o     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS *.... T.** S***       4.2       4.2      5.1
 OTHER US LOANS      S. .       0.0       3,.3     4.5
 EX-IM BANK LOANS...*.           00       3.3      4.5
 ALL  OTHER .. R. . ,        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978      1979     1946-79
 TOTAL*....o..      530     24.5      28.9    229.3
 IBRD                0.0      0.0       0.0      3o5
 IFC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                24.0      5.8      16.2     73.9
 1OB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB                8.8     11.9       9.7     39.3
 UNDP                0.3      3o4       3.0     22.4
 OTHER-UN            0.0      1.1       0.0      4.1
 EEC                19.9      2.3       0.0     86.1
 
 
 216
