 TOGO
 President Gnassingbe Eyadema has maintained firm control and
 molded Togo into an authoritarian, one-party state since
 seizing power in a military coup in 1967. In addition to
 serving as Head of Government, President Eyadema is Minister
 of Defense and Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and head of
 the only legal political party, the Rassemblement Du Peuple
 Togolais (RPT). While all Togolese are considered members of
 the RPT and are obligated to vote, only active party members
 can gain political office. The Eyadema Government rules by
 decrees and ordinances and considers its legal authority to be
 based on the Constitution of 1979 which was formally adopted
 by referendum. This Constitution provided for a National
 Assembly, which serves primarily as a consultative body.
 One-candidate presidential elections held every 7 years have
 confirmed a continuation of President Eyadema's rule. The
 President dominates all branches and functions of government.
 The Government's authority is reinforced through tight control
 over the organs of state security, the military, the National
 Police (Surete), and the Special Police (Gendarmerie). All
 these organs have internal security responsibilities.
 Approximately 80 percent of Togo's 3 million people are
 involved in subsistence agriculture. The country's economic
 prospects improved in 1988. As in 1987, excellent rains in
 1988 produced an abundant harvest in the south, but floods
 followed by drought have created a food shortage in the
 north. Foreign exchange earnings were still down due to low
 world prices for Togo's major exports, e.g., phosphates and
 cocoa. However, overall government revenues were up following
 Togo's successful conclusion of agreements with the
 International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the donor community. In
 addition, the Government's reform program has been taking
 effect, notably in introducing new fiscal policies aimed at
 regulating expenditures and ensuring a balanced budget for the
 first time in several years.
 Although human rights in Toga continued to be circumscribed,
 the Government in 1988 instituted a series of positive
 measures which increased public awareness of human rights.
 The independent Togolese Human Rights Commission, which was
 established in late 1987, was officially activated in February
 in a highly publicized conference presided over by President
 Eyadema. The President publicly declared his support for the
 Commission and its task and warned that the human rights
 abuses which exist in Togo must stop. With this high-level
 support, the Commission successfully started investigating
 individual cases" and conducted a campaign throughout Togo to
 educate Togolese about their rights'and the legal limitations
 on officials' powers. In April Togo hosted a United Nations-
 sponsored seminar on human rights in Africa. The conference
 was followed by a training seminar in Lome for Togolese
 security officials to sensitize them to human rights concerns
 and abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political killing
 There were no reports of political killings.
 
 
 380
 TOGO
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There is no specific Togolese law prohibiting torture, and in
 the past beating of male detainees was routine police
 procedure. With the intensive human rights campaign in 1988,
 however, members of the Togolese Human Rights Commission and
 attorneys report that the level of such treatment has
 dramatically decreased. Conditions have improved for persons
 held in civilian detention centers though less for persons
 detained in military prisons or the gendarmerie camp in Lome.
 Prison conditions are harsh. The prisons lack proper
 lighting, ventilation, and sanitation, and are seriously
 inadequate in food and medical care. Prison administration
 has generally been neglected. The situation commanded public
 attention in July when the prisoners in Lome's prison rioted
 to protest newly issued regulations limiting their sick
 leave. (The Prefect of Lome was relieved of his post by the
 President because he had ignored the signs of prison unrest.)
 Prisoners in civilian prisons are permitted family visits,
 since it is the family which usually has to assume
 responsibility for providing much of the prisoner's food,
 clothing, and linen. About 18 percent of the prison
 population is foreign (mostly Ghanaians and Nigerians), and
 those foreign prisoners who have no family members in Togo to
 supply extra food often suffer from severe malnutrition.
 In late 1987, the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) was permitted to visit all civilian prisons of Togo and
 was invited by the Government to return at its initiative.
 During these visits the ICRC members were allowed unrestricted
 access to civilian facilities and prisoners. Military prisons
 to date have remained closed to inspections as only military
 and paramilitary personnel are granted access to these
 facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, and Exile
 The President restored in 1987 the 48-hour limit on the length
 of time a person may be held incommunicado without charge,
 with an additional 48-hour extension if the case is deemed
 serious or complex. Most arrests and detentions in 1988
 followed this 48-hour charge requirement.
 However, persons accused of "political crimes," such as
 defaming the Government or person of the President, can be
 arrested and detained without regard to prescribed legal
 limitations, including the 48-hour charge regulation. Such
 persons have been routinely charged as "administrative
 detainees;" a status which does not permit recourse to normal
 legal remedies.
 In practice, a substantial number of prisoners, both political
 and nonpolitical, are held for long periods of time--in some
 cases 6 months or more--before being br6ught to trial, owing
 to a shortage of judicial personnel and lack of enforcement of
 judicial procedures. Sometimes these long detentions are by
 design and sometimes through administrative-negligence. One
 such case involved a Burkina Faso citizen whose file was lost
 
 
 381
 TOGO
 by the prison. (When the case was brought to the personal
 attention of the President, the prisoner was released.) A
 detainee's right to counsel is not guaranteed but depends on
 the status of the person and the level of political interest
 in the case.
 Prefects have the authority to order detention at will,
 although they sometimes have been removed for abusing this
 authority. The power to arrest in cases involving national
 security is arbitrary and practically unlimited. In such
 suspected cases, any permanent officer of the Gendarmerie may
 arrest and temporarily detain any person without seeking prior
 approval or submitting a subsequent report. The Gendarmerie
 holds some persons outside the structure of the judicial
 process.
 Persons arrested and detained by the military are processed.
 through the military judicial system.
 While there are no precise figures available, there were
 several persons in detention at the end of 1988 categorized as
 "administrative detainees" whose "crimes! were "disrespect"
 toward the Chief of State or the Government. With the
 increasingly active role of the Togolese Human Rights
 Commission, however, even political detainees now have the
 possibility of bringing their cases before the Commission.
 The number of Togolese political exiles is unknown. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There is an established judicial hierarchy for routine
 criminal and civil cases from traditional (African) to
 codified (French) practice. At the lowest level, the village
 chief or council of elders can hear criminal and civil cases
 by taking testimony, listening to evidence, interviewing all
 parties, and making a decision. Those who do not accept the'
 traditional ruling can take their cases to the codified
 judicial system. Cases can also be taken directly to the
 regular courts. The Supreme Court stands at the apex of the
 court system.
 In Togo's statutory judicial system the investigative
 (pretrial) process is undertaken by a special judge who must
 examine the adequacy of the evidence for trial and decide on
 bail. Due to an insufficient number of judges, this process
 is often protracted, with many months elapsing before the cabe
 actually comes to trial. Crowded court dockets, in turn,
 cause further delays. Trials, however, are public, and
 judicial procedures are followed. Defendants have the right
 to counsel, but only in potential capital punishment cases
 will the Government appoint counsel if the accused is unable
 to afford it. Special courts exist to handle cases related to
 public security (State Security Cdurt), embezzlement of public
 funds (Tribunal for Recovery of Public Funds)-, and violent
 crimes (Court of Assizes). Amnesty International has asked
 the Togolese Government to institute a right of appeal to a
 higher court for those convicted by the State Security Court.
 Trials in this Court are held in camera, but this Court has
 been inactive for over 2 years.
 Persons who embezzle money in large sums are generally not
 released from jail, even after serving their sentence, until
 the money is repaid (about 80 such persons are currently in
 
 
 382
 TOGO
 prison). Family members (usually spouses) are sometimes held
 in lieu of a suspect who cannot be found or who flees.
 Togo's judicial system is not independent of the executive, as
 the President can and does intervene in cases of interest.
 There is also evidence of executive intervention in judicial
 proceedings to determine sentences.
 The number of political prisoners is not known. However, 17
 persons (10 condemned to death and 7 to life imprisonment)
 remained in prison at the end of 1988 for their participation
 in the September 1986 coup attempt against the Government.
 Exile groups in Ghana opposed to the Government of Togo claim
 that many political prisoners are held in Togolese jails.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Mail is routinely opened, and telephone conversations are
 frequently monitored. The Government also maintains an
 extensive network of informants which permeates all sections
 of Togolese society to keep check on actual or perceived
 opponents. Religious publications of the Jehovah's Witnesses
 often disappear in the mail. In routine criminal or civil
 cases, searches of private residences are authorized in
 advance by a judge or senior police official. In cases
 involving national security concerns, searches take place
 without prior authorization. While all Togolese are
 automatically members of Togo's sole political party and are
 required to vote, no one is forced to take an active party
 role.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While freedom of speech is restricted, some easing of controls
 took place in 1988. Direct and open criticism of the
 Government, and especially of the President, is perceived as
 serious antigovernment activity and is not tolerated.
 However, in line with the human rights campaign, official
 abuses and general complaints are now aired in public forums
 with the President's support. Because of the less restrictive
 atmosphere, academicians and professionals have been more open
 about airing their political views in public.
 The Government owns, operates, and controls all sectors of the
 media, which it uses as a means for projecting a positive
 self-image and maintaining public support. Publication or
 circulation of any material criticizing or questioning
 government policies is not permitted. Cases of gross
 governmental malfeasance are not, however, immune from media
 scrutiny. This has been true of the unraveling and final
 disposition of the financial scandal involving officers of
 Togo's agricultural bank. While the media has provided fairly
 complete coverage, no mention has been made of the alleged
 involvement of several military officers.
 There is government censorship of all films, books, plays, and
 other writings published in Togo. Intellectuals are aware
 that they must exercise careful self-censorship or else risk
 possible imprisonment, exile, or having their works banned.
 Some bookstores, however, sell a wide range of books,
 including those containing veiled criticism of the system of
 govexnment. Foreign publications are offered for sale openly
 
 
 383
 TOGO
 in bookstores, and only rarely have individual issues (those
 which are harshly critical of Togo) been withdrawn by the
 censors.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled in Togo.
 Government approval must be obtained before any large group
 can meet. This process is an effective means for preventing
 any antigovernment groups from meeting. Government permission
 for nonpolitical events is given routinely and expeditiously.
 Professional groups which do not undertake political
 activities are free to hold meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 With a few exceptions, the Government promotes a climate of
 openness for religious freedom. Although all religious groups
 must have government authorization to operate, only the
 Jehovah's Witnesses and the Apostolic Faith Mission are
 currently proscribed by name. They are not allowed to conduct
 services, proselytize, or otherwise carry out religious
 activities, although there are no known legal penalties for
 being a member of either group. The Jehovah's Witnesses
 continue to have members in Togo.
 All religious groups must qualify under one of seven broad
 categories specified by the Ministry of Interior to be
 officially sanctioned. Qualifying groups are not restricted
 in their religious practices. They are free to publish
 religious material, conduct services, and teach their faith.
 Non-Togolese clergy of these religious groups are welcome to
 reside in Togo, proselytize, and engage in other religious
 activities. Local religious groups are free to maintain
 contacts with coreliqionists in other countries, and no
 restrictions exist on travel for religious purposes. The
 Government does not favor any specific religion, and
 membership in any authorized religious group is neither a
 benefit nor a hindrance in civil service promotions.
 d. Freedom of'Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or work place,
 is generally allowed. However, the Government restricts the
 issuance of passports in order to control the emigration of
 professional Togolese and also to keep known political-
 dissidents under close scrutiny. Exit visas are required.
 The Government maintains customs and security checkpoints
 throughout the country on all major routes. Except for the
 few political exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in
 other countries may return at will.
 Togo has traditionally welcomed refugees, and the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recognizes some
 500 refugees in Togo. During 1988 there were renewed
 allegations that the Government occasionally forcibly
 repatriates refugees to neighboring countries in return for
 those countries returning dissident Togolese. There have also
 been reports that some refugees avoid registering with UNHCR
 to preclude their Government's receiving information about
 their whereabouts.
 
 
 384
 TOGO
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In the one-party state created by President Eyadema, all
 citizens are automatically party members but are unable to
 change by democratic means the one-party political system or
 the government in power. While active party members may
 debate minor issues at party meetings or even raise complaints
 against local officials, no challenges are permitted to the
 President's programs. Presidential elections were held in
 1986, the second since 1979. President Eyadema was again the
 only candidate and was elected for another 7-year term with
 99.7 percent of the votes cast.
 A National Assembly, created pursuant to the 1979
 Constitution, has 77 members but does not have the power to
 reject laws proposed by the executive. It is limited to
 debating certain categories of proposed legislation. In the
 1985 National Assembly elections and in elections held in
 January 1987 for municipal and prefectural councils, multiple
 candidates from the official party were permitted to run, but
 each candidate had to obtain party authorization and submit
 campaign literature for approval.
 Ethnic and religious groups are represented in the National
 Assembly in approximate proportion to their actual numbers in
 the country, and the Central Committee of the party has a fair
 north-south balance. Women, however, are seriously
 underrepresented, there being none in the Cabinet and only 3
 in the 77-member National Assembly. The 46-member party
 Central Committee has 10 women members.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In October 1987, Togo formally inaugurated a National Human
 Rights Commission (NCHR) composed of 13 members, one each
 elected by 13 private and public bodies, e.g., the bar
 association, judges, doctors, teachers, trade unions. The
 Commission is authorized by law to receive complaints from any
 Togolese citizen or foreign resident, to investigate, and to
 have access to government and police files. If a violation is
 found to exist, the Commission is also authorized to negotiate
 with the responsible governmental authority either to bring
 about rectification or to submit the case to the courts or to
 the President. Commission members enjoy immunity from arrest
 or prosecution during their term of office and for 1 year
 afterwards.
 The Commission became active in February 1988 and received a
 number of cases to investigate, including petitions concerning
 arbitrary detentions, torture, attacks on religious freedom,
 and illegal withdrawal of documents. According to its first
 annual report, the NCHR reviewed 151 cases falling within its
 competence, and "ultimately kept 116 petitions which it
 considered of such a nature as to justify its advocacy of the
 victims before the Administration." The report noted that
 over half of the petitions involved arbitrary detentions, and
 that the NCHR had been successful in resolving a number of
 these cases, either by obtaining the release of persons from
 police custody or by ensuring transfer of the cases to the
 Prosecutor's Office. The President has played an active and
 supportive role, encouraging the Commission to take cases to
 whatever levels necessary for resolution.
 
 
 385
 TOGO
 The Government has been active in recent years in
 participating in international forums, such as the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission. It has ratified the
 international covenants on human rights, the African Charter
 on Human and Peoples' Rights, and the Optional Protocol to the
 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The'
 Government did not respond in 1988 to Amnesty International's
 requests for information.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is some discrimination in Togo in favor of northern
 ethnic groups over southerners. Prior to President Eyadema's
 seizure of power in 1967, political power was dominated by
 southern ethnic groups who also enjoyed economic and social
 privileges. Under President Eyadema, who is a northerner and
 a military man, the situation has changed considerably in the
 past 21 years, with northerners now forming the bulk of the
 military and security forces. At the same time, a serious
 effort has been made to integrate all ethnic groups into the
 political structure; ministers, prefects, assembly delegates,
 and labor and party officials are generally representative of
 Togo's ethnic distribution. Southerners, however, continue to
 predominate in senior civil service, technical, and
 professional jobs. There is no known discrimination on
 grounds of religion.
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled
 out in the "family code" which was adopted in early 1980.
 Under this code, women's rights include maternity leave
 benefits. In the economic sphere, women dominate local market
 activities and commerce with Togo's neighbors and often amass
 considerable wealth. But formal equality under the law and
 economic power have not given women an effective role in
 political decisionmaking. Nor do they spell out economic or
 social equality for women. Unlike civil law, customary or
 traditional law gives all property to the male in the event of
 separation or divorce. Similarly, although women are legally
 allowed to acquire contraceptives and undertake family
 planning, custom and tradition prohibit women from access to
 contraception without the permission of their husbands or
 fathers.
 Far fewer women than men receive university education, and the
 number of women graduates from secondary schools is low. In
 addition, the pensions of working women who die do not go to
 their families, unlike those of working men. Although working
 women pay into the pension fund in the same proportion as men,
 their children receive no funds in case of death, creating a
 special hardship for families with no father. Economic
 conditions in rural areas often leave women little time for
 anything other than carrying water, finding firewood, cooking,
 childbearing, caring for the family, and helping to raise food
 crops. The Government has undertaken a campaign to make women
 throughout Togo aware of their expanded opportunities under
 the new family code. A government-sponsored women's
 organization, the National Union of Togolese Women, is active
 in the promotion of women's education and welfare.
 
 
 386
 TOGO
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Although under the Togolese labor code all Togolese workers
 have the right to organize themselves, actual labor organizing
 is permitted only under the auspices of the National
 Confederation of Workers of Togo (CNTT), which under the
 direction of Togo's single political party unites various
 independent trade unions into one national labor
 organization.   All wage earners are automatically members of
 the CNTT, and all pay dues via an automatic check-off system.
 The CNTT is affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions and sends delegates to International Labor
 Organization (ILO) conferences. The CNTT also maintains ties
 with the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial
 Organizations. An affiliate of CNTT is a member of the
 International Federation of Commercial, Clerical, Technical
 and Professional Employees, which held its 21st world congress
 in Lome in August 1987.
 Strikes are authorized only as a means of last resort but
 rarely, if ever, take place. The Government acts as
 arbitrator in cases where labor and management cannot settle a
 dispute. The few strikes which have occurred in the past have
 been short and ended as a result of government arbitration.
 The Government has not used coercion, force, or arrests to end
 strikes.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers do not have the right to organize outside the CNTT.
 The CNTT is not an independent union and basically conveys the
 Government's views and requirements to workers. It does have
 a role in the wage bargaining process and does on certain
 issues represent the workers' economic interests to the
 Government. It also takes the workers' side in disputes with
 employers (unless the employer is the Government). Labor
 legislation and practice is uniform throughout the country,
 including in the export processing zone near the Port of Lome.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Prisoners are sometimes required to work, and there are
 occasional early morning mobilizations of the populations in
 larger towns and cities to clean streets and pick up trash.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Under the Togolese Labor Code, the employment of children
 under the age of 14 in any enterprise is prohibited. Some
 types of industrial and technical employment require a minimum
 age of 18. While this is generally enforced in urban
 employment, in rural areas even very young children
 traditionally help their families with agricultural work or
 animal husbandry.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor practices in Togo are regulated by the Togolese Labor
 Code adopted in 1974. The Code stipulates that there should
 be equal pay for equal work regardless of sex. Working hours
 of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural
 enterprises, should not normally exceed 40 hours per week; at
 
 
 387
 TOGO
 least one period of 24 hours of rest per week is compulsory;
 and workers should receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The minimum wage in the agricultural, sector is about 20 cents
 per hour, and in the nonagricultural sector about 25 cents per
 hour. The amounts are not sufficient for workers to maintain
 a decent standard of living, and minimum wage workers
 supplement their incomes through second jobs or through some
 subsistence farming. Enterprises must run a regular medical
 service for their employees.
 Health and safety standards in the workplace are determined by
 a technical consulting committee at the Ministry of Labor and
 instituted by decrees. There are penalties for employers who
 do not meet the conditions of the decree. These provisions
 are believed to be respected by large state-owned and private
 enterprises but are probably ignored by many smaller firms and
 the large subsistence agricultural sector involving family
 units. Due to Togo's significant unemployment, few workers in
 the smaller firms where working conditions are poorest are
 willing to complain and risk losing their jobs.
 
 
 388
