 TOGO
 The Government of Togo is authoritarian. Power is firmly
 centralized in the hands of President Gnassingbe Eyadema who
 is also Head of the Army and of the only legal political
 party, the Rassemblement du Peuple Togolais. The Eyadema
 Government has been in power since 1967. Its legal authority
 is based on a written constitution adopted by national
 referendum in 1979. Only party members can participate in the
 political process. As head of the party, President Eyadema
 dominates the executive, legislative, and judicial functions
 of government. The Government's control of the elements of
 coercion, and the wide recognition that it is willing to use
 them, are important factors in maintaining its authority.
 Some administrative arrests and detentions without trial
 continue.
 Togo was officially designated by the U.N. General Assembly as
 one of the *least developed countries among developing nations'
 in 1982. Its economy is heavily agricultural, with only one
 mineral product (potash), and a population which is growing
 rapidly. Togo's economy is experiencing the restraints
 currently familiar to countries exporting a few primary
 products that do not include petroleum. It nonetheless has
 a flourishing commercial sector and encourages private
 enterprise. The right to own property individually and in
 common is protected by the Constitution and is respected by
 the Government in practice.
 The attitude of the Government toward human rights is
 influenced by a variety of security threats, both internal
 and external. There is no provision under Togolese law and
 judicial procedures for protection of the integrity of the
 person. Habeas corpus is not recognized, no specific law
 prohibits torture, and the judiciary is not independent. At
 the same time, the Government of Togo is concerned about its
 international reputation, and in 1984 played an active role
 in the U.N. Human Rights Commission.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 During 1984, there were no reported instances of killing for
 political motives in Togo. There were no reports of deaths
 perpetrated by opposition groups, insurgents, or terrorists.
 b. Disappearance
 In 1984, there were no reported instances of disappearances in
 Togo.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Detention without trial of suspected opponents occurs, and
 Amnesty International noted in its 1984 report the
 disappearance of one person in 1983. Togolese authorities
 have been enjoined by President Eyadema from torturing
 detainees. However, some released prisoners and trial
 defendants have claimed to have been beaten and have alleged
 that their confessions to the police were obtained either by
 
 
 354
 TOGO
 threat or application of physical coercion. There were several
 such reports in 1984. Poor prison conditions appear to be the
 consequence of Togo's poverty. Lome's central prison is
 crowded, and facilities are rudimentary with limited space,
 light, and ventilation. Food and medical care are reported to
 be barely adequate by local standards. In facilities outside
 Lome, reports describe overcrowding, poor sanitation/hygienic
 conditions, and inadequate food service. At these prisons,
 families are allowed to visit and to provide food. Only
 military and paramilitary personnel are granted access to
 Togo's three military prisons in Lome, Kara, and Temedja. In
 1984, there were no new reports on prevailing conditions in
 Togo prisons, although past reports described forced marches,
 hard labor, and beatings imposed on prisoners in both military
 and civilian prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Togolese legal system does not include the right of habeas
 corpus, nor does this right exist in practice. Detention
 without trial or administrative detention is used in Togo
 against those whom the Government considers guilty of 'crimes
 against the public trust' (i.e., corruption or political
 opposition thought to pose a security threat). Those held in
 administrative detention are usually not formally charged and
 cannot obtain redress through the courts. Preventive
 detention has no fixed term.
 Reports indicate that the national gendarmerie has almost
 unlimited power to arrest and detain persons in Togo for
 whatever reason. Present practice allows any permanent
 officer of the gendarmerie to arrest and detain persons
 without seeking prior permission or submitting a subsequent
 report. There-are reported instances of gendarmerie officers
 being bribed to make arrests as a solution to personal disputes
 not having any relation to matters of state, security, or
 local laws. These arrest cases are not subject to the usual
 judicial review.
 Prisoners accused of crimes unrelated to political security
 are usually held for no longer than 48 hours prior to
 indictment or provisional release pending investigation. No
 legal basis exists to prevent authorities from holding a
 person beyond that time without charge. Administrative
 sanctions against officials have also included suspension from
 their jobs and assignment to residences in their home
 villages, where they are required to report weekly to the
 regional gendarmerie office. There was one reported case of
 this type in 1984. The number of detainees held by the
 gendarmerie in its Lome prison, outside the structures of
 local judicial process, varies but has been reported to be as
 high as 50. Detentions made by the military are processed
 through the military judicial system. There is no functioning
 system of bail in Togo.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Pretrial proceedings are sometimes protracted. A crowded
 court docket and shortage of judges inhibit speedy trials.
 Defendants accused of nonpolitical crimes are generally
 accorded the right to a public trial and the right to be
 represented by counsel. When the defendant cannot afford the
 cost of an attorney, counsel is appointed by the Government.
 An attorney is accorded permission to talk with the defendant
 
 
 355
 TOGO
 privately. Defendants and counsel are formally notified of
 charges in writing. Special courts, handling security,
 embezzlement of public funds, and violent crimes, observe the
 same standards of justice as regular courts. Togo's judicial
 system is not independent of the executive branch and is open
 to political interference in those trial cases important to
 the Government.
 President Eyadema publicly stated in 1980 that Togo had six
 political prisoners. This referred to persons convicted of
 crimes against the state. In January 1982, President Eyadema
 announced the release of two of these persons, Kouassivi
 Alphonse de Souza and Abdo de Souza. Unconfirmed reports,
 which do not include names or any other case specifics,
 estimate that perhaps up to 200 political detainees are
 currently held in Togolese prisons. It is unknown what
 portion may have committed acts of violent protest. The
 number of political exiles is unknown, but is believed to
 number about a dozen.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not force individuals to be members of
 Togo's sole political party. But anyone who wishes to have
 influence in Togo's political process must be a party member.
 Monitoring of correspondence and telephones exists. It is
 generally believed that the Government and political party
 maintain extensive networks of informants in all important
 sectors of Togolese society in order to monitor dissident
 activity. Authorization by a judge or senior police official
 is normally required for physical searches of priVate
 residences in both civil and criminal cases. In matters
 determined by the Government to involve national security,
 searches without formal authorization are permitted.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is restricted, and a free press does not
 exist in Togo. The Government owns and operates the media and
 does not permit publication or circulation of material
 criticizing its policies or officials. From time to time,
 some cabinet ministers and mid-level government functionaries
 are accused of corruption and/or ineffective implementation of
 programs. This is reported in the media. In the past,
 authorities occasionally have confiscated issues of foreign
 publications containing articles considered to be critical of
 the Government. This did not occur in 1984. Academic freedom
 is permitted only in nonpolitical fields.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of assembly is strictly controlled. Prior
 government approval must be obtained before large groups may
 assemble. Approval for such gatherings is a political
 question and is at the discretion of the Government. This
 discourages protest or political meetings. The single
 national trade union federation, La Confederation Nationale
 des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT), is controlled by the national
 political party. All workers are required to organize under
 its banner. The federation serves to convey to workers the
 Government's views and requirements. On basic economic
 
 
 356
 TOGO
 issues, it does represent workers' concerns to the Government.
 All major sectors of the Togolese work force are unionized.
 The right to strike exists and has been exercised on occasion
 in the past. In such instances, the Government counseled the
 striking workers and the strike was ended without physical
 coercion or arrests of striking union members. Professional
 groups are enjoined to avoid political action. The CNTT is a
 member of the continent-wide Accra-based Organization of
 African Trade Union Unity (OATUU).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion usually prevails in Togo, although
 Jehovah's Witnesses were banned by government decree in
 1979, and are not recognized by the Government of Togo as a
 religious group which has a right to conduct services,
 proselytize, or otherwise carry out religious activities in
 Togo. There are no known prescribed legal penalties for being
 a Jehovah's Witness. It should be noted that no specific
 religion is favored by the Government. There is no requirement
 for religious groups to be licensed by the Government. With
 the exception of Jehovah's Witnesses, open practice and
 teaching of religion is permitted. There is no restriction on
 publishing strictly religious material. Foreign clergy are
 allowed to proselytize. Local religious groups are permitted
 contact with similar organizations in other countries. No
 restrictions exist on religious travel. Religious affiliation
 is not an impediment or help to advancement in Togo and is
 compatible with membership in Togo's only political party.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or workplace, is
 allowed in principle for Togolese and foreigners. Domestic
 travelers do encounter security and customs-related official
 roadblocks throughout the country. Passport issuance is
 restricted by the Government in order to control the number of
 professional Togolese who emigrate and also to keep known
 political dissidents under close scrutiny. Except for a few
 political exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other
 countries may return at will. Togo has traditionally welcomed
 refugees, as well as displaced persons.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Eyadema holds a monopoly of power in Togo. There
 are, however, institutions permitting some participation in
 decision-making where the President is not directly involved.
 The Political Bureau of the single political party, and the
 larger Central Committee, permit discussion but ratify all
 government decisions. The Political Bureau is chosen by the
 President with the concurrence of the party congress, which
 meets every five years. The national Constitution specifies
 that the Central Committee include members who are chosen by
 the party congress, some of whom are Cabinet members. Others
 are drawn from the single trade union, youth and women's
 groups, and private commerce. Membership in the party as a
 whole is open to all citizens and is estimated at one
 million. Frequent meetings of the party at various levels
 serve both to pass down government policy and to a lesser
 degree to provide the Government some feedback.
 
 
 357
 TOGO
 Active participants in the party may express their views at
 party meetings on issues such as the implementation of policy
 and the behavior of subordinate officials. There is, however,
 no challenge to the President's political program and the
 Central Committee's decisions. During the last election in
 December 1979, President Eyadema was the only candidate. He
 received 99.7 percent of the votes cast. Togo has a 67-member
 National Assembly which debates certain categories of proposed
 legislation as defined by the Constitution, but has no real
 power to reject proposed laws. The National Assembly can and
 does require ministers to justify their budgets, and it gives
 sanction to policy decisions. The President of the National
 Assembly also holds office in the party Central Committee.
 National Assembly members are elected on a national
 constituency basis. Only one party list is presented to
 voters. All regional ethnic groups and both sexes are
 represented within the single party political system. The
 Government thus claims that all groups participate in it.
 Women have not traditionally had a role equal to men in the
 political process in Togo, but their participation is
 encouraged. Currently, 4 women serve on the 22-member Central
 Committee of the party.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In October 1982, the Togolese National Assembly ratified the
 African Charter on Human Rights. Togo also hosted a 1982
 conference on human rights practices in Africa. In 1983, the
 International Committee of the Red Cross established a
 regional office in Lome. Togo participated constructively in
 the Human Rights Commission in Geneva in 1984.
 The Government of Togo has in the past invited international
 organizations such as Amnesty International to visit Togo to
 investigate charges of human rights violations. Since 1979,
 Amnesty International and the Government of Togo have
 exchanged public comment about human rights violations in
 Togo. In its 1984 Report, Amnesty noted its main concerns in
 Togo to be detention without trial of suspected political
 opponents of the Government and allegations of torture of
 detainees, as well as harsh prison conditions. Freedom House
 rates Togo 'not free.' There are no internal human rights
 organizations based within Togo that report on or observe
 human rights violations.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Togo is listed among the U.N. General Assembly's least
 developed among developing nations. With a GNP per capita of
 $344.40 (1982) for a population of 2,927,000 (1984) and a
 relatively resource-poor land mass of only 56,000 square
 kilometers, Togo faces many endemic problems and has in
 addition suffered from declining prices and/or sales of its
 major exports of phosphates, cocoa, and coffee. In the late
 1970's Togo made major investments--many of which have been
 unprofitable--in industrial projects and tourist
 infrastructure, but the primary focus of governmental
 development policies over the past five years has been on
 increasing agricultural production. Togo is virtually
 self-sufficient in food in normal climatic conditions, and
 average diet provided 89.83 percent of caloric requirement
 (1977).
 
 
 358
 TOGO
 Among the more than 40 ethnic groups in Togo, the coastal
 southern tribes have historically been the most populous, best
 educated, and most prosperous due to contact with the West and
 to more favorable climatic and geographical conditions. One
 of the Government's major objectives over the past two decades
 has been to channel resources into the traditionally poorer
 northern areas of Togo. Despite these efforts, discrepancies
 persist in the level of economic and social development
 between the north and the south.
 Inadequate governmental resources have limited efforts to
 improve health and sanitation levels in Togo, although
 Ministries for Public Health, Social Affairs, and Education
 typically receive large shares of the regular national budget
 (40 percent of the 1983 budget). Life expectancy at birth is
 48.04 years, and the infant mortality rate is 108.70 per
 thousand. On a nationwide basis, there is only one doctor for
 every 18,100 people (1980) and one nurse for every 1,430
 people (1980), although the Government operates 21 hospitals
 and nearly 300 dispensaries or clinics throughout the
 country's 21 prefectures. For the country as a whole, about
 16 percent of the population (1975) has access to safe water;
 in urban areas, the figure rises to around 50 percent, while
 dropping to 10 percent for rural areas. Forty-two percent of
 the urban population is estimated to be living below the
 absolute poverty level (1978).
 Education has also been a major focus of government policy.
 School attendance is theoretically compulsory until age 15.
 The adult literacy rate was cited by the World Bank as 15.9
 percent in 1970. Since many children beyond normal primary
 school age (6-11) typically are still enrolled in primary
 schools, the overall primary school enrollment ratio is 110.52
 percent (1981). For males, this ratio is 137.29 percent and
 for females 85.01.(1981), although governmental policies call
 for and practice equality of the sexes.
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled
 out in the "Family and Individual Code" which was adopted in
 early 1980. Under this code, women's rights include the
 ownership of property, control of all money earned, and
 maternity leave benefits. Article 88 of the labor code
 stipulates equal pay for equal work, qualifications, and
 production for both sexes. Women dominate local market
 activities and commerce with Togo's neighbors. They often
 amass considerable wealth. Formal equality under the law and
 success in the local marketplace do not mean total equality
 for all women throughout Togo, however. Traditional law
 places barriers in the path of women seeking to break with
 custom. Civil law, for example, recognizes a woman's property
 rights, but customary law gives all property to the male in
 the event of separation or divorce. Economic conditions in
 rural areas also often leave women little time for anything
 other than carrying water, finding firewood, cooking, caring
 for the family, and helping to raise food crops. The
 Government has undertaken a campaign to make women throughout
 Togo aware of their expanded opportunities under the new
 family code. The Government's priority emphasis on developing
 water resources in rural Togo should also help to mitigate one
 of the most onerous burdens on rural women, that of carrying
 water over long distances.
 
 
 359
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TOGO
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL...        7.7      7.7      9.0
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.7     7.7      9.0
 A.AID  .................       3.4      3.4      3.9
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.4     3.4      3.9
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        1.9     1.9      2.9
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        1.9     1.9      2.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TOTAL .........        1.9     1.9      2.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & VFP.        0.8      0.7      0.9
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.1     1.2      2.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        2.4      2.4      2.2
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      . 2.4     2.4      2.2
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.4     2.4      2.2
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....      .0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        7.7      7.7      9.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        7.7     7.7      9.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL ........    23.9     87.6    23.1    427.9
 IBRD               0.0     0.0      0.0      3.5
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                5.5    81.2      0.0    211.3
 IDB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD8                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDB              10.8      6.4    23.1     89.3
 UNDP               3.2      0.0     0.0     29.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0      3.8
 EEC                4.4     0.0      0.0     90.4
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 24
 
 
 360
