 TOGO
 President Gnassingbe Eyadema continued to dominate Togo's Government. In
 1994 citizens elected a National Assembly in generally free and fair elections. The
 new Head of Government is opposition leader Edem Kodjo who serves as Prime
 Minister. Togo's governmental institutions are, however, still too weak and fragile
 to ensure democratic government in practice. Although the February elections pro-
 duced a slight opposition majority in the National Assembly, President Eyadema re-
 tains the final say in all matters due to his personal control of the military and se-
 curity forces.
 The security forces consist primarily of the army, navy, air force, national police
 (Surete), gendarmerie, and regular police. Approximately 90 percent of the army's
 officers and 70 percent of its soldiers come from the President's northern ethnic
 group. The Interior Minister (after June 1994, the Secretary of State for Security)
 is nominally in charge of the national police, and the Defense Minister has nominal
 authority over the other security forces. In fact, all the security forces remain loyal
 to their chief, President Eyadema, and carry out whatever orders he gives them.
 Members of the security forces committed serious acts of brutality against civilians.
 Except for a few cases, the Government did not punish the perpetrators.
 About 80 percent of the country's 3.4 million people are engaged in subsistence
 agriculture, but there is also an active commercial sector. Annual per capita gross
 domestic product is less than $400. The January devaluation of the local currency
 and the suspension of much foreign economic assistance due to the countrys record
 of human rights abuses severely damaged the economy.
 The human rights situation was mixed. Although the country held legislative elec-
 tions, and the new National Assembly assumed some functions of a democratic legis-
 lature, there was a significant incidence of political violence and abuse of human
 rights. There were credible reports that in several cases the security forces and their
 allies continued to intimidate, harass, and kill civilians and those perceived as en-
 
 
 269
 emies of President Eyadema with little apparent fear of punishment. The Eyadema
 Government subjected the opposition press to repeated criminal prosecutions for ex-
 pressing critical views. An attack by Togolese armed dissidents and the Togolese
 militarys indiscriminate reaction to it resulted in hundreds of civilian deaths and
 nearly 100 Togolese military fatalities.
 Prolonged pretrial detention and beating of prisoners are commonplace, and there
 were several documented cases of torture. Prison conditions remained very harsh.
 Defendants' rights to fair and expeditious trials are not ensured. Discrimination and
 some violence against women and some abuse of children continued.
 Although somewhat diminished, there is a large backlog of persons awaiting
 trial-some as long as 3 years-due to lack of qualified judicial personnel, an inef-
 fective criminal justice system, and indifference to abuses on the part of some offi-
 cials.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Security forces were responsible for
 political and extra dicial killing. In only a few instances has the Government
 proved willing or able to punish the perpetrators. On January 5, a group of armed
 ogolese dissidents based in Ghana attacked the main military camp and other gov-
 ernment sites in Lome with the apparent aim of killing President Eyadema and in-
 flicting casualties on the security forces. Fatalities among the attackers were low,
 about 10 by their own estimate and somewhat higher according to the Government.
 In the ensuing 3 days of battle, dissidents killedu wards of 100 members of the
 security forces, while up to 500 innocent civiians died either at the hands of the
 attackers or from careless and indiscriminate firing by the security forces. Security
 forces summarily executed several Ghanaian youths and Togolese military personnel
 already detained for suspected compicity with the Ghana-based attackers. The Gov-
 ernment arrested several persons alleged to have been involved in the January 5
 attack, but it did not prosecute or punish any members of the security forces for
 killing civilians or military detainees.
 OnFebruary 12, according to credible reprts, elements of the security forces kid-
 naped and killed daston Edeh, newly elected National Assembly deputy of the oppo-
 sition Ation                                       two compaons. T      uout
 the ye, unkno       assaila   kill      ral f   ce officials, bankers, and other
 businessmen under unexplained circumstances; but the perpetrators and their mo-
 tives were unclear since the crimes were not fully investigated.
 On January 25, assailants kidnaped and murdered labor leader Tchao Idrissou
 (see Section 6.a.). On February 18, six relatives and associates of the Secretary-Gen-
 eral of the same union were reportedly kidnaped by persons in uniform; they have
 not been seen since that time. By year's end, the Government had made no arrests
 nor indicated a suspected motive.
 Seven bodies of persons burned beyond recognition were discovered around the
 town of Tsevie, north of Lome, in August and September. Although members of the
 security forces were widely suspected of having committed these killings, police con-
 ducted only a cursory investigation and made no arrests. On October 9, armed per-
 sons credibly identified as Togolese dissident forces shot and killed four membrs
 of the security forces at the gendarmerie and elice offices at Vogan, southeast Togo.
 Several suspects were subsequently arrested and made televised confessions, but
 the private press widely questioned whether they were, in fact, the ones who carried
 out the attac.
 In only a few cases, the Government arrested or punished members of the security
 forces suspected of involvement in extraudicial killings. On October 29, authorities
 arrested and detained Lt. Col. Yoma D)oua, the Commander of the Presidential
 Guard, along with Master Sergeant Pouli on charges of the robbery and murder of
 a Togolese notary, Laurent Agbemavor, earlier in the year. Djoua is widely thought
 to be responsible for many past human rights violations and was more recently ru-
 mored to have been involved in plotting against President Eyadema. The military
 subsequently demoted Djoua to Private. Djoua retired from the military but had not
 been brought to trial by year's end. Other military associates of Djoua are reportedly
 in custody.
 b. Disappearance.-There were several disappearances, although most had no evi-
 dent political motive. In some cases these disappearances were credibly linked to
 members of the security forces. On September 6, armed persons kidnaped Togolese
 diplomat David Bruce, who has not been seen since then. A witness indicated in-
 volvement by members of the security forces. Bruce had been Chief of Staff to the
 President of the High Council of the Republic, the opposition-dominated interim Na-
 
 
 270
 tional Legislature which members of the security forces had earlier targeted with
 threats and violence. Although the Government began an investigation, it has not
 reported any results.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the law prohibits these practices, security forces and their official affiliates
 reportedly tortured detainees. The most common means of torture was severe beat-
 ing, and security force personnel frequently beat detainees after arresting them. The
 Government did not prosecute or punish any officials for these abuses.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and inadequate
 food and medical care. Children are often incarcerated with adult criminals. The
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and local private organizations
 have access to prisons for monitoring purposes with advance government permis-
 sion, but the Government sometimes denied access to other private international
 nongovernmental groups (NGO's).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law allows authorities to hold ar-
 rested persons incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-
 hour extension in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice, detainees can be
 and are often detained without bail for lengthy periods with the approval of a judge.
 Family members and attorneys officially have access to a detainee after the initial
 48- or 96-hour detention period, but authorities often delay, and sometimes deny,
 access.
 Judges or senior police officials issue warrants. Although detainees have the right
 to be informed of the charges against them, in practice, police sometimes ignore this
 right. The law stipulates that a special judge conduct a pretrial investigation to ex-
 amine the adeay of the evidence and decide on bail. However, a shortage of
 judges and quahfied personnel and official indifference have resulted in lengthy pre-
 trial detentions--in some cases from 1 to 3 years. As a rough estimate 30 percent
 of the prison population were pretrial detainees. While a large backlog of untried
 cases remained, the new Government of Prime Minister Kodjo freed a significant
 number of prisoners in pretrial detention whose time in jail exceeded that permitted
 by law. In rare cases, the Government used brief investigative detentions of less
 than 48 hours to harass and intimidate opposition journalists for alleged defamation
 of Government officials.
 There were several political detentions during the year. However, at least 27 po-
 litical detainees and political prisoners were released at years end under an am-
 nestyproposed by President Eyadema and approved by the National Assembly on
 December 15. The amnes applies specifically to the armed dissidents allegedly in-
 valved in the attacks on Lme of March 25 1993, and January 5, 1994, as well as
 to other persons inside or outside Togo who allegedly committed political crimes
 through December 14. It covers opponents of the Government and members of the
 security forces who may have committed offenses. Bikagni Nikabou was arrested in
 1992 and held without trial until he was tried and sentenced to 3 years' imprison-
 ment for arms smuggling on January 7 1994 Four members of his family were de-
 tained without trial starting in 1992. Under the general amnesty, the four family
 members were released at the end of the year and Nikabou at the beginning of
 1995.
 Police arrested six members of the Union des Forces de Changement, the political
 party associated with President Eyadema's opponent, Gilchrist Olympio, for having
 hung posters and for distributing tracts calling on people to boycott the February
 legsaive eectians. The authorities released four persons without trial, and con-
 victed two of attempting to disrupt the elections. Palice arrested Komi Dackey, a
 local official of the Aviation Workers' Union, in January on suspicion of involvement
 in the January 5 attack on Lame by Ghana-based Togolese dissidents. He was held
 without presentation of evidence but was released inDecember under the year end
 amnesty.
 The Constitution prohibits exile and the Government did not formally exile any-
 one. However, several opposition leaders remained abroad for reasons of personal
 safety, as did over 150,000 citizens who left because of political violence, notably
 that committed by the security forces in January 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the judicial system is formally independ-
 ent of the Government, the executive branch can and does intervene at times to ma-
 nipulate the judiciary. The judicial system employs both African traditional law and
 the Napoleonic code in trying criminal and civil cases. The Supreme Court stands
 at the apex of the court system and special courts exist to handle cases related to
 public security, embezzlement of public funds, and violent crimes.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.).
 Trials are open to the public, and judicial procedures are generally respected. De-
 fendants have the right to counsel and to appeal. The Bar Association provides at-
 
 
 torneys for the indigent. Defendants may confront witnesses, present evidence, and
 enjoy a presumption of innocence. In rural areas, the village chief or council of el-
 ders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who reject the traditional ruling
 may take their case to the regular court system, which is the starting point for cases
 in urban areas.
 Political prisoners included Martin Gbenouga, director of the newspaper Tribune
 des Democrats, who was sentenced to 5 years imprisonment for publishing a news-
 paper article critical of the President. He was pardoned in January 1995 (see Sec-
 tion 2.a.). Two members of the opposition political party Democratic Convention of
 the African People, Gerard Akoumey and Stephane Koudssou, were released in the
 year end amnesty. They had been convicted in September 1993 for placing a bomb
 in July 1993 at the headquarters of the CAR Party. They publicly confessed, but
 some opposition sources asserted that the charges were police fabrications and that
 the confessions had been coerced.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, a judge or senior plice official may authorize searches of private
 residences. In political and national security cases, the security forces need no prior
 authorization. Police conducted such warrantless searches extensively, searching for
 dissidents' arms caches as well as for criminals. The Government uses telephone
 tape, monitors correspondence, and maintains the police and gendarmerie as domes-
 tic intelligence services.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. However, the authorities engaged in sporadic persecution of the inde-
 pendent press, using threats, arrests, prosecutions, and occasional seizures of news-
 papers. Approximately 15 independent newspapers were published during the year,
 many highly critical of the President and the Government. Some reported difficul-
 ties distributing their editions in interior regions because of harassment by support-
 ers of the President, including some members of the security forces.
 The official media (two radio stations, one television station, and one daily news-
 paper) were generally slanted in favor of President Eyadema and the Government,
 ut allowed the opposition limited access. The two private Ghana-based radio sta-
 tions, which had broadcast opposition views in 1993 ceased to operate during the
 year, as did a pro-Eyadema private station.
 The authorities arrested Martin Gbenouga, director of the opposition newspaper
 Tribune des Democrats, for publishing an article critical of President Eyadema and
 other African leaders. A court convicted Gbenouga on May 6 of insulting the Presi-
 dent and sentenced him to 5 years' imprisonment. Gbenouga was quickly trans-
 ferred to one of the countvs worst prisons, the Mango Penitentiary in Northern
 Tog In October Gbenougas conviction was invalidated by the Appeals Court on
 technical grounds. On January 17, 1995 he was pardoned by the President and re-
 leased.
 In March gendarmes briefly detained staff members from the opposition Courtier
 du Golfe newspaper, whose senior officials then fled the country. The newspaper
 had reported an alleged plot by pro-Eyadema forces against opposition leader Yaovi
 Agobyibor and his political party.
 On August 31, a court sentenced in absentia the managing and assistant editors
 of the opposition La Sentinelle to 5 years' imprisonment and fined them 3 million
 CFA francs for publishing an article that allegedly defamed and threatened Presi-
 dent Eyadema. The two defendants had already fled Togo. The court further prohib-
 ited the newspaper from publishing for 6 months.
 At the University of Benin, Togo's sole university, academic freedom is con-
 strained by concern by professors about potential harassment by the Government
 or antiopposition militants.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens are free to organize in associations and political parties, but fear of harsh reac-
 tion from the Government has restricted public demonstrations. In February and
 March, local authorities violently suppressed anti-government demonstrations in the
 largely Muslim city of Sokode. It also violently suppressed religious assemblies there
 during Ramadan, beating the participants. Although many political meetings were
 held during the legislative election campaign, many others were canceled after the
 murder of elected Deputy Gaston Edeh for fear of violence from the pro-Eyadema
 faction. The Government requires all political parties to register and requires ad-
 vance notification for public demonstrations. On occasion the Government banned
 demonstrations or modified their time or place, citing a threat to public safety or
 interference with public business.
 
 
 272
 c. Freedom of Relgion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. However, the Government has
 on occasion used force to dispel religious meetings (see Section 2.b.).
 Local re lgious groups are free to maintain contacts with coreligionists in other
 countries. There are no restrictions on travel for religious purposes. All official reli-
 gious observances are ecumenical in nature, and the Government does not favor any
 specific religion. Membership in a particular religious group confers no advantage
 or disadvantage in the regime.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right of domestic and foreign travel and emigration, the right to
 change residence or workplace, and the right to return to the country are generally
 respected. In 1993, in the wake of political violence by the security forces, more than
 250,000 citizens, mainly southerners, fled to neighboring Benin and Ghana, and
 roughly 125,000 were displaced internally. Many returned, but approximately
 150,000 were still abroad at year's end because of concern about their personal safe-
 ty should they return or because of other considerations including economic ones.
 The Government's amnesty law was intended to encourage the refugees' return, but
 results by the end of the year were disappointing. The Government accommodates
 an estimated 6,000 refugees, mainly Ghanians, and does not force them to return
 to countries in which they fear persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Despite Constitutional and structural advances, citizens still were only partly able
 to change their Government. President Eyadema continued to dominate the state
 apparatus, despite the creation of a parliamentary system and the installation of a
 new Government under opposition leader Prime Minister Edm Kodo. In contrast
 with the seriously flawed presidential elections of 1993, international observers
 deemed the legislative elections in February to be generally free and fair, although
 there were deficiencies, including the Government's unwillingness to accredit some
 foreign observers and local poll watchers.
 The principles of universal suffrage and secret ballot were observed. However,
 some members of the security forces, and militants engaged with them, are credibly
 reported to have engaged in several bombings and attacks on polling places and on
 one vote-counting center during the second round of the legislative elections. They
 are also believed responsible for the kidnaping and murder of Gaston Edeh, newly
 elected member of the CAR Party. Opponents of President Eyadema are credibly re-
 ported to have bombed a house belonging to pro-Eyadema Minister of Information
 Benjamin Agbeka. The Supreme Court's Constitutional Chamber, dominated by
 Eyadema supporters, invalidated the election of Eyadema opponents in three dis-
 tricts in a ruling widely considered to be questionable.
 Opposition parties won a slight legislative majority and President Eyadema
 named as Prime Minister Edem Kodjo, the leader of the smaller opposition party
 in the legislature, the Togolese Union for Democracy, with six seats. In doing so,
 he met the formal constitutional requirement to name someone "from among the
 parliamentary majority", but bypassed the leader of the larger (34-seat) opposition
 party, the CAR's Yaovi Agboyibor. Although the Government allows opposition polit-
 ical parties to function legally and openly, security forces or propresidential mili-
 tants occasionally harassed, threatened, or intimidated their members or leaders.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in political activities,
 and many women do so through membership in associations and political parties,
 teachers' unions, and protest groups. However, there was only one female minister
 in the Kodjo Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several local private human rights groups. These include the Togolese
 Human Rights League and the Association for the Promotion of the Rule of Law.
 The National Human Rights Commission, a government-sponsored and govern-
 ment-funded human rights organization, remained relatively inactive. The Paris-
 based Federation Internationale des Ligues des Droits de L'Homme and the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross visited and participated in seminars. The U.N.
 Human Rights Subcommission, Amnesty International, and other private organiza-
 tions criticized the Government for abuses including its failure to take action on
 human *hts violations in 1993 and earlier, including the 1992 attempted assas-
 sination o opposition leader Gilchrist Olympio. The Government did not respond in
 detail but termed the United Nations report "scandalous and outdated."
 
 
 273
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family origin, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal political or other
 convictions. However, the Government does not provide effective redress for dis-
 crimination complaints, and discrimination based on both ethnic group and sex is
 common.
 Women.-Despite the law and constitutional protections, women continue to expe-
 rience discrimination, especially in education, pension benefits, and traditional law.
 A husband may legally oppose his wife's right to work and control her earnings. Em-
 ployers are often reluctant to hire women, especially for higher level positions. Far
 fewer women than men attend university and few women graduate from secondary
 school. In urban areas, women dominate local market activities and commerce with
 Toga's neighbors. However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas, where most
 of the population lives, leave women with little time for anything other than taxing
 domestic and agricultural field work. Under traditional law, which affects the vast
 majority of women, a wife has no rights in the event of divorce, separation, or the
 death of her husband.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, continues. Although mechanisms
 exist within both the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for
 redress, the police rarely intervene in domestic violence cases. Local houses of pros-
 titution exist. In recent years, instances of trafficking in Togolese women for the
 purposes of prostitution have come to public attention. These women have been
 promised jobs in the Middle East or Europe, transported there, then forced into
 prostitution and sometimes otherwise abused. There are no specific laws dealing
 with trafficking of this nature, and the Government has made no visible efforts to
 curtail it.
 Children.-The Government cannot afford adequate protection of children's wel-
 fare. There are few juvenile courts, and children are often jailed with adult crimi-
 nals. Orphans and other needy children receive more aid from extended families or
 private organizations than from the State.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which international health experts have con-
 demned as dangerous to both physical and psychological health is practiced by a few
 ethnic groups in Togo's northern and central regions. Although some reports indi-
 cate the practice, which is typically performed at an early age, may be gradually
 diminishing, as high as 50 percent of Togolese women may have undergone FGM.
 NationalIRacial7Ethnic Minorities.-Members of northern ethnic groups domi-
 nate the security forces, while southerners dominate most commerce and the profes-
 sions. Southerners also dominate most political parties, except for the pro-Eyadema
 party. Civil unrest in recent years and inadequate law enforcement exacerbated eth-
 nic rivalries dating from precolonial times.
 With the rise in North-South tensions, majority ethnic group members in those
 regions have harassed and attacked their neighbors belong g to the minority
 groups, forcing them back to their home regions. Mainly southern Togolese fled in
 January 1993 to neighboring Benin and Ghana after some members of the security
 forces in Lome fired indiscriminately on civilians (see Section L.a.).
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate accessibility to pub-
 lic or private facilities for people with disabilities. Although the Constitution nomi-
 nally obliges the Government to aid disabled persons and shelter them from social
 injustice, the Government provides only limited assistance in  ractice. While there
 is no overt state discrimination against disabled persons, andsome hold some re-
 sponsible government positions, the disabled have no meaningful recourse against
 private sector discrimination, which compels many to beg.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides most workers the right to
 join unions and the right to strike. Security forces, including firemen and policemen,
 do not have these rights; government health care workers may join unions but may
 not strike. The work force in the formal (wage) sector is small, involving about 20
 percent of the work force, of whom 60 to 70 percent are union members or support-
 ers. There were no strikes in 1994.
 There are several major trade union federations. The National Confederation of
 Togolese Workers (CNTT), though no longer formally affiliated with the Govern-
 ment, remains closely associated with it. The Labor Federation of Togolese Workers
 (CSTT) and the National Union of Independent Syndicates (UNSIT) probably sur-
 passed the CNTT in membership. Although independent of any political party, they
 cooperated closely with the opposition parties in the 1992-93 general strike, which
 was primarily political in nature. During the general strike, a new labor federation,
 
 
 274
 the General Union of Free Unions (UGSL) was formed by workers not in agreement
 with the strike. This federation is made up primarily of supporters of President
 Eyadema.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against workers for reasons of sex, ori-
 gin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution against
 strikers. The Government transferred many civil servants in the wake of their par-
 ticipation in the 1993 general strike. Labor leaders and opposition politicians de-
 nounced these transfers as arbitrary and discriminatory.
 Security forces threatened and harassed some labor leaders. The authorities ar-
 rested and imprisoned union official Komi Dackey. Another labor leader, Tchao
 Idrissou of the Unsyndito Chauffeurs' Union, was kidnaped and murdered by un-
 known persons for reasons which may have involved his union activities (see Section
 L.a.).
 The various federations and unions are free to associate with international labor
 groups. The CNTT and the UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code nominally
 provides workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal
 (wage) sector employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However,
 true collective bargaining is limited by the Government's role in producing a single
 tripartite bargaining agreement signed by the unions, management, and the Gov-
 ernment. This agreement sets wage standards for all formal sector employees. Indi-
 vidual groups in the formal sector can attempt through collective bargaining to ne-
 gotiate a more favorable package, and some do, but this is not common. The CNTT
 had a role in the bargaining process in earlier years when it was the de facto me-
 nopoly labor federation, but it acted more as a spokesman for labor interests within
 the Government and ruling party than as an independent labor federation.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor is
 charged with resolving labor-related complaints but does not always do so effec-
 tively.
 A 1989 law allows the establishment of export processing zones (EPEs). Many
 companies have EPZ status, and about 20 are currently operating. The EPZ law pro-
 vides exemptions from some provisions of the Labor Code, notably the regulations
 on hiring and firing. Employees of EPZ firma d not enjoy the same protection
 against antiunion discrimination as d other workers
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law does not address
 this question, forced or compulsory labor is not known to exist.
 d Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial
 and technical employment require a minimum age of 18. Inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce these age requirements, but only in the formal sector in urban
 areas. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in farming and petty trading,
 very young children traditionally assist in their families' work.
 p. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets minimum wages for dif-
 ferent categories, ranging from unskilled labor through professional positions. Less
 than the official minimum wage is often paid in practice, but mostly to less skilled
 workers. Official monthly minimum wages range from approximately $27.50 to $45
 (14,000 to 22,000 CFA francs). The minimum wage was established in 1987 and has
 not been changed, despite the January CFA devaluation which halved the value of
 the local currency in dollar terms. Many workers cannot maintain a decent standard
 of living at the lower official minimum wages, and many must supplement their in-
 comes through second jobs or subsistence farming. The Ministry 0 Labor is osten-
 sibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage system but does not enforce
 the law in practice. The Labor Code, which regulateslabeor practices, requires equal
 pay for equal work, regardless of sex. However, this provision is generally observed
 on ly in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory, and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The law requires overtime payments, and there are restrictions on excessive over-
 time. The Ministry of Labors enforcement is weak, however, and employers often
 ignore these prviOns.
 technica l   ig committee in the Ministry of Labor sets health and safety
 standards in the workp ace. It may levy penalties on employers who do not meet
 the standards and employees ostensibly have the right to complain to labor inspec-
 tors of unhealthy or unsafe conditions without penalty. In practice the Ministry's
 enforcement of the various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Larger enter-
 
 
 275
 prises must legally provide medical services for their employees and usually attempt
 to respect occupational health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
