 TOGO
 A transition government headed by Prime Minister Joseph Koffigoh and charged
 with holding national elections remained in office during most of 1992. However,
 President Gnassingbe Eyadema retained effective control over the security forces.
 Scheduled elections were postponed because of political violence and squabbling
 among various factions. This resulted in month-long negotiations between the Presl-
 dent and the major political parties in August 1992 to prolong the transition period
 to December 31, 1992, by which time a new, democratically e ected government was
 to be installed. Although the agreement explicitly retained the Prime Minister and
 the High Council of the Republic (HCR) or interim legislature, it also enhanced
 President Eyadema's powers, putting him in charge of security issues, giving his po-
 litical party greater representation in the Government, and requiring his agreement
 to a new ministerial cabinet. As agreed in August, the President now presides over
 the Council of Ministers when the subject matter is in his domain, e.g., security,
 although in fact he chose to preside over all the Cabinet meetings. The August
 agreement also contained changes to the draft constitution; in particular, it deleted
 a requirement that active-duty military personnel resign in order to become can-
 didates for the Presidency. This deletion permits President Eyadema to be a can-
 didate again if he chooses. A draft constitutional prevision requiring presidential
 candidates to be 45 years old was retained, effectively excluding 44-year-old interim
 Prime Minister Koffigoh from running for the Presidency in 1992.
 While a constitutional referendum did take place on September 27, other sched-
 uled elections were repeatedly postponed. The Constitution was passed overwhelm-
 ingly. In the wake of the hostage-taking at the HCR in October 1992, a major inde-
 pendent labor union and the Collective of Major Opposition Political Parties (COD
 II) declared an indefimite general strike which was still in effect at year's end. The
 political demands made by the coalition were resisted by President Eyadema, and
 the continuing stalemate made it impossible to carry out the elections originally
 scheduled for 1992.
 The Togolese security forces numbering approximately 13,000, consist primarily
 of the Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police (Surete), and Gendarmerie. The Inte-
 rior Minister is responsible for the National Police. The Defense Minister nominally
 supervises the other Togolese security forces, but, in fact, they report through the
 General Staff to President Eyadema. Total military expenditures for 1989, the last
 year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a de-
 tailed analysis, were $43 million. While military expenditures have been the subject
 of public debate, the transition Government has left the decision to implement any
 such reductions to the next, elected government. Members of the security forces, and
 especially elements of the Army, were credibly cited in 1992 for various human
 rights abuses.
 Tog has an annual per capita gross domestic product of less than $500. More
 than 70 percent of its 3.6 million people are engaged in subsistence agriculture, but
 the country also has an active commercial sector. The economy continued to stag-
 nate in 1992 due to political uncertainty, inadequate rainfall, and declining terms
 of trade for principal exports:phosphates, coffee, cocoa, and cotton. While the Gov-
 ernment of Prime Minister Koffioh remained committed to rspect for human
 
 
 rights, political polarization and subsequent violence, much of it committed by mem-
 bers of the security forces, seriously affected the human rights situation. Political
 parties were active, and a free press functioned, but elements of the military en-
 gaged in harassment of both political figures and journalists. There were no reports
 of long-term political prisoners in Togo in 1992, although there were brief detentions
 under questionable circumstances by members of the security forces. This included
 an incident in which the entire H was effectively taken hostage for a day, and
 members of the HCR were beaten.
 Assassinations and attempted assassinations of political figures and members of
 President Koffigoh's Government were part of a larger climate of insecurity in which
 prominent figures were threatened, and many bombings and attacks by gunmen
 were carried out throughout the country. Several political figures were killed. Some
 of these incidents were credibly attributed by human rights organizations to ele-
 ments of the security forces. The climate of insecurity and attendant fears of vio-
 lence had a very negative effect on political expression. One credible instance of tor-
 ture by members of the security forces was reported.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Several politically motivated killings
 occurred in Togo in 1992, and no effective action was taken to apprehend and pun-
 ish the perpetrators. On May 5, unidentified persons ambushed Gilchrist Olympio,
 likely presidential candidate and chairman of the Union of Forces of Change (UFC)
 olitical party. Olympio was seriously wounded, and two of his associates, Dr.
 Messan Atidepe, a Member of the HCR, and Elliot Ohin, Chairman of the Togolese
 Movement for Democracy, were killed. After an investigation in Togo, the Paris-
 based International Federation of Human Rights (FIDH) attributed these killings to
 security forces associated with the President. On July 23, Tavio Amorin, a member
 of the HCR and first National Secretary of the Pan-African Socialist Party, was shot
 by unidentified persons in civilian dress. He later died of his wounds. His death was
 credibly attributed to elements of the security forces. In May a member of President
 Eyadema's political party was killed in a clash with UFC supporters. Another mem-
 ber and his family were killed in a September explosion of uncertain origin at his
 home. In retaliation for the bombing, the homes of 37 members of the opposition
 reportedly were burned, and many opposition supporters fled the area. The Govern-
 ment subsequently sent in troops to restore order.
 There were scattered incidents of violence associated with the November and De-
 cember general strike in which both police and civilians were killed and injured. Ex-
 amples of individuals affected durn  the pod include several prefects who failed
 to appear at a meeting called by President Eyadema. They were subsequently
 threatened by members of the security forces; at least two were beaten, and a num-
 ber went into hiding, fearing for their safety. On December 4, several policemen and
 civilians were shot and wounded in Lome in a clash between an opposition figure
 and the police. On December 6 in Kpalime, an opposition stronghold, a gendarme
 in civilian clothes was discovered carrying a weapon ankd w  kled by a crowd. An-
 other gendarme was ikured in the same incident, and security forces responded
 with force shooting to wdeath several civilians. Additional incidents were recorded in
 Badou and other regional cities.
 b. Disappearance.eNo disappearances were reported.
 Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.--
 There was one credible report of torture in 1992. Captain Esso Pelo, a military offi-
 cer, was reported by the press to have been severely tortured by members of the
 security forces for allegedly providing information on President Eyadema and his as-
 sociates to members of the opposition. No action to punish this reported crime or
 those of a similar nature reported in earlier years had been taken by the end of
 1992.
 Two journalists were beaten and briefly detained by security forces on November
 16. The journalists, members of the Union of Government-Employed Journalists
 (SYNJOPE), had gsne to Radio Lame, the government radio network, to urge the
 station managers to go to a minimum service broadcast format during the general
 strike. It was credibly reported that the Minister of Culture and Communications
 was present and witnessed the beating.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh in 1992 with serious overcrowding and in-
 adequate food and medical care for prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exi/e.-Under long-standing Togolese law, per-
 sons arrested may be held incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an ad-
 ditional 48-hour extensio in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice, most de-
 
 
 tentions conform to this provision. On October 22, elements of the military forces,
 including members of the Presidential Guard, surrounded the meeting place of the
 HCR, effectively taki  hostage the members of the HCR and other persons in the
 building. The hostagetakers were seeking rebates of dues they had paid to the
 former sole political party. They were seen to beat some of the hostagesbefore free-
 ing them. Passersby in the street were severely beaten by soldiers as well. On sev-
 eral occasions, journalists were detained briefly for publishing materials offensive to
 the President or military forces. It is questionable whether these detentions met
 legal requirements.
 A shortage of qualified judicial personnel has produced a backlog of prisoners who
 are held for long periods of time-in some cases 6 months or more-before being
 brought to trial.
 In 1992 there were no persons formally exiled from Togo, since a general amnesty
 had been promulgated in 1991. However, some critics of President Eyadema re-
 mained abroad for all or part of 1992 because of threats against them.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system, while officially independent
 of the Government, frequently has been subject to intervention by President
 Eyadema in the past, but no such incidents were noted in 1992. The judicial system
 employs both traditional law and the Napoleonic cede in trying criminal and civil
 cases. The Supreme Court is at the apex of the system. The criminal process begins
 with pretrial investigation bya special judge who examines the adequacy of the evi-
 dence and decides on bail. The number of judges is inadequate, and training is in-
 sufficient. The result is a serious impediment to the delivery of justice. Trials are
 open to the public, and judicial procedures are respected. Defendants have the right
 to counsel, and lower court decisions may be appealed to two higher courts. In rural
 areas, the village chief or council of elders may try minor criminal and civil cases.
 Those who reject a traditional ruling may take their case to the regular court sys-
 tem, which is the starting point for cases in urban areas. Special courts handle
 cases related to public security (State Security Court), embezzlement of public funds
 (Tribunal for Recovery of Public Funds), and violent crimes (Court of Assizes). There
 are procedural safeguards and a right of appeal in the special courts.
 The State Security Court has not convened in recent years. There have been no
 political or security cases tried under the transition Government.
 There were no known political prisoners in Togo in 1992.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy. Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, searches of private residences may be authorized by a judge or sen-
 ior police official. In political and national security cases, the security forces do not
 require such authorization. The new Government has ended the practice of opening
 mail and monitoring telephones. The police and gendarmerie continue to maintain
 domestic intelligence services. The transition Government's efforts to eliminate the
 domestic activities of military intelligence have not been completely successful.
 During 1992 there were many bombings or armed attacks against private resi-
 dences. in many of these cases, the victims were members of o position groups, and
 the attacks were credibly believed by the opposition and local numan rights groups
 to have been conducted by elements of the security forces. In some cases attacks
 were carried out against the homes of persons closely associated with President
 Eyadema, his political party, or the security forces presumably by unidentified op-
 ponents. In many instances, motivation was not clear. No arrests or trials of sus-
 pects in the cases of bombings or house attacks were reported in 1992.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press was exercised in
 1992 in Togo, but those freedoms were sometimes constrained by episodes of harass-
 ment, damage to propety, threats of violence, arrests, and personal injury, particu-
 larly inflicted by the security forces.
 Approximately 15 independent weekly or biweekly newspapers were published in
 1992. While opposition newspapers are widely available in Lome, some have re-
 ported difficulties in distribution in interior regions because of harassment from
 supporters of President Eyadema. On January 22, 1992, uniformed men, apparently
 from the army, wrecked the offices of the opposition newspaper, ~ourmer du Golfe.
 The presumed reason for the attack was the publication of stories considered to be
 defamatory to military personnel. In early September, the military and gendarmerie
 increased their harassment of opposition newspapers, brieflytaking into custody the
 directors or editors of four of the leading weekies (La Parole, Ibanou Express,
 Forum Hebdo, and Courrier du Golfe). Formal charges for defamation of President
 Eyadema were brought against the director of La Parole in September. Court pro-
 ccedings in the La Parole case had not been concluded by year's end. The news-
 papers continued critical coverare desnite these incidents of harassme.nt.
 
 
 Until September the official media (two radio stations, one television station, and
 one daily newspaper) covered the views of the various government organs and the
 opposition factually and in some detail. However, since the September government
 reshuffle, the state media have tended toward favorable coverage of President
 Eyadema and his political party, to the disadvantage of the Prime Minister and the
 opposition. During and after the October 22-23 seizure of the HCR, the state media
 ofen failed to carry domestic and foreign statements critical of the military's ac-
 tions.
 On September 4, Mrs. Madeleine Aduayom, an opposition figure and member of
 the HCR, was beaten by gendarmes after she left a television station where she had
 participated in a discussion program dealing with political topics. The national tele-
 vision station suspended its weekly political broadcasts in protest against Mrs.
 Aduayom's mistreatment. Also in response, SYNJOPE called a strike to protest "the
 precarious treatment and insecurity' they face in their work. In November an unof-
 ficial radio station, Radio Liberte, began clandestine broadcasting of opposition
 views. The unregistered station was denounced by the Communications Minister,
 who ordered the station located and closed down. Security force efforts to do so were
 unsuccessful.
 On September 13, following reluctance of the HCR to approve a new Eyadema-
 dominated Cabinet, a group of military personnel entered the premises of the na-
 tional radio and demanded the station broadcast a communique attributed to the
 Togolese armed forces demanding the immediate acceptance of the new Cabinet.
 The communique was rebroadcast repeatedly until withdrawn by a military officer,
 reportedly acting on the orders of President Eyadema. The HCR acted positively'on
 the new Cabinet appointments less than 24 hours later. On October 22, during the
 seizure of the HCR, soldiers again occupied the radio station briefly and forced the
 station to broadcast army communiques.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the transition Govern-
 ment, Togolese were free to organize in associations and political parties, and many
 did so. Political activities were subject on occasion to harassment and interference
 from members of the security forces or opposing political groups. Death threats and
 attacks against opposition leaders and members of Prime Minister Koffigoh's Gov-
 ernment, following assassinations and attempted assassinations, led to curtailment
 of public political activities. Some prominent figures avoided living at home because
 of the threat to their safety.
 Political groups from southern Togo hesitated to campaign in the north central
 part of the country, the President's home area where they were sometimes harassed
 or attacked by, supporters of the President. Similarly, members of the President's
 party were on occasion beaten when attempting to engage in political activities in
 parts of the south, where oppition to the President is concentrated. While some
 public gatherings were held without interference, in other instances, the security
 forces dispersed them with force. On July 30, at least 23 persons were reported in-
 jured as police and gendarmes fired tear gas, and, in at least one case, live ammuni-
 tion at crowds which were blocking streets and burning tirs in protest against the
 death of political leader Tavio Amorin. On August 4, security force memers fired
 in the air and beat members of a women's gup preparing to hold a demonstration
 for democracy. During the general strike in Nove r and December, security forces
 forcibly dispersed an opposition march, beating some participants, when marchers
 attempted to move through an area of Lome in which demonstrations had been
 banned.
 c. Freedom of Reiion.-The Constitution adopted on September 27, like the pre-
 ceding interim constitution, provides for religious freedom. Jehovah's Witnesses and
 several small apostolic/celestial grups in the past were denied official approval to
 practice their beliefs. Formerly able to worship only in private, they may now prac-
 tice openly. Non-Togolese clergy may proselytize and engage in other religious ac-
 tivities.
 Local religious groups may maintain contacts with coreligionists in other coun-
 tries. There are no restrictions on travel for religious purposes. All official religious
 observances are ecumenical in nature, and the Gvernment does not favor any spe-
 cific religion. Membership in particular religious groups has no bearing on civil serv-
 ice promotions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Free movement (including domestic and foreign travel, emigration, the
 right to change residence or workplace, and the right to return to the country) is
 generally enjoyed by all. With the rise in tensions between the northern and south-
 ern regions, some residents of minority ethnic groups were harassed by members
 of majority populations and therefore were obliged to return to their home regions.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Throughout 1992 Togolese citizens did not enjoy the right and ability to change
 their government through democratic means. The struggle toward democracy was
 dealt serious blows during the year. In the biggest success, a referendum on the new
 Constitution was held on September 27, and the Constitution was overwhelmingly
 approved. The referendum was marked by a large turnout and was essentially free
 and fair.
 The political parties reached agreement in August on modifying and extending the
 transitional regime until December 31, 1992. The original date of August 28 had
 been set by the National Conference in 1991. The agreement provided more author-
 ity to President Eyadema, including returning the military and security services to
 his formal control.
 Scheduled municipal, legislative, and presidential elections were repeatedly post-
 poned either by political wrangling or by technical difficulties. Even ager the agree-
 ment in August on dates for the elections, they had to be postponed, first because
 of technical problems which became evident during the constitutional referendum,
 but also because of a dispute over what kind of voting system would be used. The
 October 22-23 HCR seizure led the opposition to demand additional guarantees of
 army neutrality and security for the electoral period.
 The climate of fear which prevailed throughout most of the year had a negative
 impact on the ability of people to campaign or speak freely. For example, on Decem-
 ber 4, uniformed members of the security forces fired at the headquarters of the
 U.T.D. opposition party with no casualties. The repeated instances ormilitary inter-
 ference in the political process rendered the transition even more difficult and prob-
 lematic.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In 1987 the Government established and funded the National Human Rights
 Commission (CNDH) to investigate reports of human rights abuses. The CNDH,
 which functions independently of the Government, issued several reports in 1992
 critical of abuses by the Togolese military. There are several private human rights
 groups in Togo, including the Togolese Human Rights League and the Association
 or    motion of Rule of Law. The Togolese Human Rights League prepared a report
 on the state of human rights in Togo and intervened on behalf of victims of human
 rights abuses during the year. The transition Government also established a Min-
 istry of Human Rights, which was later combined with the Ministry of Social Wel-
 fare. Human rights monitors were subject to threats of violence, credibly attributed
 to elements of the security forces, and were obliged to take special security pre-
 cautions, sometimes absenting themselves from Togo. The Government received vis-
 its from representatives of international human rights organizations. The armed
 forces denounced as false a report from the Paris-based International Federation of
 Human Rights accusing members of the security forces of complicity in the assas-
 sination attempt against Gilchrist Olympio.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 In Togo the security forces are dominated by northern ethnic groups, while com-
 merce and the professions tend to be the preserve of southerners. Most political par-
 ties are dominated by southerners, except for the President's own party. Ethnic ri-
 valries, dating from precolonial times, have been exacerbated by the civil unrest of
 recent years and inadequate law enforcement. On May 2-3, a clash occurred be-
 tween the Kabye and Kotokoli communities in Central Togo in a land dispute com-
 plicated by ethnic and political animosities.
 Togolese women have equality with men under the law, and women's economic
 and social rights are set forth in the Family Code adopted in early 1980. While this
 Code guarantees various women's rights, including maternity leave benefits, in
 practice, women continue to be subjected to discrimination, especially in education,
 pension benefits, and traditional law. Far fewer women than men receive university
 education, and the number of women graduates from secondary schools is low. In
 the urban economic sphere, women dominate both local market activities and com-
 merce with Togo's neighbors, often amassing considerable wealth in the process.
 However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas leave women with little time for
 anything other than taxing domestic and agricultural work. Unlike civil law, cus-
 tomary or traditional law-which affects the vast majority of women-discriminates
 against women, e.g., giving all property to the male in the event of separation or
 divorce. Women participated in the recent political changes through membershio in
 
 
 282
 associations and political parties, teachers' unions, and protest groups. Five women
 are in the 79-member legislature and I is a Minister in the transition Government.
 Violence against women, including wife beating, occurs in Togo. Mechanisms exist
 within both the traditional extended family and formal judicial structures for re-
 dress, but the police rarely intervene in domestic violence cases. Female genital mu-
 tilation (circumcision) is practiced by some northern ethnic groups but is reportedly
 diminishing gradually. However, according to an independent expert in the field the
 percentage of Togolese women who have undergone this procedure may be as igh
 as 50 percent. While the Government has undertaken a campaign to make women
 throughout Togo aware of their expanded opportunities under the new Family Code,
 it has not specifically addressed the issue of violence against women or female geni-
 tal mutilation. A government-sponsored national women's organization publicizes
 women's health, education, and welfare issues, and private groups have formed to
 address similar concerns.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Togolese workers have the right to join labor unions
 and to strike. Prior to 1991, the right of association was effectively limited by the
 requirement that all workers pay dues to the National Confederation of Togolese
 Workers (CNTr), which was formerly associated with the ruling party, a practice
 that had been criticized for years by the International Labor Organization. This
 gave the CNTT a de facto monopoly on the labor movement although trade unions
 could and did exist outside the CN7T. In August 1991, the Rational Conference sus-
 pended the automatic withholding of CNTT dues for all workers, and it froze
 CNITs assets. A number of trade unions left the CNTr, some of which then affili-
 ated with two new federations: the Labor Federation of Togolese Workers (CSTT)
 and the National Union of Independent Syndicates (UNSIT). The CSTT and the
 UNSIT are supplanting the CNTT in importance.
 In response to various political events, labor unions called for general strikes
 which were generally observed. Such strikes followed the assassination attempt
 against Gilchrist Olympio, the murder of Tavio Amorin, and the takeover of HCR
 headquarters by military personnel. Four strikes were called in 1992. Striker de-
 mands were primarily political, particularly in the case of the HCR takeover, calling
 for cabinet changes, assured neutrality of the armed forces, and punishment of mili-
 tary members responsible for the October 22 HCR takeover. In the case of this
 strike, begun in November, the demands had not been met, and the strike was con-
 tinuing at year's end.
 A police strike in March was marked by violence as elements of the police erected
 roadblocks, commandeered private vehicles, and shot randomly, killing at least one
 person. The strike had political overtones, as one issue was what to do with 500
 recruits-former soldiers mainly from President Eyadema's ethnic group-who did
 not meet police standards.
 The various federations and unions are free to associate with international labor
 groups. The CNIr and the UNSIT were approved as affiliates of the ICFTU in De-
 cember 1992.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code guarantees
 workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal sector employees
 are nominally covered by a collective bargaining agreement. There is one tripartite
 collective bargaining agreement signed by the unions, management, and the Gov-
 ernment. It sets wage standards for all formal sector employees. Individual groups
 of the formal sector can attempt to negotiate a more favorable package, and some
 do, though it is not a common practice. The CNTI had a role in collective bargain-
 ing when it was the de facto monopoly labor federation, but it acted more as a
 spokesman for labor interests within the Government and ruling party than as an
 independent labor federation. Since 1991 the CNTT, as well as the newer labor fed-
 erations, have taken a more active role in independent collective bargaining.
 While the interim Constitution is silent on worker rights, the 1974 Labor Code
 prohibits antiunion discrimination.
 A law allowing the establishment of Export Processing Zones (EPZ's) was enacted
 in late 1989. A number of companies have received EPZ status, and about a dozen
 have begun operations. The EPZ law provides exemptions from some provisions of
 Togolese labor law, notably the regulations on hiring and firing workers. Employees
 of EPZ firms do not enjoy the same protection against antiunion discrimination as
 do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although the law is silent on the
 question, forced or compulsory labor does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under the age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial
 
 
 and technical employment require a minimum age of 18. These age requirements
 are generally enforced in the formal sector in urban areas by inspectors from the
 Ministry of Labor. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in farming, very
 young children traditionally assist in their families' work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor.-Minimum wages are set by the Government
 for different categories, but less than the official minimum wage is often paid in
 practice. Workers sometimes cannot maintain a decent standard of living even at
 the official minimum wages, and many must supplement their incomes through sec-
 ond jobs or subsistence farming.
 Labor practices are regulated by the Labor Code. The Code stipulates that there
 should be equal pay for equal work, regardless of sex, and this provision is generally
 observed in the formal sector. Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, ex-
 cept for agricultural enterprises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at
 least one 24-hour rest per week is compulsory; and workers must receive 30 days
 of paid leave each year. Enforcement is weak, and these provisions are not univer-
 sally respected.
 Health and safety standards in the workplace are determined by a technical con-
 sulting committee in the Ministry of Labor, which may levy penalties on employers
 who do not meet the conditions. In practice, the Ministry's enforcement of the var-
 ious provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Larger enterprises are required to pro-
 vide medical services for their employees and usually attempt to respect occupa-
 tional health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
