 TOGO
 President Gnassingbe Eyadema and his Assembly of the Togolese People (,  m)
 party, strongly backed by the military, continue to dominate the exercise of political
 power in Tog. The opposition however, has since February 1994 held a narrow ma-
 jority in the National Assembly, and the Government is headed by Edem Kodjo,
 leader of a small opposition party, the Democratic Union of Tog (UTD). Most of the
 institutions called odr in the Constitution either do not exist or are too weak or frag-
 ile to ensure democratic government. Togr took positive steps toward economic and
 democratic reform and made some progress in its professed intention to move from
 an authoritarian legacy to multiparty democracy.
 The security forces consist primarily of the army (including the elite Presidential
 Guard),. navy, air force, the Gendarmerie, and the Surete Nationale (which includes
 the national police). Approximately 90 percent of army officers and 70 percent of en-
 listed soldiers come from the President's northern (Kabye) ethic group. The Min-
 ister of the Interior is in charge of the national police and the Defense Minister has
 authority over other security forces. These ministers remain overwhelmingly loyal
 to their chief, and thus President Eyadema exercises direct control over the security
 forces. There are credible reports that members of the security forces committed nu-
 merous serious human rights abuses.
 About 80 percent of the country's estimated 4.3 million citizens are engaged in
 subsistence agriculture; there is also an active commercial sector. Annual per capita
 gross domestic product is approximately $300. Foreign donors, notably France and
 the European Union, resumed military and economic assistance. The economy
 showed moderate growth this year.
 The human rights situation improved somewhat, and the number of reported vio-
 lations significantly diminished. However, the conditions that led to the abuses of
 the past-the political dominance of President Eyadema and the unchecked actions
 of ty, str  -still exist, and problems remained  ai n areas. There were
 credible reports that security forces and their allies were responsible for
 extrajudicial killing, beatings, intimidation, interference with privacy rights, and ar-
 bitrary detentions. The Government did not effectively punish any of those involved.
 In general, the Government does not investigate or punish security force members
 who commit such abuses. Prolonged pretrial detention is cormnplace, and prison
 conditions remained very harsh. The judicial system fails to ensure defendants'
 rights to fair and expeditious trials. Some detainees wait as long as 4 years to be
 judged. There were instances of infringement of freedom of speech of the press by
 security forces. Discrimination and violence agai rt women continued, as did abuse
 of children. In August the Government signed an agreement with the United Na-
 
 
 275
 tions High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to facilitate the safe repatriation
 of refugees from neighboring Ghana and Benin.
 Armed dissidents were responsible for the deaths of security force personnel and
 civilians.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.--Security forces were responsible for
 at least one extrajudicial killing. On July 27, in Accra, Ghana, unknown persons
 credibly alleged to be Togolese security forces murdered Lieutenant Vincent Tokofai,
 a leader of the armed Togolese opposition in Ghana. Lt. Tokofai was one of the
 guards for Prime Minister Koffigoh who defended the Prime Minister's office during
 the December 1991 siege by security forces. He was alleged to be the person respon-
 sible for killing the brother of President Eyadema during that attack. The Govern-
 ment disclaimed responsibility for LI. Tokofai's murder but did not investigate, pros-
 ecute, or punish anyone for the killing.
 Lieutenant Colonel Yoma Djoua was convicted of robbery and premeditated mur-
 der and sentenced to 35 years' imprisonment. He had been under arrest since 1994
 and was widely thought to have committed many extrajudicial killings on behalf of
 President Eyadema in the past. There was no resolution of the 1994 murder of Ac-
 tion Committee for Renewal (CAR) party leader Gaston Edeh.
 On May 13, armed individuals, credibly alleged to be radical opposition forces,
 fired on security forces in Bagbe, killing five soldiers and two children of civilians.
 Opposition forces were also responsible for the deaths of six soldiers in an armed
 battle in the Lome suburb of Ave-Maria June 14, and for an attack in D'akepe
 which killed three soldiers and three civilians.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were, however, no developments in the 1994 disappearance of diplomat David
 Bruce, nor any resolution of the disappearances of Afougnilede Essiba, Adanou Igbe,
 Kobono Kowouvi, and another companion, arrested by soldiers at an armed check-
 point in Adetikope in 1994. In 1994 the Government began an investigation of the
 Bruce disappearance, but has not yet reported results.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits these practices, but on numerous occasions security forces beat
 detainees immediately after arresting them. Some suspects claimed to have been
 tortured. The Government did not investigate, prosecute, or punish any officials for
 these abuses.
 Prison conditions remained very harsh, with serious overcrowding and inadequate
 sanitation and food. Medical facilities are practically nonexistent, and widespread
 disease in prisons led to numerous deaths of incarcerated individuals. Children are
 often incarcerated with convicted adults. International and local private organiza-
 tions have access to prisons for monitoring purposes. Women are housed separately.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law allows authorities to hold ar-
 rested persons incommunicado without charge for 48 hours, with an additional 48-
 hour extension in cases deemed serious or complex. In practice, detainees can be
 and often are detained without bail for lengthy periods with the approval of a judge.
 Family members and attornerys officially have access to a detainee after the initial
 48- or 96-hour detention period, but authorities often delay, and sometimes deny,
 access.
 Judges or senior police officials issue warrants. Although detainees have the right
 to be informed of the charges against them, in practice, police sometimes ignore this
 right. The law stipulates that a special judge conduct a pretrial investigation to ex-
 amine the adequacy of the evidence and decide on bail. However, a shortage of
 judges and other qualified personnel plus official indifference have resulted in
 lengthy pretrial detentions--in some cases up to 4 years. An estimated 15 percent
 of the prison population were pretrial detainees. In rare cases, the Government used
 brief investigative detentions of less than 48 hours to harass and intimidate opposi-
 tion journalists for alleged defamation of government officials (see Section 2.a.).
 There were credible allegations of arbitrary arrests and detention. On June 23,
 military police arrested Lt. Adillou Badie of the national gendarmerie in Lome. He
 was allegedly the leader of a group trying to free Lt. Col. Djoua (see Section l.a.).
 Held with out trial or charges, Ba die remains incarcerated at the officers' mess in
 Kara. Security forces detained former refugee Kokou Koudaya and Ghanaian Salifou
 Zakari without trial and without access to a lawyer or family for 10 months; both
 claimed to have been tortured. Koudaya, an opposition party member, was charged
 with arms possession and fraud. Although their arrests predated the general am-
 nesty of December 14, 1994, they were not released until August 28.
 
 
 276
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government did not formally exile any-
 one.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, the executive branch continued to influence the judiciary in prac-
 tice.
 The Supreme Court stands at the apex of the court system. The civil judiciary sys-
 tem includes the Sessions (Court of Assizes) and Appeals Courts. A nulitary tribunal
 exists for crimes committed by security forces, but its proceedings are closed. Tradi-
 tional law discriminates against women, particularly in the area of inheritance.
 The court system remained overburdened and understaffed (see Section 1.d.), and
 magistrates, like most government employees, are not always paid on time. The ju-
 dicial system employs both African traditional law and the Napoleonic Code in try-
 ing criminal and civil cases. Trials are open to the public, and judicial procedures
 are generally respected. Defendants have the right to counsel and to appeal. The
 Bar Association provides attorneys for the indigent. Defendants may confront wit-
 nesses, present evidence, and enjoy a presumption of innocence. In rural areas, the
 village chief or council of elders may try minor criminal and civil cases. Those who
 reject the traditional ruling may take their cases to the regular court system, which
 is the starting point for cases in urban areas.
 The Government released all political prisoners in late 1994 and early 1995 under
 the December 1994 general amnesty. Several opposition groups claim that the Gov-
 ernment holds nine prisoners at the Kara military prison for political reasons, but
 most groups-including the independent Togolese League of Human Rights--con-
 sider them to be civil prisoners convicted in a public trial in which their rights to
 due process were respeted.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-In
 criminal cases, a judge or senior police official may authorize searches of private
 residences. In political and national security cases, the security forces need no prior
 authorization. Police conducted searches without warrants, searching for dissidents'
 arms caches as well as for criminals. The Government monitors telephones and cor-
 respondence, and maintains the police and gendarmerie as domestic intelligence
 services.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice, al-
 though on occasion it intimidated journalists through threats, detention, and perse-
 cution. Authorities detained Knock-Kalao Billy, director of publication of the satiri-
 cal weekly newspaper Kpakpa Desenchante on June 2, following publication of an
 article critical of the gendarmerie. He was released after a few hours of questioning.
 In November, Fulbert Altisso, director of the opposition newspaper LEveil du
 Peuple, was arrested and charged with defamation in regard to an article accusing
 security forces of murdering four civilians. The Government released him December
 26. Journalist Martin Dossou Gbenouga, Managing Editor of Tribune des Demo-
 crats, was pardoned after originally being convicted of defamation of the President,
 and released in January.
 In early August, the Secretary of State for Security cited an outdated law in an
 attempt to penalize opposition newspapers for not conforming to government guide-
 lines. The same week, security forces confiscated issues of La Sentinelle and La
 Lettre de Tchaoudjo and harassed street vendors of opposition newspapers. The edi-
 tors of La Sentinelle who fled the country in 1994 remain abroad. Authorities also
 seized copies of the opposition La Crocodile from the streets.
 There is a lively press-often extremely critical of President Eyadema and Prime
 Minister Kojo--of approximately 10 independent newspapers. There is one inde-
 pendent radio station, but it operates without an official license. The official media
 consist of one radio station, one television station, and one daily newspaper. Al-
 though they were generally slanted in favor of President Eyadema and the Govern-
 ment, they allowed the opposition limited access. In October two private television
 stations received licenses to broadcast, but neither provide any reporting of local or
 national events.
 At the University of Benin, Togo's sole university, academic freedom is con-
 strained by concern among professors about potential harassment by the Govern-
 ment or antiopposition militants.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, citi-
 zens are free to organize in associations and political parties, but fear of harsh reac-
 tion from the Government has reduced public demonstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice.
 
 
 277
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government gen-
 erally respects them in practice. However armed roadblocks and arbitrary searches
 of vehicles are commonplace. The lack of discipline of the soldiers manning the road-
 blocks, and actions such as firing at vehicles and frequently demanding bribes be-
 fore allowing citizens to pass, impedes free movement within the country. Of the es-
 timated 300,000 refugees who had left Togo for security-related or economic reasons
 in the early 1990's, approximately 100,000 have still not returned.
 In August the Government negotiated an agreement with the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for the repatriation of an estimated
 45,000 Togolese refugees living in Benin and 75,000 to 80,000 living in Ghana. At
 year's end, registration of refugees had begun, and some spontaneous repatriations
 ad taken place.
 The Government accommodates rougbly 8,500 refugees, mainly Ghanaians, and
 there were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee
 status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens peacefully to change their gov-
 ernment. In recent elections, however, this right has been only partly respected. Al-
 though international observers considered the 1994 legislative elections to be gen-
 erally free and fair, they found the 1993 presidential elections to be seriously
 flawed. Institutions created to ensure transparency in electoral procedures and to
 adjudicate election disputes, such as the National Electoral Commission and the
 Constitutional Court, are still not in place. Three legislative seats won by the oppo-
 sition, then questionably invalidated by the Supreme Court's Constitutional Cham-
 ber in 1994, remain unfilled. There has been no significant progress toward setting
 by-elections.
 Although the opposition majority in Parliament has on occasion shown independ-
 ence, President Eyadema continues to dominate the Government. In 1994 Eyadema
 used a questionable interpretation of the Constitution to install Edem Kodjo, the
 leader of a minority opposition party, the UTD, as Prime Minister. While K o has
 demonstrated some independence from Eyadema-notably in successfully negotiat-
 ing the refugee repatriation agreement with the UNHCR and a less successful-effort
 to open the phosphate parastatal to private investment--Eyadema continues to in-
 fluence important ministerial nominations, and maintains a highly centralized gov-
 ernment. The Government does not openly restrict the functioning of political oppo-
 nents, but the President uses the strength of the military and his government allies
 to intimidate and harass citizens and opposition groups. Ey'adem also continues to
 influene the judiciary. The 9-month boyott of the Nationa Assembly by the opposi-
 tion maorit CA   pa   ited the Parliament's ability to act independently of the
 President. TeCA    returned to Parliament in August.
 The Constitution provides for universal suffrage and a secret ballot. There are no
 legal restrictions on the participation of women or ethnic minority members in polit-
 ical activities. Although many women are members of associations and political par-
 ties, teachers' unions, and protest groups, there was only one female minister in
 government and one female deputy in the National Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several local private human rights groups, including the Togolese
 Human Rights League (LTDH) and the Association for the Promotion of the Rule
 of Law. Several international human rights organizations, including the U.N. Cen-
 ter for Human Rights, visited Togo. In general the Government allows these groups
 access to investigate alleged violations of human rights, although there were in-
 stances of threats and intimidation of human rights leaders.
 The National Human Rights Commission (CNDH), a government-sponsored and
 government-funded human rights organization, hosted a 3-day seminar for African
 national human rights commissions. Together with the LTDH, the CNDH was vital
 in the release of Kokou Koudaya and Salifou Zakari (see Section 1.d.), but was oth-
 erwise relatively inactive. The International Committee of the Red Cross has a per-
 manent representative in Togo.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnic group, regional
 or family origin, sex, religion, social or economic status, or personal political or other
 convictions. However, the Government does not provide effective redress for dis-
 
 
 278
 
 crimination complaints, and discrimination based on both ethnic group and sex is
 common.
 Women.-Violence against women, including wife beating continues. Althouo,
 mechanisms exist within both the traditional extended faumy and formal judicial
 structures for redress, the police rarely intervene in domestic violence cases. Local
 houses of prostitution exist, and some trafficking in Torolese women for the pur-
 poses of prostitution or for exploiting women as domestic servants occurs with no
 visible effort by the Government to curtail these abuses. Women's groups and relat-
 ed nongovernmental organizations have active campaigns to inform women of their
 4easpite a constitutional declaration of equality under the law, women continue to
 experience discrimination, especially in education pension benefits, and as a con-
 sequence of traditional law. A husband may legally oppose his wife's right to work
 and control her earnings, as well as decide where his family will live. Employers
 are often reluctant to hire women, especially for higher-level positions. Far fewer
 women than men attend university, and fewer women graduate from secondary
 school. Families traditionally give boys priority over girls when deciding who shall
 attend school. In urban areas, women dominate local market activities and com-
 merce with Togo's neighbors. However, harsh economic conditions in rural areas,
 where most of the population lives, leave women with little time for anything other
 than taxing domestic and agricultural field work. Under traditional law, which ap-
 plies for the vast majority of women, a wife has no rights of survivorship in the
 event of divorce, separation, or the death of her husband.
 Children.-Although the Constitution and laws provide for the protection of chil-
 dren's rights, in practice government programs often suffer from a lack of money
 and materials. The Government provides free education in state schools, and there
 are social programs to provide free health care for poor children. Orphans and other
 needy children receive some aid from extended families or private organizations but
 less from the State. There are few juvenile courts, and children are often jailed with
 adults. There are credible reports that trafficking in children for the purpose of
 forced labor exists (see Section 6.c.).
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and pschological health. The Government has
 no stated policy on FGM, which is practiced by some ethnic groups in Togo's north-
 ern and central regions. Although there are no reliable figures, according to some
 estimates, as many as 50 percent of Togolese women may have undergone FGM. _
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate accessibility to pub-
 lic or private facilities for people with disabilities. Although the Constitution nomi-
 nally obliges the Government to aid disabled persons and shelter them from social
 injustice, the Government provides only limited assistance in practice. While there
 is no overt state discrimination against disabled persons, and some hold responsible
 government positions, the disabled have no meaningful recourse against private sec-
 tor discrimination, which compels many to beg.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Membera of northern ethnic groups domi-
 nate the security forces, while southerners dominate most commerce and the profes-
 sions. With a few exceptions, southerners and northerners are also divided along po-
 litical lines. Civil unrest in recent years and inadequate or prejudicial law enforce-
 ment exacerbated ethnic rivalries dating from precolonial times. With the rise in
 north-south tensions, majority ethnic group members in those regions have harassed
 and attacked their neighbors belonging to the minority groups, forcing them back
 to their home regions. In recent years, many Togolese, predominantly southerners,
 fled to neighboring Benin and Ghana, and members of northern ethnic groups were
 internally displaced.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides most workers with the
 right to join unions and the right to strike. Security forces, including firemen and
 policemen, do not have these rights; government health care workers may join
 unions but may not strike. The work force in the formal (wage) sector is small, in-
 volving about 20 percent of the work force, of whom 60 to 70 percent are union
 members or supporters. There was one publicly announced strike, a 1-day "wildcat
 strike" by a group of Air Afrique airline workers.
 There are several major trade union federations. These include the National Con-
 federation of Togolese Workers (CNTT), closely associated with the Government, the
 Labor Federation of Togolese Workers (CSTT), the National Union of Independent
 Syndicates (UNSIT), and the Union of Free Trade Unions.The various federations
 and unions are free to associate with international labor groups. The CNTT and the
 UNSIT are affiliates of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 
 
 279
 
 The Constitution also prohibits discrimination against workers for reasons of sex,
 origin, beliefs, or opinions. There is no specific law prohibiting retribution against
 strikers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code nominally
 provides workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively. All formal sec-
 tor employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement. However, true col-
 lective bargaining is limited by the Government's role in producing a single tri-
 partite bargaining agreement which was signed by the unions, management, and
 the Government. This agreement set wage standards for all formal sector employ-
 ees. Individual groups in the formal sector can attempt through collective bargain-
 in to negotiate a more favorable package, and some do, but this is not common.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination. The Ministry of Labor is
 charged with resolving labor-related complaints but does not always do so effec-
 tively.
 A 1989 law allows the establishment of export processing zones (EPZ's). Many
 companies have EPZ status, and about 20 are currently operating. The EPZ law pro-
 vides exemptions from some provisions of the Labor Code, notably the regulations
 on hiring and firing. Employees of EPZ firms do not enjoy the same protections
 against antiunion discrimination as do other workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically ad-
 dress this question, and children are sometimes engaged in forced labor, primarily
 as domestic servants. Credible sources have confirmed the international trafficking
 of children, most often to other West and Central African countries, but also to the
 Middle East and Asia. In rural areas, parents sometimes force young children into
 domestic work in other households in exchange for cash. The Government has done
 nothing to stop this practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of chil  n under the age of 14 in any enterprise. Some types of industrial
 and technical employment require a minimum age of 18. Inspectors from the Min-
 istry of Labor enforce these age requirements, but only in the formal sector in urban
 areas. In both urban and rural areas, particularly in farming and petty trading,
 very young children traditionally assist in their families' work. Under the Constitu-
 tion, school is mandatory for both sexes to age 15, but this is not strictly enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets minimum wages for dif-
 ferent categories, ranging from unskilled labor through professional positions. Less
 than the official minimum wage is often paid in practice, mostly to less-skilled work-
 ers. Official monthly minimum wages range from approximately $28 to $44 (cfa
 14,000 to cfa 22,000). This 1987 minimum wage has not been revised, despite the
 50 percent devaluation of the CFA in 1994. Many workers cannot maintain a decent
 standard of living at the lower official minimum wages, and many must supplement
 their incomes through second jobs or subsistence farming. The Ministry ofbabor is
 ostensibly responsible for enforcement of the minimum wage system but does not
 enforce the law in practice. The Labor Code, which regulates labor practices, re-
 quires equal pay for equal work, regardless of sex. However, this provision is gen-
 erally observed only in the formal sector.
 Working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for agricultural enter-
 prises, normally must not exceed 40 hours per week; at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week is compulsory, and workers must receive 30 days of paid leave each year.
 The law requires overtime compensation, and there are restrictions on excessive
 overtime work. The Ministry of Labors enforcement is weak, however, and employ-
 ers often ignore these provisions.
 A technical consulting committee in the Ministry of Labor sets workplace health
 and safety standards. It may levy penalties on employers who do not meet the
 standards, and employees ostensibly have the right to complain to labor inspectors
 of unhealthy or unsafe conditions without penalty. In practice, the Ministry's en-
 forcement of the various provisions of the Labor Code is limited. Large enterprises
 must legally provide medical services for their employees and usually attempt to re-
 spect occupational health and safety rules, but smaller firms often do not.
