 TOGO
 The Government is authoritarian, with power firmly centralized
 in the hands of President General Gnassingbe Eyadema. He is
 also head of the armed forces and of the only legal political
 party, the Rassemblement Du Peuple Togolais. In power since
 1967, the Eyadema Government's legal authority is based on a
 Constitution adopted by national referendum in 1979. All
 Togolese are considered to be members of the party, and all are
 obligated to vote. Generally, only active party members can
 achieve political office. As head of the party, President
 Eyadema dominates the executive, legislative, and judicial
 functions of the Government.
 The Government's control of the elements of coercion, including
 the military, the Gendarmerie, and civil police (Surete), and
 the wide recognition that it is willing to use them, especially
 in cases involving the security of the country or regime, are
 important factors in maintaining its authority.
 Togo's economy is heavily oriented toward subsistence
 agriculture, with most Togolese participating only marginally
 in the modern (cash) sector. Coffee, cocoa, and cotton are the
 only significant export crops. Togo exports one mineral
 product, phosphate. World prices for these exports have
 recently been below normal, and Togo has had to institute an
 austerity program, with attendant hardship on the population.
 Togo also has a small but flourishing commercial sector and
 encourages private enterprise, much of which is carried out by
 women.
 The human rights situation changed little in Togo in 1986.
 Lengthy detention of persons without charge still occurred for
 long periods, particularly in security related cases. However,
 there was movement in the trials of political prisoners, and
 there were some releases of prisoners, demonstrating
 sensitivity by the Government to international concerns. Of
 the 18 persons arrested in September 1)85 for distributing
 antigovernment tracts, 15 were released by early 1986; the
 remaining 3 were publicly tried and convicted in July, with 1
 immediately receiving a presidential pardon. Two of the
 defendants claimed during the trial that their confessions had
 been extracted through the use of torture. Public trials were
 held in December for those arrested in connection with a coup
 attempt on September 23, which was staged from Ghana; for those
 accused of infiltrating briefcase bombs into Togo in July; and
 for those accused of involvement in the 1985 bomb explosions in
 Lome, Togo's capital. As a result of these trials, 7 persons
 were acquitted, and others received sentences ranging from
 death (the 13 persons who received death sentences have the
 right to appeal for presidential clemency) to 1 year in
 prison. The Government considers these convicted persons to be
 terrorists and not political prisoners.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 On September 23 a commando force largely made up of Togolese
 dissidents attacked Lome from neighboring Ghana in an attempted
 coup d'etat. They failed in their goals of killing President
 
 
 337
 TOGO
 Eyadema and forcing the overthrow of the regime. However,
 there were a number of deaths as a result of the fighting
 between the dissidents and government forces. The Government
 announced that seven of the commandos were killed as well as
 eight civilians, but it made no announcement of the number of
 Togolese security personnel killed in the fighting. It is
 highly probable that many more than the announced number of
 civilians were killed, with some local estimates going as high
 as from 150 to 200 total civilian and military casualties.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance for political motives.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading treatment or
 Punishment
 While the President has enjoined Togolese authorities to
 refrain from torturing prisoners, there is no specific Togolese
 law prohibiting torture. Some released prisoners and trial
 defendants claimed to have been beaten or tortured and alleged
 that their statements to the police were obtained either by
 threat or application of physical coercion. For example,
 during the July trial, two of the three Togolese charged with
 distributing antigovernment pamphlets retracted their previous
 confessions which they said had been obtained under torture.
 Reportedly, the general populace believes that torture is
 practiced, particularly by the military and the Gendarmerie.
 The Association of African Jurists, in a 1986 Report, found
 that prisoners had been beaten during detention. Amnesty
 International's 1986 Report on Political Imprisonment and
 Torture in Togo said that torture of both political and
 criminal prisoners appeared to be frequent and involved
 beatings and electric shock treatments.
 Prison facilities are overcrowded and rudimentary with limited
 space, light, sanitation facilities, and ventilation. Food and
 medical care are reported to be barely adequate by local
 standards. Families are allowed to visit prisoners and to
 provide food, although sometimes this is not permitted until
 after the period of investigation is over. Only military and
 paramilitary personnel are granted access to Togo's four
 military prisons. There were credible reports of prisoner
 beatings and hard labor on state-owned farms.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Togolese legal system does not include the right of a
 detained person to a judicial determination of the legality of
 detention. Prisoners accused of crimes unrelated to political
 security are usually held for no longer than 48 hours prior to
 indictment or provisional release pending investigation, but
 nothing prevents authorities from holding a person beyond that
 time without charge. Arbitrary arrest and detention occur in
 Togo, especially of those the Government considers guilty of
 "crimes against the public trust" (e.g., corruption, political
 opposition, or threat to national security). There is no
 functioning bail system.
 In late 1985, the Government established a commission of
 inquiry to examine the conditions of detainees. While the
 commission's report was not made public in Togo, it was made
 available to human rights organizations and journalists in
 Europe. Reportedly, the commission found that conditions in
 Togolese prisons were generally satisfactory, but it
 
 
 338
 TOGO
 recommended that the legal 48 hour limitation for detaining a
 prisoner without charge should be respected.
 Both political and nonpolitical prisoners held in preventive or
 administrative detention are usually not formally charged and
 cannot obtain redress through the courts. They may be detained
 as long as the Government deems necessary for the
 investigation, which in some cases may take months or even
 years. As is generally the case, the three Togolese tried in
 July for opposition to the Government were not allowed access
 to lawyers during the police investigation, but they were
 allowed access to lawyers of their own choosing (including one
 French lawyer) once the police investigation had ended, and the
 case had been turned over to the courts. The defense lawyers
 were vigorous in arguing their clients' case. Nonjudicial
 sanctions are often taken against those who have been
 administratively detained, e.g., those government employees
 arrested in the antigovernment pamphlet case were fired from
 their jobs. Administrative sanctions have also included
 relegation to residences in home villages, where the persons
 are required to report weekly to the Gendarmerie.
 Reports indicate the national Gendarmerie has exercised almost
 unlimited power in arresting and detaining persons in Togo.
 Present practice allows any permanent officer of the
 Gendarmerie to arrest and detain persons without seeking prior
 permission or submitting a subsequent report. President
 Eyadema is believed to follow political cases closely. The
 number of detainees held by the Gendarmerie outside the
 structures of local judicial process has been reported to be as
 high as 50. Those persons detained by the military are
 processed through the military judicial system. The number of
 political exiles is unknown, but is not believed to be large.
 There is no forced labor in Togo outside the penal system.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Traditional courts at the village level handle a large number
 of civil and even criminal cases, with evidence generally being
 presented by both sides before the village chief or a council
 of elders who then make a decision. Those who do not accept a
 traditional court's ruling may take cases to the regular legal
 system. In the regular courts, pretrial proceedings are
 sometimes protracted. A crowded court docket and a shortage of
 judges make speedy trials unlikely. Defendants accused of
 nonpolitical crimes are generally accorded the right to a
 public trial and the right to consult and be represented by
 counsel. When the defendant cannot afford an attorney, counsel
 is appointed by the Government. Defendants and counsel are
 formally notified of charges in writing. Special courts handle
 security, embezzlement of public funds, and violent crimes and
 observe the same standards of justice as the regular courts.
 Togo's judicial system is not independent of the executive
 branch and is open to political interference in those trial
 cases deemed important to the Government.
 In 1986 the Government tried several important cases. After
 releasing or pardoning 15 of the approximately 18 persons
 arrested in 1985 for distributing antigovernment pamphlets, 3
 were tried and convicted. One was subsequently pardoned, while
 the other two received 5-year prison terms. Another 15 persons
 charged with taking part in bringing explosives into Togo were
 tried in December, (7 in absentia). Four were acquitted, and
 
 
 339
 TOGO
 the remainder were given prison sentences ranging from 1 to 13
 years. An estimated 25 people were arrested in September for
 taking part in the attempted coup d'etat staged from Ghana and
 also for the 1985 Lome bombings. They were given a public
 trial in December, along with 10 persons tried in absentia.
 Three were acquitted, 13 sentenced to death, (which they may
 appeal), 14 to life imprisonment, 4 to 1 year in prison, and 1
 to 1 month in prison. The Government and the Association of
 African Jurists consider those charged with bringing in
 explosives and with participation in the coup attempt to be
 terrorists.
 Opposition sources outside Togo have claimed that there are up
 to 200 political prisoners in Togo but are unable to produce
 specific names. The President of the Association of African
 Jurists said in a September Jeune Afriue interview that the
 only political prisoners in Togo were the three (now two)
 convicted pamphleteers. Amnesty International reports
 estimates from various sources place the number of political
 prisoners at between 200 and 300 with few tried or formally
 charged. Nearly all of the approximately 50 detainees
 mentioned in Section l.d. were arrested because they were
 judged to be threats to internal security and thus could be
 considered political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 It is generally believed that there is monitoring of
 correspondence and telephones and that there are extensive
 networks of informants in all important sectors of Togolese
 society in order to check on dissident activity. Searches of
 private residences in both civil and criminal cases are
 normally authorized by a judge or senior police official. In
 matters judged by the Government to involve national security,
 searches without formal authorization are permitted. While all
 Togolese are considered to be members of the sole political
 party, no one is forced to take an active role in party
 activities. Following the September 23 incursion by dissidents
 based in Ghana, Togo's Minister of the Interior publicly
 appealed to bands of vigilantes to desist from carrying out
 systematic searches of citizens in the streets because this
 practice violated the basic principle of respect for human
 dignity.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech in practice is restricted on political
 matters. Criticism of the President and the Government is
 considered antigovernment activity, and most citizens are
 careful to avoid such criticism. Academic freedom is practiced
 only in nonpolitical fields.
 The Government owns and operates the media, which it regards as
 a vehicle for mobilizing popular support for its policies. It
 does not permit publication or circulation of material
 criticizing its policies or officials and considers any such
 activity a serious offense. From time to time, the media will
 report that certain government officials have been accused of
 corruption and/or ineffective program implementation. Foreign
 publications normally freely circulate, and there is no
 interference with foreign radio broadcasts.
 
 
 340
 TOGO
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is strictly controlled. Government
 approval must be obtained before large groups may assemble.
 Such authorization or withholding of it effectively precludes
 antigovernment political meetings. Permission for other types
 of meetings is easily obtained. Professional groups are
 enjoined to avoid political activities.
 Although the right to organize is guaranteed under the Togolese
 Labor Code, organization of workers is permitted only under the
 aegis of the single national trade union federation, La
 Confederation Nationale des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT), which
 is controlled by the political party. All major sectors of the
 Togolese work force are unionized. The CNTT conveys the
 Government's views and requirements to workers and, on certain
 economic issues, represents workers' concerns to the
 Government. Workers also have the right to strike, but only
 after every possible method of arbitration has been thoroughly
 exhausted. When disputing parties cannot reach a compromise,
 the Government serves as arbitrator. Strikes have occurred
 only rarely in the past. In each instance, the Government
 continued discussions with striking workers, and the strikes
 ended shortly thereafter without physical coercion or arrests
 of striking members. The CNTT is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and sends
 delegates to the International Labor Organization meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion generally prevails in Togo, although the
 Jehovah's Witnesses were banned by a government decree in
 1979. This one group is not recognized by the Government as a
 religious faith having the right to conduct services,
 proselytize, or otherwise carry out religious activities.
 There are, however, no known legal penalties for being a
 Jehovah's Witness. No specific religion is favored by the
 Government. Religious sects must have government authorization
 to become established in Togo. With the exception of Jehovah's
 Witnesses, the open practice and teaching of religion is
 permitted. There is no restriction on publishing religious
 material. Foreign clergy are allowed to proselytize. Local
 religious groups are permitted contact with coreligionists in
 other countries. No restrictions exist on travel for religious
 reasons. Religious affiliation is neither an impediment nor an
 advantage with regard to advancement and is compatible with
 membership in the sole political party.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel,
 emigration, and the right to change residence or workplace, is
 generally allowed for Togolese and foreigners. However, the
 Government restricts the issuance of passports in order to
 control the emigration of professional Togolese and also to
 keep known political dissidents under close scrutiny. Exit
 visas are also required. Domestic travelers may encounter
 security or customs-related roadblocks. Except for the few
 political exiles, Togolese who have chosen to reside in other
 countries may return at will. Togo has traditionally welcomed
 refugees. Following the September 23 incursion by dissidents
 based in Ghana, movement across Togo's western border with
 Ghana has been restricted.
 
 
 341
 TOGO
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 To Change Their Government
 Togo is a one-party state with President Eyadema holding a
 monopoly of power since 1967. All citizens are considered to
 be members of the party, and active party members may express
 their views at party meetings on issues such as the
 implementation of policy and the behavior of subordinate
 officials. No challenges are allowed, however, to the
 President's political program and the central committee's
 decisions. During the elections in December 1986, President
 Eyadema was the only candidate and was reelected for another
 7-year term with 99.7 percent of the votes.
 Togo has a 77-member National Assembly which debates certain
 categories of proposed legislation as defined by the
 Constitution, but it has no real power to reject laws proposed
 by the executive. The party permitted for the first time
 multiple candidates for seats in the National Assembly
 elections of March 1985. Within the one party, there were 216
 candidates for 77 seats, and there were a number of spirited
 contests. All religious and ethnic groups and both sexes are
 represented within the single party. Of the 46 party members
 elected to the central committee during the 1986 party
 congress, 10 were women, and 3 women are National Assembly
 delegates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Togo has been active in human rights forums, such as in the
 U.N. Human Rights Commission. The Government has allowed the
 International Committee of the Red Cross to visit political
 prisoners.
 There are no organizations within Togo that report on or
 observe human rights. In the past, the Government extensively
 permitted entry to and cooperated with international human
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International in
 investigating charges of human rights violations. However, at
 the end of 1985, an Amnesty team was denied entry, and in 1986
 the Government did not allow Amnesty to send representatives to
 observe the July trial of the antigovernment pamphleteers. The
 Government took exception to reports published by Amnesty about
 torture and political imprisonment, claiming that it was not
 objective. The Government also excluded from the July trial
 representatives of the Paris-based International Federation for
 Human Rights. The Government did, however, permit other
 international observers to attend the trial, and the
 Association of African Jurists sent several delegations to Togo
 in 1986 to investigate charges of detention of political
 prisoners.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The economic and social rights of Togolese women are spelled
 out in the family and individual code which was adopted in
 early 1980. Under this code, women's rights include maternity
 leave benefits. Women dominate local market activities and
 commerce with Togo's neighbors and often amass considerable
 wealth. Formal equality under the law and success in the
 market place do not mean total equality for all women
 throughout Togo. Civil law, for example, recognizes a woman's
 
 
 342
 TOGO
 property rights, but customary or traditional law gives all
 property to the male in the event of separation or divorce.
 Economic conditions in rural areas also often leave women
 little time for anything other than carrying water, finding
 firewood, cooking, child bearing, caring for the family, and
 helping to raise food crops. The Government has undertaken a
 campaign to make women throughout Togo aware of their expanded
 opportunities under the new family code.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Labor practices in Togo are set by the Togolese Labor Code
 adopted in 1974, which is generally respected in practice. The
 Code specifically stipulates that there should be equal pay for
 equal work, qualifications, and production for both sexes;
 working hours of all employees in any enterprise, except for
 agricultural enterprises, should not normally exceed 40 hours
 per week; the employment of children under the age of 14 in any
 enterprise is prohibited; at least one period of 24 hours of
 rest per week is compulsory; and workers earn 30 days of paid
 leave each year. Enterprises must run a regular medical
 service for their employees. Health and safety standards in
 the workplace are determined by a technical consulting
 committee at the Ministry of Labor and instituted by decrees.
 There are penalities for employers who do not meet the
 conditions of the decree.
 
 
 343
 U.S.OVRRSEAS -LOANS ANO GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: TOGO
 1984     1985     1986
 I. EON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          9.0      8.5     13.7
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     9.0      8.5     13.7
 A.AID ....... ............      3.9      3.6     11.4
 LOANS ................. 0.3          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        3.9      3.6     11.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.),,.         0.0       0.0      7.9
 B.FOO FOR PEACE .......         2.9      2.5      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....       2.9      2.5      0.0
 TITLE  I-TITAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        2.9      2.5      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.9      0.7      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         2.0      1.8      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          2.2      2.4      2.3
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     2.2      2.4      2.3
 PEACE  CORPS ......       2.2       2.4      2.3
 NARCOTICS ........        0.2       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.NAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 ..INTL NIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0       0.0      0.1
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER ;RANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...          9.0      8.5     13.8
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     9.0      8.5     13.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FRU14 INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1?84     1985     1986      1946-86
 TOTAL .........   24.7      48.?      6.9    485.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0      3.5
 IF:                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      46.4      6.9    264.6
 10B                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AO3                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFO               23.1      0.0      0.0     89.3
 UNOP                1.6      2.3      0.0     33.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0%,0     0.0      3.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0     90.4
 
 
 344
