 TOGO
 Togo's Government is firmly centralized with power
 in the hands of President Gnassingbe Eyadema, who
 is also head of the army and the one legal political
 party, the Rassemblement Du Peuple Togolais. The
 dominance of the executive was institutionalized
 by the Constitution of the Third Republic adopted
 by national referendum in 1979, which also
 provides for a legal system under the strong
 influence of the executive branch.  Partici-
 pation in Togo's political process is permitted
 only through the single recognized political party.
 Togo is a poor country and its economy is experienc-
 ing the restraints currently familiar to countries
 exporting a few primary products that do not include
 petroleum. The Economic and Social Council of the
 UN recommended this year that Togo be added to the
 list of least developed countries. Togo's economy
 is a mixture of public and state enterprises with
 a very active local private trading sector account-
 ing for approximately 35 percent of GDP.
 Togo's current legal code and judicial procedures are
 based on French and local legal traditions and include
 little protection of the integrity of the person. Writ
 of habeas corpus is not recognized, there is no specific
 law prohibiting torture, and the judiciary is not
 independent of the executive branch. Human rights
 practices are influenced by real and perceived security
 conditions and are to that extent arbitrary. Thus, it is
 difficult to predict trends of human rights in Togo.
 Nevertheless, increasing governmental efforts to
 develop a constructive and respected role in inter-
 national fora have been accompanied by greater
 sensitivity to human rights concerns. Parallel to
 this is an increasing awareness of international human
 rights standards and practices among Togo's educated
 elite and members of the judiciary, which has led the
 Government of Togo toward improved human rights practices
 in 1982.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 As far as can be determined, there have been no
 killings in Togo for political motives either
 by the Government or by opposition political
 organizations.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no reports that people have been abducted,
 secretly arrested, or held in clandestine detention by
 official or quasi-official security forces, or by
 elements whose activities are condoned by the Govern-
 ment of Togo. Political arrests in Togo are routinely
 handled by the Gendarmerie Nationale, which is under the
 control of the presidency, and to a lesser degree by the
 
 
 330
 -m-ilitary, in accordance with Togolese law. The Surete
 Nationale, a police force with fairly high standards of
 efficiency and honesty, is rarely engaged in political
 detentions.
 c. Torture
 There is no Togolese law which specifically prohibits
 torture, although Togolese authorities have been
 enjoined by President Eyadema from torturing detainees.
 Some released prisoners-claim to have been beaten.
 Allegations have been made that some prisoners have been
 subject to electric shock and some trial defendants have
 alleged their confessions to the police were obtained
 either by threat or application of physical coercion.
 These allegations have not been confirmed.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Prison conditions in Togo are harsh. Lome's central
 prison is crowded, and facilities are rudimentary
 with limited space, light, and ventilation. Food
 and medical -are areadequate by local standards.
 With regard to facilities outside Lome, reports
 describe--overorowding, poor sanitation and hygienic
 conditions, and inadequate food. However, families
 are allowed to visit and to provide food. Only
 mili:tary and para-military personnel are normally
 granted access to Togo's three military prisons in
 Lome, Lama Kara, and Temedja. Unconfirmed reports
 describe forced marches, hard labor, and beatings
 imposed on prisoners there.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Togolese legal system does not include the writ of
 habeas corpus, and this right does not exist in practice.
 Detention without trial or administrative detention is used
 in Togo against those whom the Government considers guilty
 of "crimes against the public trust" (i.e. corruption)
 or political opposition. Detainees held in administrative
 detention cannot usually obtain redress through the courts.
 Preventive detention has no fixed term. In practice,
 prisoners accused of non-political crimes are usually held
 for no longer than 48 hours prior to indictment or pro-
 visional release pending investigation. No legal basis
 exists, however, to prevent authorities from holding a
 person beyond that time without charge. The number of
 detainees held by the Gendarmerie in its Lome prison,
 outside the strictures of local judicial process,
 is reported to be approximately 50. Detentions made by the
 military arp processed through the military judicial
 system.
 President Eyadema publicly stated in 1980 that Togo
 had six political prisoners. This referred to persons
 convicted of crimes against the state. In January
 1982, President Eyadema announced the release of two
 
 
 331
 of these persons, Kouassivi Alphonse de Souza and Abdo
 de Souza, who were convicted by Togo's state security
 court of conspiracy to overthrow the Government in August
 1979 and given ten year prison sentences. Unconfirmed
 reports estimate that approximately 200 political detainees
 are currently held in Togolese prisons.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Almost all defendants are accorded the right to a
 public trial and the right to be represented by counsel.
 Counsel is appointed by the Government in those cases
 where the defendant cannot afford the cost of an attorney.
 An attorney is accorded permission to see the defendant
 in person and engage in private'discussions with him.
 Defendants and counsel are formally notified of charges
 in writing. Special courts (security, embezzlement of
 public funds, violent crimes) observe the same standards
 of justice as regular courts. A crowded court docket
 and shortage of judges inhibit speedy trials. A new in-
 dividual and family legal code approved by the National
 Assembly and published in April 1980 is beginning to be
 applied. The Government plans a country-wide education
 campaign to inform individual citizens of provisions of
 the new code, which reportedly will enhance the rights
 of women. A penal code for civilians has been approved
 and promulgated and is generally followed by the
 Government. Togo's judicial system is not indepen-
 dent of the executive branch and is open to politi-
 cal interference in those trial cases important to
 the Government.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Authorization by a judge or senior police official
 is normally required for physical searches of pri-
 vate residences in both civil and criminal cases.
 In matters determined by the Government to involve
 national security, searches without formal authori-
 zation are permitted. Phone taps also are known
 to exist.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is restricted, and a free press
 does not exist in Togo. The Government owns and
 operates the media and generally does not permit
 publication or circulation of material criticizing
 its policies or officials. From time to time
 however, some cabinet ministers and mid-level
 government functionaries are criticized for in-
 effective implementation of programs and for cor-
 ruption. Authorities occasionally have been known
 to confiscate issues of foreign publications con-
 taining articles considered to be critical of the
 Government, although this practice has not occurred
 recently. Academic freedom is only permitted in
 non-political fields.
 
 
 332
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of assembly is limited. Prior govern-
 mental approval must be obtained before large
 groups may assemble. The single national trade union
 federation, La Confederation Nationale des Travailleurs du
 Togo, is controlled by the National Party. The
 Federation essentially serves to convey to workers
 governmental views and requirements, but on basic economic
 issues it represents workers' concerns to the Govern-
 ment. All major sectors of the Togolese work force
 are unionized, and the right to strike exists, though
 it is rarely exercised. Professional groups are not
 persecuted or intimidated unless they become involved in
 activities that are thought to threaten the country's
 stability or security.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion usually prevails in Togo. How-
 ever, in 1979 Jehovah's Witnesses were banned by
 government decree. No specific religion is favored
 by the Government, and with the exception of Jeho-
 vah's Witnesses, open practice of religion is per-
 mitted.
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel
 and emigration, is allowed in principle for Togolese
 and foreigners. Domestic travellers encounter se-
 curity and customs-related official roadblocks throughout
 the country. Cases have been reported where Togolese
 have been denied certificates of nationality (a
 prerequisite for obtaining a passport and in some cases
 employment) and passports, in order to prohibit their
 foreign travel. This stricture has usually been applied
 to prevent Togolese doctors from emigrating to Europe,
 but may recently have been used to prevent foreign
 travel by political opponents of the regime. Except for
 a few political exiles, Togolese who have chosen residence
 in other countries may return to Togo at will. Togo has
 traditionally welcomed refugees, and there are no reports
 of harassment of refugees.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 President Eyadema holds a monopoly of power in Togo.
 There are, however, institutions permitting somewhat
 wider participation in decision-making on issues
 about which the President is not firmly resolved.
 The political bureau of the single political party
 and the larger central committee discuss and decide
 such issues, and ratify all government decisions.
 The political bureau is chosen by the President
 with the concurrence of the party congress which
 meets every five years. The central committee has
 has some members who are chosen by the party
 congress, some who are cabinet members, and others
 
 
 333
 drawn from the single trade union, youth and women's
 groups, and private commerce. Membership in the
 party as a whole is open to anyone of good character.
 Membership is estimated at one million. Frequent
 meetings of the party at various levels appear to
 serve both as mechanisms to explain and gain
 acceptance of government policy and as a consultative
 process to provide the Government with feedback on
 its decisions. Active participants in the party may
 express their views at party meetings on issues such
 as the implementation of policy and the behavior of
 subordinate officials. There is, however, no serious
 challenge to the President's political program and
 the central committee's decisions on major policy
 issues.
 During the last election in 1980, President Eyadema,
 who was the only candidate running for the office,
 received 99.7 percent of the votes cast. Togo has a
 67-member National Assembly which debates certain
 categories of proposed legislation as defined by
 the Constitution, but it has no real power to
 reject proposed laws. It can and does require
 ministers to explain and justify their budgets,
 and it gives sanction to policy decisions. The
 President of the National Assembly also holds
 office in the party central committee. National
 Assembly members are elected on a national con-
 stituency basis. Only one party list is pre-
 sented to voters. All regional ethnic groups
 and both sexes are represented within the confines
 of the single party political system, and thus all
 groups are said to be represented in the Govern-
 ment. Women have not traditionally had a role
 equal to men in the political process in Togo,
 but the Government is encouraging greater partici-
 pation by them. Currently four women serve on the
 22-member central committee of the party. The
 Secretary of State of the Ministry of Public Health
 in charge of social affairs and women's condition
 and the Minister Delegate to the Presidency in
 charge of relations with the National Assembly
 are women.
 3.    Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violation of
 Human Rights
 The Government of Togo intends to host an international
 Conference entitled "The Rights of Children in Africa"
 sometime in 1983. The Government has agreed also to
 establish a new school for the study of international human
 rights at the University of Benin in Lome, coinciding with
 the conference. In October 1982 the Togolese National
 Assembly ratified the African Charter on Human Rights
 and in the same month hosted a conference on human Tights
 practices in Africa.
 The Government of Togo in the past has invited inter-
 national organizations such as Amnesty International
 
 
 334
 to visit Togo to investigate charges of human rights
 violations. Amnesty International sent an observer
 to the 1979 "mercenary" trial of those accused of
 participation in the 1977 coup plot, but did not have
 access to the file of evidence collected by the
 magistrate in charge of the preliminary judicial
 investigations. Since the 1979 trial, Amnesty
 International and the Government of Togo have ex-
 changed public comment about human rights violations
 in Togo. In its 1982 report Amnesty noted its main
 concerns in Togo as detention without trial of suspected
 political opponents of the Government, the ill-treatment.
 of detainees, as well as the 1979 trial and its results.
 Freedom House in 1982 rated Togo as "not free".
 There are no organizations based within Togo that
 report on or observe human rights violations.
 4.    Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Togo is listed by the United Nations as among the
 36 poorest countries in the world (34th). With
 few natural resources, a population of 2.64 mil-
 lion, and a small land area the size of West Virginia
 (65,700 sq. km.), Togo is less endowed than many
 African countries with the resources needed for
 appreciable economic growth.
 The society comprises over 40 ethnic groups, each
 with its own traditional chiefdoms and laws which
 are afforded some limited official status. The
 coastal and southern ethnic groups are the most
 populous and educated, and predominate in the
 economy, bureaucracy, and professions. The south's
 major group, the Ewe, accounts for over a third
 of the population. Northern groups are dominant in
 the military and police.
 Current government policies attempt to channel
 greater development resources to the poorer, mostly
 northern groups to correct prior imbalances during
 the colonial period. However, the coastal region
 remains the center of Togo's modern economy and
 still receives and produces the bulk of government
 revenues. Discrimination based on tribalism and
 regionalism is condemned by the Government, and
 special efforts are made to help improve the condiion
 of less developed northern groups. The right to
 own property individually and in common is protected
 by the Constitution.
 According to the latest available figures (1981),
 12.1 percent of Togolese infants do not survive their
 first year of life. While this figure is high, it is a
 significant improvement over 1970 figures of 16.39 per-
 cent per'1000 live births. Sanitation standards
 are low. Life expectancy at birth is 47.1 years
 (1980). Forty-nine percent of the urban population
 and 10 percent of the rural population have access to
 safe water (16 percent country-wide, 1975). Net
 available food supplies could theoretically provide
 just 90 percent of the caloric nutritional needs of
 the total population (1977).
 
 
 335
 Togo has 21 hospitals and nearly 300 dispensaries
 and clinics spread throughout the country's 28
 prefectures. Service is provided at subsidized,
 nominal prices and on a non-discriminatory basis.
 Doctors and nurses are in short supply with one
 doctor available for every 17,900 people (1977),
 and one nurse for every 2,000 (1977). The Ministry
 of Public Health through its social affairs division
 maintains child and maternal health care
 units throughout the country that, among other
 services, distribute approximately $2 million
 of free US-supplied PL-480 food annually.
 School attendance is compulsory until age 15
 and primary education is available throughout the
 country. Since many students start school
 late and repeat school years, the number of places
 provided for primary education exceeded the number
 of children of primary school age (6-11) in 1980
 (111 percent). Available places in secondary
 schools equalled only 25 percent of the 12-18 year
 population, and available places in higher education
 institutions equalled just 1.9 percent of the 19-
 22 year population. School enrollment in Togo has
 increased annually. The adult literacy rate is low
 (18 percent, 1977) and the quality of education in
 public schools is inadequate.
 Enrollment ratios in Togo's far northern districts
 are considerably below those of southern districts
 and enrollment ratios for females are generally
 lower than those for males throughout the country.
 Government policy of providing universal primary
 education on an even-handed basis regardless of
 sex or ethnicity has begun to reduce these discrep-
 ancies.
 Except during periods of drought, enough food is
 available to sustain the population. GNP exceeded
 $1 billion for the first time in 1980 ($1.05 billion)
 with per capita GNP projected at $380. Growth in
 real GDP averaged less than three percent per annum
 during the 1975-1980 period, barely keeping pace
 with population growth of 2.4 percent (1974-1979).
 Most recent estimates place 42 percent of the urban
 population below the absolute poverty level.
 Togo's fertility rate is high (6.5 percent in
 1979).
 
 
 336
 U.S.GVcRSEAS -LOANS IN: ozANTS- OiLIOATISNS AND LOAN AJUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL Y1AAK3 - l'LLIONS OF COLLARS)
 LUTRY: T'a,
 1 11    19S2
 I.:CGN. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          5.6     10.0      7.7
 LUAf;S ..............       O.        0.D      0.0
 GKANTS .............        5.6      12.0      7.7
 .  .................       1.7       4.6      3.4
 L A Z . .............                 0.0      0.0
 G   ANJTS.                  1,      4.6      3.4
 (SgC.SU'P.ASS:$T.) .          0.0      0.0       0.0
 T.c    i 1,   P ACl .......   1.7      3.1       1.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.l      0.0
 GRANTS .............        1.7       3.3      1.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL .... .  ,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 RAPAY. IN S-LOANS.....           .0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. 1N !UR. CUj.? .....        3.0      0.0      0.0
 TUTLa  !I-TOTAL .........        1.7      3.1      1.9
 Z.ZIF .IE .Y r.0.5               0.6      0. 3
 VOL.RELiPF AGENCY .....        1.2       2.5      1.1
 C.TrHER :LON. ASSIST.. .         2.0      2.3      2.4
 LOAN5 ............... 0.0            0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 2.0             2.3      2.4
 PEACE  CORPS ......       2.0       2.3      2.4
 NARCOTLOS........         0.0       2.0      0.0
 OTHMK. ................ . 0.0     0.0       0.0
 II.tIIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................. 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0             0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 3.CREDIT SALS-MS ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.!DTRN.$ ....        2.0      0.0      0.0
 U.TRAN-cX;LSS STOCK...         0.0       0.U      0.0
 E.OTMER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  CON. b MIL...          5.6     10.0      7.7
 LOANS ..............       .. 0.0      ).0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     5.6     10.0      7.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.L OTHAR ..............  ... .0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANC  FRL" TNTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1150.    1951     19PZ     1946-82
 TOTAL .........   12.4     13.U      15.2    2c6.9
 IBRD               0.0      0.0       0.0      3.5
 lEG                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA               11.0      0.0       0.3     83.U
 lS                J.U      0.0       0.0      3.
 A35                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFRD               0.0      9.7      10.3     59.8
 WNOP               1.4      2.5       0.0     26.4
 OTHER-UN           0.0      O.E       0.0      3.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0       4.4     90.4
 
 
 337
