 TOGO
 Togo is a one-party authoritarian state. No opposition is
 permitted. Its economy is a mixture of government and
 private enterprises. Natural resources are limited.
 A strong executive, a National Assembly and the supremacy of
 the ruling party (Ressemblement de Peuple Togolais, RPT)
 were institutionalized by the Constitution of the Third
 Republic which went into effect January 1, 1980.  Togo's
 legal system includes a supreme court and a court of appeals
 which is under the strang influence of the executive branch. The
 government places national unity and economic development
 over individual political and civil liberties. President
 Eyadema has developed a nationalist philosophy to unify an
 ethnically diverse population and has strongly promoted
 country-wide economic and social development with priority
 emphasis given to agriculture. Women and members of all
 ethnic groups are encouraged to participate in economic
 development and, within the context of the single party
 state, political life. Activities outside the single
 political party are suppressed.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Togolese authorities are enjoined by the president from
 torturing detainees; however, there is no law which specifi-
 cally prohibits torture. Some released prisoners claim to
 have been beaten and subjected to hard labor practices.
 Allegations that some prisoners are subject to electric shock
 have not been confirmed. A foreign visitor, who had the occa-
 sion to see two prominent prisoners in July 1979, described
 them as looking healthy and well-fed. He said neither
 exhibited evidence of torture. Some cases of torture have
 probably occurred. Trial defendants sometimes claim their
 confessions to the police were coerced.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Prison conditions in Togo are harsh and Lome's central
 prison is crowded and facilities are rudimentary. Families
 are allowed to visit and to provide food. Adequate food,
 sanitation and medical care are provided at Lome's main
 detention facility, but space, light and ventilation are
 limited. Reports describe overcrowding, poor sanitation/
 hygienic conditions and inadequate food service in most
 places of detention outside of Lome. Only military and
 paramilitary personnel are normally granted access to
 military prisons and detention facilities in Lome, Lama-Kara
 and Temedja where it is reported forced marches, hard labor
 and beatings have been imposed on prisoners. Summary
 executions have not taken place in Togo during President
 Eyadema's regime. There are no reports of discrimination
 in Togolese prisons based on sex, race, religion or tribal
 origins.
 
 
 285
 c. Disappearances
 There are no reports that people are abducted, secretly
 arrested or held in clandestine detention by official or
 quasi-official security forces in Togo.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Togolese legal system does not include the writ of
 habeas corpus. The government detains individuals adminis-
 tratively for activities it considers corrupt or harmful to
 national unity and security. Such detentions are usually
 brief but have no fixed term. It is practice to hold a
 person only up to 48 hours without charge although there is
 no legal basis preventing authorities from holding a person
 beyond 48 hours without charge. Article 49 also provides
 that no one can be detained arbitrarily. Unconfirmed
 reports estimate that approximately 200 political detainees
 are held throughout the country. President Eyadema publicly
 stated in 1980 that Togo had six political prisoners (37 of
 43 political prisoners were released in early 1980).
 Arrests for drug trafficking and official corruption are
 publicized. The Amnesty International Report 1980, claims
 that numerous reports have been received of arrest and
 detention without charge or trial in Togo, often on slight
 pretext. Amnesty International alleges that there is no
 judicial redress available in such cases.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Togolese legal and judicial procedures are based on the
 French system for most categories of cases and on traditional
 law (droit coutumier) for local or family disputes. There
 is no statutory basis for free public trial, but it is
 accorded to individuals in keeping with French law. A public
 trial can be denied to an individual by the authorities.
 The foregoing has no legal basis. Article 49 of the constitu-
 tion provides that no one can be judged without having been
 given the chance to present his defense. Local practice
 accords every person the right to be represented by an
 attorney and to see his attorney immediately after detention.
 The attorney obtains a permit to communicate from the attorney
 general. Counsel is appointed by the government if the
 defendant cannot afford the fee. Defendant and counsel are
 formally notified of charges in writing. Special courts
 (state security, embezzlement of public funds, violent
 crimes) observe the same standards of justice as regular
 courts. Togolese judges were appointed by decree of the
 president until 1978. Since then judges are appointed by
 the Minister of Labor and Civil Service. The president of
 the Supreme Court is appointed.by the president. Article 47
 of the constitution states the status of magistrates is to
 be fixed by law. Those persons not satisfied with a decision
 of a judge in a court of the first instance have the right
 to appeal within 30 days to the Court of Appeals. They
 have a further right to appeal to the Supreme Court. There
 is a High Court of Justice which handles cases of treason.
 Article 18 of the constitution gives the right of clemency
 to the president.
 
 
 286
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Authorization by a judge or police official is normally
 required for physical searches of private residences in both
 civil and criminal cases. Searches without formal authoriza-
 tion are, however, permitted.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 The Togolese population is estimated at 2.5 million. Fifteen
 percent of the population with a per capita gross national
 product (GNP) of $320 lives in urban areas compared with 85
 percent with a per capita GNP of $100 living in rural areas.
 The population growth rate is 2.6 percent, while life expec-
 tancy at birth is 47 years for females and 46 years for
 males. There are.lS,336 people per physician. Education is
 compulsory to age 15. Over 90 percent of school-age children
 in urban areas and 68 percent of those in rural areas attend
 school. Togo's current adult literacy rate is estimated at 7
 percent for females and 27 percent for males.
 Reports show an annual economic rate of growth of 6 percent
 for 1978-79. The projected 6 percent increase in gross
 domestic product (GDP) for 1980 is based on a continued
 increase in agricultural production and a more vigorous
 industrial growth. The rate of inflation, which has averaged
 7.4 percent in recent years, and the 1979 cost of living
 index increase of 1.4 percent for African urban households
 -are expected to rise substantially in 1980-81 owing to
 increased petroleum costs. The current budget provides that
 health, education and agriculture will receive close to one
 half of the budget allocated to the various ministries. The
 state owns major industries and controls natural resources,
 while the private sector operates primarily in commerce and
 services.
 Togo continues to concentrate on rapid economic development
 in such areas as tourism and light industry, but is beginning
 to devote more resources to the needs of the poor.
 In the past two years, the government of Togo has begun
 implementing an agrarian reform program which will bring
 unused land under cultivation and distribute land resources
 more widely among the people. The government's right of
 eminent domain provides for compensation, and private property
 rights are observed. Despite its avowed austerity program,
 the government has increased the fixed and subsidized prices
 of certain basic necessities such as bread, sugar, cement,
 fertilizer, taxi fares and petroleum products.
 In 1980 the government continued efforts to bring potable
 water, electrification and agricultural development to all
 regions of the country which have been aided by bilateral and
 multilateral assistance agreements.
 The rights of Togolese women and children are spelled out
 in the "family and individual's code" which was adopted in
 early 1980. In Togo, women's rights include the ownership
 of property, control of all money earned, and maternity
 leave benefits. Article 88 of the labor code stipulates
 
 
 287
 equal pay for equal work, qualifications, and output whatever
 the sex of the employee. In addition to being primarily
 responsible for children, women dominate commerce in the
 market place where they often amass considerable wealth.
 Women receive a fair share of the Togolese  Development
 Bank's loans to medium and small-sized enterprises and have
 developed agricultural and craft cooperatives. Equality
 under law does not mean total equality. Traditional law
 places barriers in the path of women seeking to break
 with custom. Civil law recognizes a woman's property
 rights, but customary law gives all property to the male in
 event of separation or divorce. Economic conditions in
 rural areas leave women little time for anything other
 than carrying water, finding firewood, cooking and caring
 for the family, and raising food crops. The government has
 undertaken a campaign to make women aware of their expanded
 opportunities in modern Togolese society. The government's
 current program of developing water resources in rural areas
 will help to mitigate one of the most onerous burdens on
 rural women, that of carrying water over long distances.
 The government opposes corruption. In July 1980 the newly
 appointed minister of labor and civil service was dismissed,
 detained and then fined for fraud in the administration of
 secondary school exams. Bureaucratic corruption does not
 appear to be widespread.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech is restricted and a free press does not
 exist. The government controls the media and does not
 permit publication or circulation of material criticizing
 its policies or personalities. Authorities occasionally
 confiscate issues of foreign publications containing articles
 considered to be critical of the government. Freedom of
 religion is enjoyed by most Togolese. The right to assembly
 is subject to governmental approval.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Free movement, including domestic and foreign travel and
 emigration, is allowed for Togolese and foreigners with
 few exceptions. Foreign travel by individuals who have
 allegedly posed a threat to national security is restricted.
 Two individuals, Kodjovi de Souza and Teyi Lawson, whose
 aim was to overthrow the Eyadema government, were repatriated
 from Accra against their will but with the acquiescence
 of the Ghanaian government in 1979. Businessman Bani Lawson
 was also forcibly repatriated from Niamey in 1979, presumably
 with the acquiescence of the Nigerien government. Togo
 observes the Common Market and West African Economic Community
 Conventions on Freedom of Passage and Temporary Residence.
 Citizens of various African countries resident in Togo are
 free to return to their countries of origin without Togolese
 government interference.
 
 
 288
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Togo is a single party state, under the authoritarian
 leadership of President Eyadema. All regions of Togo,
 all ethnic groups, and both sexes are represented in Togo's
 government, its single party, and its 67-member National
 Assembly. No opposition organizations are permitted.
 Within the single party system, active participants may
 express their views on such issues as the function of the
 government and the behavior of its officials, except top
 leadership. An active role in party leadership is reserved
 to those who have shown some leadership ability and support
 party objectives. Meetings of the single political party at
 various levels frequently serve as a consultative process in
 the formation of legislation.
 Women have not traditionally had a role equal to that
 of men in the political process, but the government is
 encouraging greater participation by women. Currently four
 women serve on the 22-member central committee of the party.
 The Minister for Social Affairs and Women's Promotion is a
 woman.
 The single national trade union federation, La Confeder-
 ation Nationale des Travailleurs du Togo (CNTT) is controlled
 by the national party. Workers are protected by a labor
 code, minimum wage law, guarantees against termination
 without cause and a national social security system. The
 labor code establishes an elaborate mechanism for collective
 bargaining, arbitration and, as a last resort, the use of
 strikes. Some wage increases occur as a result of collective
 bargaining, but are generally the result of presidential
 decree. Strikes not authorized by the government-controlled
 union occur from time to time. In August 1980 taxi drivers
 struck independently of the union to protest the maintenance
 of fixed rates after a rise in fuel prices. After 36 hours
 of work stoppage and negotiations between strike leaders
 on the one hand and union and government officials on
 other, agreement on a new fare schedule was reached.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The government of Togo in the past has invited interna-
 tional orgnizations, such as Amnesty International, to visit
 Togo to investigate charges of human rights violations.
 Amnesty International sent an observer to the 1979 "mercenary"
 trial of those accused of participation in the 1977 coup
 plot, but did not have access to the dossier (file of
 evidence collected by the magistrate in charge of the
 preliminary judicial investigations). Since the 1979 trial,
 Amnesty International and the government of Togo have
 exchanged public charges and countercharges concerning human
 rights violations in Togo. During the past year representa-
 tives of Amnesty International have made several visits to
 Togo.
 
 
 The preamble of the 1979 constitution declares adherence
 to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. There are
 no organizations based within Togo that report on or observe
 human rights violations. Togo has ratified the 1951 Geneva
 Refugee Convention, the 1967 New York Protocol on the Status
 of Refugees and the 1975 United Nations Convention on
 Diplomatic Personnel.
 
 
 290
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TOGO
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         4.2      6.1      5.9
 LOANSo.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS......o.            4.2      6.1      5.9
 A.AID ..........o......        1.3      1.2      1.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      oO      0.0
 GRANTS.............        1.3      1.2      1.9
 (SEC.SUPPoASSIST.)o.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE......          1.4      2.7      1.7
 LOANS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............ 14               2.7      1.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS..oo.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR..,.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL........         1.4      2.7      1.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.         1.0      0.4      0.5
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.4      2.3      1.2
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST-           1.5      2.2      2.3
 LOANS.....o....... .       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTSo........        1.5      2.2      2.3
 CONTR. TO IFI..oo         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS,.....         1.5      2.2      2.3
 OTHER......o....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TOTAL..,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS.oo.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS  ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 IIIoTOTAL ECON. & MILe,.         4.2      6.1      5.9
 LOANS.............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         4.2      6.1      5.9
 OTHER US LOANS.........          3.3      0.8      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         3.3      0.8      0.0
 ALL OTHER...............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ---     ---------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........     24.5     28.9     12.4    239.8
 IRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      3.5
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                5.8     16.2     11.0     84.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB              11.9      9.7      0.0     39.3
 UNDP               3o4      3.0      1.4     23.9
 OTHER-UN           1.1      0.0      0.0      3.0
 EEC                2.3      0.0      0.0     86.0
 
 
 291
