 THAILAND
 Thailand is a constitutional monarchy whose history has been
 marked by frequent military coups and powerful military-
 bureaucratic influence over political life. The King exerts
 strong informal influence. In the most recent coup on February
 23, military leaders acting as the "National Peacekeeping
 Council" abrogated the 1978 constitution and abolished the
 bicameral legislature. Under the terms of an Interim Charter,
 the Council named a civilian Prime Minister who in turn chose a
 cabinet composed mainly of civilian technocrats. A council-
 appointed national legislative assembly drafted a new
 Constitution which was promulgated on December 9. A new
 election law has also been approved, and parliamentary
 elections are scheduled for March 22, 1992. Critics charge
 that certain elements of the new Constitution will serve to
 extend the military's political role beyond the election.
 Thai security services have wide-ranging legal powers, largely
 deriving from past military administrations. Under the Interim
 Charter, the Peacekeeping Council Chairman and the Prime
 Minister were empowered to counter threats to the monarch,
 national security, public order, or the economy. This summary
 legal power was not used, however, and expired with the
 promulgation of the new permanent Constitution on December 9.
 The Government usually takes steps to discipline or prosecute
 security officials found to have committed abuses. However,
 credible reports of occasional summary executions and physical
 abuse of detainees by police officers continue. Prosecutions
 in such cases are infrequent and convictions rare.
 A middle-income developing country with a free enterprise
 economic system, Thailand is currently enjoying rapid economic
 growth. The Thai system generally provides strong protection
 for individual economic interests, including property rights.
 While the industrial sector is expanding, the majority of the
 people are in rural areas where agriculture is the chief source
 of livelihood.
 While Thai citizens continued to enjoy a wide range of civil
 liberties, the 1991 coup was a setback to progress in recent
 years toward democratic rule. Limitations on worker rights,
 mistreatment of detainees, some restrictions on freedoms of
 speech and press, and trafficking in women for purposes of
 prostitution continue to be problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 .Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There are credible reports that occasionally police summarily
 execute criminal suspects without regard to due process,
 particularly in areas outside the capital with high local crime
 rates. Some officials assigned to these areas acknowledge the
 practice, which they appear to regard as an unexceptionable
 method of dealing with alleged habitual criminals. Credible
 sources also have reported cases in which police staged
 posthumous shootings of detainees to cover up deaths caused by
 beatings and physical abuse (see Section l.c). Victims in such
 cases were then reported to have committed suicide or to have
 been shot while resisting arrest or-trying to escape.
 
 
 997
 THAILAND
 The press at times quotes warnings from senior police officials
 that a "shoot to kill" policy has been imposed. A "shoot to
 kill" order was reported to have gone out in 1991 during a
 crackdown on auto thefts. One undonfirmed newspaper account
 reported police shot and killed 20 suspected car thieves during
 the campaign, allegedly while they were resisting arrest. The
 April 5 murder of reputed major organized crime figure Klaew
 Thanikun raised suspicions of military involvement since it
 occurred in the midst of a high profile campaign to suppress
 "Mafia-style" godfathers. However, no clear evidence of
 official complicity in Klaew's death emerged, and no suspects
 in the case have been arrested.
 There is criminal activity by poorly disciplined individual
 policemen, including substantiated cases of low paid junior
 policemen committing crimes or hiring themselves out as
 contract killers. During 1991 eight policemen were charged
 with murder in five separate cases involving a total of seven
 victims. At least three of these cases appeared to involve
 summary execution of criminal suspects.
 In one case, a policeman was arrested and charged with the July
 31 shooting death of a Burmese student of concern to the U.N.
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The student was shot
 when he attempted to flee custody. The policeman claimed to
 have acted in self-defense. A preliminary hearing was held in
 November; at year's end the case had not yet come to trial.
 The body of a second Burmese student of concern to the UNHCR
 was discovered on November 4 along the border in Kanchanaburi
 province. He had reportedly been killed by police a week
 earlier. The Government promised a full accounting to the
 UNHCR. Amnesty International and other human rights groups as
 well as the U.S. and several other embassies have also
 expressed concern about this case. One policeman was convicted
 and sentenced to death in another case in which robbery
 appeared to be the primary motive. Credible reports indicate
 that convicting police suspected of committing summary
 executions is difficult, as evidence is often fabricated and
 witnesses are intimidated or paid not to testify.
 b. Disappearance
 Prior to 1991, there had been no allegations of official
 complicity in the disappearance of any person for at least 9
 years. On June 19, Thanong Podhiarn, president a leading labor
 federation, disappeared in Bangkok. Shortly after Thanong
 vanished, his car was discovered parked outside his union
 office. Despite police efforts to determine Thanong's
 whereabouts, no solid evidence as to his fate has been
 uncovered.
 Despite the lack of evidence to substantiate charges of
 official involvement in Thanong's disappearance, a number of
 labor unionists and members of the local human rights community
 are convin'ced Thanong was abducted and killed by elements of
 the military or the'security forces. They attribute his
 disappearance to anger-in the military over Thanong's critical
 stance toward the February 23 coup and subsequent changes in
 Thai labor legislation. Government officials deny any
 involvement in Thanong's disappearance and say they have no
 knowledge of his fate. Some officials have claimed that
 Thanong vanished intentionally, either for political or
 personal reasons, but they have failed to present any evidence
 to back up the charge.
 
 
 998
 THAILAND
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although Thailand's Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or
 degrading treatment or punishment, there continued to be many
 credible reports of police beatings of prisoners and detainees,
 and the Government has done little to address the problem. A
 proposal to give civilian prosecutors authority to oversee
 police interrogations of suspects has met with strong
 bureaucratic resistance from the police department and has yet
 to be approved.
 Observers complain that conditions at the Suan Phlu Immigration
 Detention Center (IDC) constitute cruel and unusual
 punishment. As many as 1,500 illegal immigrants are held for
 extended periods of time in extremely crowded conditions with
 no opportunity to leave the cell or engage in exercise.
 Medical care is minimal, and many detainees suffer from malaria
 and other serious diseases.
 In recent years international attention has focused on reports
 of murder and rape of displaced Cambodians living in camps
 along the Thai-Cambodian border. Most of the violence is now
 committed by Khmer against other Khmer, and banditry involving
 armed Khmer resistance soldiers is becoming more common inside
 the camps and in border areas. Although the Thai Displaced
 Persons Protective Unit (DPPU), which was deployed in 1988 to
 provide external security for Khmer displaced persons camps,
 has performed with substantially greater professionalism than
 the force it replaced, two violent incidents involving the DPPU
 were reported during 1991, resulting in one death and one
 serious injury. Thai paramilitary rangers were responsible for
 one violent incident outside a camp which resulted in a
 fatality.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's Criminal and Penal Codes are based largely on
 Western European models. Except in cases of crimes in
 progress, arrest warrants generally are required but are issued
 by the police themselves rather than the courts. Specific
 charges must be brought against detainees within 48 hours, but
 police have the authority to extend the period to 7 days if
 required to complete the investigation. Detainees do not have
 the right to have their lawyers present during questioning.
 There is a functioning bail system. The only legal basis for
 detention without specific charges for long periods (up to 480
 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act. Currently, no one
 is being detained under this Act's provisions.
 Following the February 23 coup, deposed Prime Minister
 Chatichai Choonhavan, Deputy Prime Minister Arthit Kamlang-ek,
 and eight of their aides were held in detention by the armed
 forces for a total of 2 weeks. A ninth aide was released after
 2 or 3 days because of a health problem. No criminal charges
 were filed against any of those detained. The detainees were
 held in military guesthouses, apparently in comfortable
 circumstances, and suffered no inhumane treatment.
 Soon after their release, Chatichai and Arthit left the country
 for extended visits abroad. While they characterized their
 travel as voluntary, and coup leaders stressed that the two
 were free to return at any time, it is likely that the
 departures reflected the coup group's desire that Chatichal and
 Arthit exile themselves from politics at least temporarily. At
 
 
 999
 THAILAND
 the time of his release, Chatichai also announced his
 resignation from all political positions. The former Prime
 Minister returned to Thailand for 1 week in April and again in
 August. At year's end, Chatchai remained in the country and
 reportedly was considering resuming his political career.
 Former Deputy Prime Minister Arthit returned to Thailand on May
 20 and resumed his activities as the leader of the Thai
 People's Party without incident.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Thai legal system provides for the presumption of innocence
 and access to courts or administrative bodies to seek redress.
 The ciyilian judicial system includes three levels of courts:
 courts of first instance, courts of appeals, and the Supreme
 Court. A separate military court system tries cases in which
 the accused are military personnel, cases involving threats to
 the royal family, and security-related cases brought to trial
 during periods of martial law. Ordinary courts may be
 designated to sit as military courts for the purpose of hearing
 such cases. A serious flaw in providing due process rights is
 the lack of appeal from decisions of a military court.
 Separate Islamic courts are permitted to hear certain civil
 cases involving members of the country's Muslim minority.
 Trials are decided by a single judge rather than a jury in
 courts of first instance and by a panel of judges at the
 appellate level. The courts are relatively independent of
 external pressures and appear not to be intimidated in
 rendering verdicts that might displease senior government
 officers. While most trials are public, the court may order a
 closed trial. This is most often done in cases touching on
 religious sensitivities, foreign policy matters, or the royal
 family.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad
 range of legal rights. Although they have no right to counsel
 during the investigative phase of their cases, detainees are
 granted access to a lawyer of their own choosing before the
 trial. A pilot government program provides free legal advice
 to the poor, but indigent defendants are not automatically
 provided with counsel at public expense. Most free legal aid
 comes from private groups, including the Lawyers' Association
 and the Women Lawyers' Association.
 Court proceedings continued in the cases of four persons
 charged with lese majeste and inciting unrest in a June 1990
 protest rally sponsored by Shia Muslims in Pattani province.'
 Authorities have denied bail to the accused on national
 security grounds, and hearings have been closed to the public.
 Another five suspects in the case remain at large.
 By year's end the trial of 14 members of a self-styled
 "Revolutionary Council," first arrested in 1989 on charges of
 sedition,.had still to be concluded. All but one defendant,
 however, have been freed on bail.
 On May 24, prosecutors indicted two former members of the
 outlawed Communist Party of Thailand (CPT) on charges of having
 joined in a 1982 plot to assassinate the Queen, the Prime
 Minister, and the Army Commander: Six other persons named in
 the indictment remain at large, including fugitive army officer
 Manoon Roopkachorn. The accused could face the death penalty
 if convicted in the trial, which the court has ordered closed
 to the public. The case is being tried in military court, from
 
 
 1000
 THAILAND
 which no appeal is possible. Police also filed a separate
 charge against former Chatichai government minister Chalerm
 U-Bumrung, alleging he paid the two CPT defendants to lie about
 the case. Chalerm fled abroad following the coup and was
 granted political asylum in Denmark. He returned to Thailand
 in late December, was arrested, and freed on bail.
 Various aspects of the case suggest that the charges against
 Manoon and Chalerm may be politically motivated. Relations of
 the coup leaders with Manoon and Chalerm had been acrimonious
 for some time. Moreover, some human rights groups have noted
 military leaders' use of the case to pressure the Government in
 the months before the coup, as well as the military's citing of
 the Government's alleged inaction on the case to justify the
 February 23 coup. They also point to the lengthy time between
 the alleged crime and the indictment, and the decision to drop
 charges against another 37 alleged participants, including a
 number of military officers.
 Shortly after the coup, the ruling National Peacekeeping
 Council ordered a freeze on the assets of 25 members of
 previous Chatichai governments, pending an investigation to
 determine whether they had been acquired illegally, and
 appointed a committee to examine their financial records. The
 committee initially exonerated 12 of the original 25 and
 released their assets while making a preliminary judgment that
 the remaining 13 possessed "unusual wealth." By mid-December,
 the committee had acquitted two more of the accused. It found
 three others guilty, among them former Prime Minister
 Chatichai, and ordered that their suspect assets be forfeited
 to the State. By placing the burden of proof on the accused
 and combining the powers to investigate and to rule on guilt or
 innocence, the committee's procedures raised questions of due
 process and the rights of the accused to a fair trial. Under a
 law passed by the National Legislative Assembly in November,
 however, those found guilty may appeal the verdict to the
 Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai law requires that police possess a search warrant prior to
 entering a home without the owner's consent. However, search
 warrants are issued by the police themselves and are not
 subject to prior judicial review. There are credible reports
 that officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance and then
 allow their noncommissioned subordinates to apply them as
 needed. The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials
 engaged in- "Communist suppression operations" to conduct
 searches without warrants, but these powers rarely have been
 invoked in recent years. After the February 23 coup, credible
 sources reported several instances of searches being carried
 out without proper warrants. While the searchers in these
 cases failed to identify themselves, witnesses believe they
 included military or civilian security personnel.
 In recent years, it has been widely assumed that security
 services engage in surreptitious monitoring of persons
 espousing leftist or controversial views. Following the
 February 23 coup, credible sources reported a significantly
 stepped up monitoring effort aimed at those suspected of
 opposing the military leadership. Alleged targets of
 monitoring included politicians, academics, labor and student
 leaders, human rights activists, and employees of certain
 nongovernmental organizations.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1001
 THAILAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Spebch and Press
 While Thai citizens generally enjoy a substantial measure of
 freedom of speech, several laws place limits on this freedom.
 The principal legal restrictions are prohibitions on defaming,
 insulting, or threatening the King, Queen, heir apparent, or
 regent (lese majeste); defaming the character of other persons;
 advocating a Communist system of government; and speaking in a
 manner likely to incite disturbances, threaten national
 security, or insult religion.
 In addition to the four Shiite Muslims charged with lese
 majest6 in 1990 (see Section l.e.), police in September issued
 a warrant for the arrest of writer and social critic Sulak
 Sivaraksa on charges that he committed lese majeste and defamed
 the character of the army commander in an August 22 speech at
 Thammasat University. Following the issuance of the warrant,
 Sulak fled abroad where he remained at year's end.
 Thai governments generally permit criticism of their policies,
 though prominent critics have on occasion been targets of
 violence by mysterious assailants. The privately owned press
 practices self-censorship. It is particularly cautious about
 criticism of the monarchy and, to a lesser degree, the military
 and the Buddhist ecclesiastical hierarchy. In February the
 Thai language daily Matichon voluntarily ceased publication for
 3 days as a gesture of contrition for having printed a letter
 to the editor critical of Thailand's senior Buddhist monk.
 Public expression of opposition views decreased sharply in the
 immediate aftermath of the February 23 coup but resumed
 gradually in the following months. By the latter part of the
 year, public criticism of the Government and especially the
 military appeared to equal or even exceed precoup levels. Such
 criticism reached a peak on November 19, when over 50,000
 people attended a peaceful-rally to protest "undemocratic"
 clauses in the draft constitution.
 Senior police and military officials responded to the stepped -
 up criticism later in the year with occasional public
 "warnings" to newspapers about particular articles but stopped
 short of legal action. In August, however, the Air Force
 briefly barred reporters and copies of the daily Naew Na from
 facilities under its control, including the Airport Authority
 and Thai Airways. The action followed Naew Na's publication of
 a column alleging corruption at the airport. The Air Force
 lifted the ban after the author of the offending column stopped
 writing for the paper.
 Radio stations are government licensed and operated by
 government, military,'and private entities as commercial
 enterprises. They are required to broadcast government-
 produced newscasts four times daily and a military-produced
 commentary once a day, but are free to originate other news and
 commentary.
 Of five national television networks, two are run by the army
 and three by the Government. Critics charge that news coverage
 on the stations is biased in favor of those who oversee them.
 Programming about controversial subjects and persons continues
 to be barred or subject to censorship. While the Government
 allowed the broadcast of a wider range of viewpoints at times
 during the year, news reports on the activities of critics of
 
 
 1002
 THAILAND
 the draft constitution vanished from the airwaves in
 mid-November and did not return until after the charter was
 promulgated. In December the cabinet member responsible for
 government-run media announced that beginning in January 1992
 each station would be required to set up its own censorship
 committee rather than pubmitting programs to the broadcasting
 directing board for prescreening.
 Representatives of the Thai film industry complain that the
 film censorship board, composed largely of police officers,
 regularly deletes all references in films to a number of topics
 deemed politically sensitive. Among the topics subjected to
 such censorship are police corruption, misconduct by members of
 the Buddhist clergy, and the 1973 student uprising.
 Thai domestic publications continued to present a wide range of
 political and social commentary in 1991. Unless critical of
 the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and domestic books
 normally are not censored and are permitted to circulate
 freely. The 1941 Press Law empowers the police director
 general to prohibit the import of printed matter deemed
 dangerous to public order and morals. The Government imposed
 no new permanent or temporary bans on the import of foreign
 publications during 1991. However, the local distributor of
 the International Herald Tribune voluntarily withheld the
 February 26 edition of the newspaper, which contained an
 editorial critical of the coup.
 Academic and technical literature circulated freely for the
 most part. In March, however, charges of inciting unrest were
 filed against a researcher for a private labor foundation
 caught printing leaflets critical of the February 23 coup. The
 charges against the researcher were dropped shortly after the
 lifting of martial law in May.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 While the Thai legal system generally recognizes the right to
 peaceful assembly, in practice, government officials at times
 act to restrict this right. Official intolerance of public
 demonstrations appears highest in rural areas, particularly in
 the northeast of the country. Residents of these areas who
 stage apparently peaceful public protests are sometimes charged
 under the Penal Code with inciting unrest and with the assembly
 of 10 or more persons with intent to commit violence.
 In September, for example, police and army troops in Nakhon
 Ratchasima province stopped a group of several hundred
 villagers from neighboring Buri Ram province who were on their
 way to show support for villagers subject to an army-sponsored
 resettlement plan. The ensuing confrontation ended in a
 violent clash and the arrest of 10 persons, including a monk
 known for his advocacy of forest conservation. The marchers
 and the authorities accused each other of starting the
 violence, in which 14 demonstrators were reported injured.
 Authorities generally are less prone to interfere with peaceful
 public gatherings in other parts of the country. Permits are
 not required for meetings and gatherings except when they are
 held on public property or if sound amplification systems will
 be used.
 Freedom of assembly was severely restricted for over 2 months
 following the February 23 coup. During that period, National
 Peacekeeping Council orders banned political gatherings of four
 
 
 1003
 THAILAND
 or more persons and prohibited political parties from holding
 meetings or engaging in political activity.
 A total of 58 persons were arrested in two separate incidents
 and charged with violating the order banning public
 gatherings. They included 15 persons arrested during an
 anticoup demonstration at Bangkok's Ramkhamhaeng University in
 February and 43 residents of Yasothon Province arrested in
 March while demanding increased compensation for land lost to a
 reservoir project. Prosecutors dropped the charges after the
 National Legislative Assembly voted to rescind the ban on
 gatherings, as well as the ban on political party, activity, on
 May 9. The Yasothon defendants remain on trial on several
 other counts, however, including assembly of 10 or more persons
 with intent to commit violence.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is generally practiced and protected by law
 and custom. The de facto state religion is Theravada Buddhism,
 but other faiths are not restricted. Religious publishing,
 regardless of faith, is allowed. Foreign clergy are permitted
 to preach freely, although there are limits on the number of
 foreign missionaries admitted. There are no restrictions on
 religious ceremonies or instruction, or on conversions from one
 faith to another, but members of minority religious movements
 have oh occasion been subjected to legal action. One example
 of this has been the two ongoing trials (begun in 1990) of Phra
 Potirak, leader of a dissident Buddhist sect, and his �
 followers, who have been accused of violating the law governing
 the Buddhist ecclesiastical hierarchy and impersonating
 Buddhist monks or nuns. Phara Potirak and his followers remain
 free on bail and have continued their religious practices.
 Like other private associations, religious groups are generally
 required to register with the Government. In an effort to
 limit the number of separate registrations by Christian
 denominations, since the 1970's the Government has required
 most Christian church bodies to join one of five umbrella
 groups. Fixed numbers of work permits for missionaries and
 church workers are allocated to each umbrella group.
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) has
 applied to the Government unsuccessfully for independent
 registration for a number of years. Thai officials have
 repeatedly declined to grant such registration and insisted
 that the church should join an existing umbrella groups if it
 desires registration. However, under a longstanding tacit
 arrangement, the Government has allowed Mormon church workers
 and missionaries to enter the country on tourist visas. In
 June the church's former mission president was convicted in
 Bangkok of defaming Buddhism in an article written for an
 in-house church publication. He was given a 6-month suspended
 sentence and fined $200. Shortly thereafter, he departed
 Thailand after completing a scheduled 3-year assignment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Longstanding restrictions on the travel and place of residence
 of certain Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand
 remained in place in 1991. The right of citizens to change
 their residence or workplace was unabridged. Travel within the
 country was restricted in certain border areas where foreign or
 vestigial domestic insurgent groups remain active.
 
 
 1004
 
 THAILAND
 At the time of the February 23 coup, the ruling National
 Peacekeeping Council ordered a ban on foreign travel by a total
 of nine persons, most of whom had served as advisors to deposed
 Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan. Two of the nine were
 later charged with criminal offenses, and a third was made
 subject of a corruption investigation. Three of the nine
 apparently mangaged to evade the ban and travel abroad
 surreptitiously. The Peacekeeping Council eventually dropped
 the order in the case of the remaining six, and several have
 since made foreign trips without hindrance. Some persons named
 in a Peacekeeping Council-ordered asset freeze and corruption
 investigation apparently are also required to seek the
 Council's permission before undertaking foreign travel.
 Passport applications by single Thai women and children under
 the age of 14 must be approved by the Department of public
 Welfare. In addition, a 1985 statute criticized by some
 women's rights advocates requires that female passport
 applicants under age 36 sit through a series of interviews
 regarding their employment records and finances. These
 provisions are intended to prevent the export of children for
 sale and women for purposes of prostitution.
 The Government has not revoked citizenship for political
 reasons.
 While not a party to international conventions on the the
 status of refugees, Thailand has acted in the spirit of those
 agreements by providing first asylum to over 1 million people
 from Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since 1975, including about
 350,000 Cambodian displaced persons in camps on its side of the
 Thai-Cambodian border. Repatriation to Cambodia of this
 population under auspices of the UNHCR is expected to begin
 during the first half of 1992.
 Thailand continues to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and
 Lao asylum seekers and to process them in accord with the
 Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) agreed to in Geneva in
 1989. There were no reports of any pushoffs of Vietnamese
 asylum seekers in 1991. According to statistics from the
 UNHCR, there were no attacks by Thai pirates on Vietnamese boat
 people recorded during the year. The Thai marine police
 arrested three persons in the first 8 months of 1991 and
 charged them with involvement in two earlier piracy attacks.
 Thai courts convicted seven persons in 1991 for previous piracy
 incidents. Lao asylum seekers in Thailand continue to be
 screened under provisions of the CPA to determine their
 eligibility for refugee status. There were isolated reports of
 pushbacks of Lao asylum seekers by Thai government officials in
 1991. Thailand continues to cooperate with the UNHCR and Laos
 in a trilateral program to manage the voluntary repatriation of
 certain Lao asylum seekers.
 It has been official Thai policy since April 1, 1989, that
 Burmese asylum seekers in Thailand are illegal immigrants
 subject to deportation. The Thai continue to arrest and detain
 Burmese asylum seekers in Bangkok and along the border, and
 some Burmese "of concern" to the UNHCR have been included in
 deportations of large groups of illegal workers back to Burma.
 In August the Thai Government moved most Burmese detainees "of
 concern" who had completed their sentences for illegal entry
 into Thailand to a police academy north of Bangkok. The UNHCR
 has been permitted access to the facility. Approximately 1,528
 Burmese students live in camps along the Thai/Burmese border
 with over 54,000 members of Burmese ethnic minorities. There
 
 
 1005
 
 THAILAND
 have been reports that'the Thai Government plans to move this
 population back into Burma by early 1992.-, Voluntary 'agencies
 and international humanitarian assistance organizations
 continue to provide food and medical assistance.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Events in- 1991 clearly demonstrate that the right of Thai
 citizens to change their government through democratic
 processes-can still be negated easily by-military'
 intervention. Senior military officers,. assisted by
 bureaueiats; traditionally have exercised disproportionate
 influence over Thai politics. In recent years, these elements
 have been challenged by politicians, many of them representing
 a newly prosperous business elite.  The February 23 bloodless
 coup marked the latest reassertion.of-traditional elite.control--
 as well as a reversal of 12 years of halting progress toward a,
 more democratic political systen,
 After a lengthy drafting process, the military-appointed
 National Legislative Assembly completed work on a new
 Constitution, which took effect on December 9. The new charter
 requires'that a gedieraI election for a 360 member House of
 Representatives "be held within-120 days, and'it has-been set
 for March 22. Many politicians and others charge that the
 Constitution's provisions for an appointed Senate will permit
 inordinate miritary'influence over the political system in the
 future.                                     ,-
 Historically,*w6men have voted in-numbers equal to men, but
 have been grossly underrepresented in national politics and in
 high governmental positions. This'pattern-is repeated in the
 current-�nterim Cabinet and-National Legislative Assembly.
 Under a 1978"cabinet decision and standing Interior Ministry
 regulationg, women'afe barred from serving-as deputy district --
 officers, a key-position in Thailand's highly centralized---'
 system of lbciladministtation. -,By extens.ion;.this rule
 preclxdbs women'from serving in more-senior positions such as.
 district officer and provincial governor. Exclusion from these
 positions has impeded women from rising to senior levels in the
 powerful Ifiteri6r Ministry. During 1991 Interior Ministry-
 officials cbntinued to insist that-women were physically-
 incapable'of fulfilling the job's demands, particularly inthe
 area of crimb'fighting. In Obtober, however, the semi-
 autonomous Bangkok Metropolitan Administration parted company
 with the Ministr' by naming its'first female deputydistrict
 chief. W6ten enjoy better prospects in'several other I     -
 ministries and government agencies, notably the Commerce
 Ministry. ,
 Female military and police officers- are not permitted to attend.
 service academies or the cbmmafid and- general. sthaff .college, .-
 creating a major obstacle to theiT promotibn 'beyond the rank of
 colonel: -Since retired senior bureaucrats andmilitary
 officers have been the sburce of much of Thailhnd's-political
 leadership, these limit tions have also been akey factor in
 women's underrepresentatio- in politics and government.
 Section 4' Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Thai human rights organizations have had some success in
 specific areas, including pressuring the Government to address
 
 
 1006
 THAILAND
 abuses in child labor practices and in prisons. Although
 government officials are generally willing to talk to these
 groups, it is not uncommon for them to encounter official
 suspicion or even hostility, particularly when working in rural
 areas. In August interim Prime Minister Anand Panyarachun
 criticized such attitudes toward nongovernmental human rights
 organizations.
 In the past, Thailand has answered specific inquiries on human
 rights matters from Amnesty International and the International
 Commission of Jurists. With occasional exceptions, it has been
 willing to allow international human rights organizations to
 visit Thailand, to meet with appropriate government officials,
 and to lobby for corrective action.
 Following the February 23 coup, senior government and military
 officials on several occasions responded negatively to
 criticism from foreign and international organizations alleging
 human rights violations iz Thailand. In July the Interior
 Ministry ordered the last minute cancellation of a Bangkok
 seminar sponsored by the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTU) and other foreign and regional
 organizations. The cancellation appeared to be in retaliation
 for a June 25' ICTU call for its affiliates to push for trade
 sanctions against Thailand for alleged violations of worker
 rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress in integrating its
 minorities, but some problems remain. Fewer than half of an
 estimated 500,000 to 700,000 members of hill tribes are
 believed to possess documentation as Thai citizens. Advocates
 consistently cite the difficulties faced by many hill tribe
 members in obtaining Thai citizenship as the primary obstacle
 to their successful integration into society. In addition,
 credible sources report many hill tribe members have been
 subjected to deportation or resettlement efforts, often without
 regard to how long they have resided in Thailand.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 four of Thailand's southernmost provinces bordering Malaysia.
 The Government has targeted development efforts and attempted
 to expand educational opportunities in order to integrate Thai
 Muslims into Thai society. However, Muslims remain
 underrepresented in government service, the professions, and in
 higher education, primarily because of the effects of lower
 educational standards.
 The community of approximately 45.000 Vietnamese which fled
 Indochina in the 1940's and 1950's to northeastern Thailand
 lives under a set of laws and regulations restricting its
 members' movements, residences, education, and occupations.
 Since 1980, these Vietnamese have even been forbidden to buy
 new cars. Some of these restrictions are laxly enforced.
 Those born in Vietnam are not eligible for Thai citizenship
 under existing laws. In 1991 the Interior Ministry completed
 work on new regulations aimed at easing the way for some 20,000
 to 34,000 Thai-born descendants of this community to be granted
 Thai citizenship. Informed sources report local and provincial
 administrative officials have been slow to implement the new
 policy, however, apparently because of their unwillingness to
 lose the discretionary power they have long had in deciding on
 applications for citizenship.
 
 
 1007
 
 THAILAND
 Upon taking office, the Interim Government enunciated a goal of
 introducing new policies and laws aimed at enhancing protection
 of the rights of children, women, and the disabled. The
 Government subsequently upgraded a former subdivision within
 the Prime Minister's office to a national commission on women's
 affairs. The Government also won passage of a law to improve
 the lot of the disabled by means of regulations and tax
 incentives aimed at both increasing employment of the disabled
 and improving the accessibility of public and private buildings.
 Women generally have equal legal rights, with specific
 guarantees of equality with men in the areas of matrimonial
 property, the right to choose habitation and employment, and
 child custody. However, legal inequality remains in the area
 of divdrce rights. Whereas a man may sue for divorce on the
 grounds that his wife has committed adultery, a woman under
 similar circumstances faces the additional legal burden of
 proving her husband has maintained or honored another woman in
 a manner equal to that accorded his wife.
 Currently, Thai law denies Thai nationality to children born of
 alien fathers and Thai mothers, regardless of place of birth
 unless the birth is registered as illegitimate. Children of
 Thai fathers receive citizenship without regard to the mother's
 nationality.
 Though no Thai law specifically addresses violence within the
 family, the Criminal Code's.provisions on assault and abuse
 effectively make both wife beating and child abuse a crime.
 Laws on rape and abandonment also provide for harsher penalties
 when the victim is a child. While Thai governments have
 denounced physical abuse of women and children, law enforcement
 in this area has been less than vigorous. Thai law provides no
 means to intervene short of criminal prosecution of the abusive
 spouse or parent. Rules of evidence often make prosecuting
 such cases difficult, especially when the victims are
 children. For a combination of these reasons and ingrained
 cultural attitudes, which tend to be'tolerant of male
 prerogatives, police are often reluctant to pursue such cases.
 Plans to establish a new police unit staffed by female officers
 to handle cases of abuse of women and children have not yet
 been implemented.
 Within their limited resources, private women's and children's
 rights groups provide shelter to victims of abuse who come to
 their attention and ably assist them in pursuing legal action.
 Reliable data on the extent of abuse of women and children are
 not available. However, those with extensive experience in the
 field believe family violence is prevalent in all social
 classes and that the number of such cases is rising.
 Prostitution is acknowledged within Thailand as one of the
 country's most troubling social problems. Estimates of the
 numbers of women engaged in prostitution vary widely. A 1990
 Public Health Ministry survey placed the number at 86,000.
 Most other sources agree the number exceeds 100,000, with some
 placing it as high as 1,000,000. Estimates of the number of
 child prostitutes show similar variations.
 Women engaged in prostitution typically come from relatively
 poor rural areas, particularly in the country's northern
 region. With scant economic opportunities in their home
 villages, many turn to working as prostitutes in urban areas as
 a way to fulfill their familial obligations as well as to
 obtain the material fruits of industrial society. Procurers
 
 
 1008
 THAILAND
 often advance the parents of young women a substantial sum
 against their future earnings, money that frequently goes to
 pay off debts or to build a new house. The women are then
 obligated to work in a brothel for a fixed period in order to
 pay back the loan. In public discussions of prostitution,
 parents who accept money under such conditions are often
 described as having "sold" their daughters for a certain sum.
 It is not known what percentage of these women are forced into
 prostitution against their will. Human rights monitors believe
 that the majority of the women who engage in prostitution are
 not kept under physical constraint. There are, however,
 numerous cases of women and female children being forced or
 tricked into working as prostitutes and being held as virtual
 captives by brothel operators. Information from well-informed
 sources, confirmed by police arrest reports, also describes a
 disturbing recent trend toward increasing traffic in women from
 hill tribe minorities and neighboring countries. Some brothel
 operators reportedly favor such women because they may be
 obtained more cheaply and their inability to speak Thai makes
 them easier to control.
 There have also been a number of well-documented cases of local
 networks trafficking in women "exporting" prostitutes to such
 countries as Germany and Japan. In February police arrested 15
 employees of the state-owned Thai Airways International and
 charged them with complicity in such activity.
 Despite occasional high profile raids on brothels, overall
 enforcement of the laws against prostitution has consistently?
 been all but nonexistent. Senior government officials
 themselves have cited corruption as a major factor in police
 willingness to turn a blind eye to the problem. Since taking
 office, the Interim Government has followed a policy of
 cracking down on brothels engaging in child and forced
 prostitution. In June the Interior Ministry's Public Welfare
 Department announced the establishment of a national center to
 coordinate the rescue of child prostitutes and those forced
 into prostitution against their will. While police raids
 against brothels engaging in such practices did increase
 following the announcement of the new policy, informed sources
 say the crackdown has had little practical effect and that the
 brothels targeted usually reopen within a few days.
 Women are well represented in the labor force and are holding
 more professional positions, particularly in the commercial
 sector. They are not barred legally from positions
 traditionally held by men except for government and miltary
 posts described above and a limited number of occupations
 deemed to pose excessive physical hazards. Government
 regulations require employers to fix the same wages and
 benefits for similar work by men and women. Discriminatory
 practices persist, however. State-owned Thai Airways, for
 example, requires women flight attendants to retire or accept
 transfer to a ground job at age 45. No such requirement exists
 for male employees. Women continue to be concentrated in
 traditionally lower paid jobs, and there appears to be a
 significant gap between average salaries earned by men and
 women, although no accurate statistics are available. In rural
 areas, sex stereotypes are more pronounced with respect to
 social roles. These barriers are being modified as mass
 communications bring new role models to even the most remote
 communities.
 
 
 1009
 THAILAND
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Thailand's basic labor law is the Labor Relations Act of 1975,
 which applies only to the private sector. Until April 1991,
 the Act also applied to workers in state-owned enterprises. As
 amended, the 1975 Act extends only to private sector employees
 the right to form and join unions or employee associations of
 their own choosing without prior authorization; to decide on
 the constitutions and rules of these associations, and unions;
 to express their views without government or employer
 interference; to confederate with other unions; to receive
 protection from discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or
 termination by any outside authority because of union
 activities; and to have employee representation in direct
 negotiations with employers. However, no law explicitly.
 protects workers from discrimination due to their participation
 in organizing new unions which have not yet been officially
 registered.
 The 1975 Act specifically withholds from government workers the
 right to form unions. Nonetheless, civil servants may and do
 form "employee associations," which are influential in
 determining salary scales, benefits, and conditions of
 employment.
 In April the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly
 amended the 1975 Act to exempt state enterprise workers and
 enacted a State Enterprise Employee Relations Act that
 dissolved unions in this sector. In place of unions, workers
 in each state enterprise may form a single "association" after
 at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees have
 submitted a petition to the Department of Labor to register
 their association. These bodies may submit employee grievances
 to management and negotiate benefits, but not wages.
 Associations do not have the right to confederate. Officials
 have stated that these groups will be allowed to affiliate with
 international labor organizations, but one large state
 enterprise in August issued regulations forbidding such an
 affiliation.
 The new Act, like the 1975 Act, denies all state enterprise
 workers the right to strike. In the past, public sector unions
 circumvented this prohibition by holding "extraordinary
 meetings" which took workers off the job for days at a time.
 The new Act requires associations to hold general meetings only
 on weekends and holidays. One of the National Peacekeeping
 Council's first actions after the February 23 coup was to ban
 strikes and lockouts. This ban was rescinded with the lifting
 of martial law in May. Like other groups, unions could not
 stage rallies or protests during the period of martial law. In
 addition, in February the Council issued a decree amending the
 1975 act to require that a majority of a union's members
 approve strikes in a secret ballot. Previously the only legal
 requirement for a strike in most of the-private sector was a
 24-hour notice to management. The same decree also requires
 that the Department of Labor certify advisors selected by the
 unions to represent them, which is important in a country of
 small, weak unions.
 Under the 1975 Act, the Government has the authority "to
 restrict the right to strike whenever a strike would affect
 national security or cause severe negative repercussions for
 the population at large." However, the Government seldom uses
 
 
 1010
 THAILAND
 this provision and did not do so in 1991. Thai labor law also
 forbids strikes in "essential services", defined much more
 broadly than the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 standards, to include ports, education, transportation, fuel
 and energy, telecommunications, hospitals, and waterworks.
 Since a period of social unrest in the mid-1970's, Thailand has
 averaged fewer than 10 strikes a year. Since the lifting of
 martial law, very few strikes have occurred.
 Even before the dissolution of state enterprise unions reduced
 total union membership by about one-half, less than 3 percent
 of the total work force, or about 12 percent of the industrial
 work force, was unionized. Almost 60 percent of the work force
 is employed in the largely unorganized agricultural sector.
 Factors discouraging the growth of organized labor are the
 antiunion and paternalistic attitudes of employers, the Thai
 preference to avoid face-to-face confrontation, and a provision
 of Thai labor law permitting the formation of private sector
 labor unions with as few as 10 members. This provision has
 resulted in a proliferation of small, weak unions--about
 700--grouped into 7 national federations.
 The only verified incident in 1991 of Thai unionists suffering
 violence due to their union activities was a scuffle in late
 November outside an American owned factory pitting strikers and
 their sympathizers against factory guards, It is unclear who
 started the trouble. The disappearance since June of Thanong
 Podhiarn, a prominent union leader and probably the most
 outspoken critic of postcoup government labor policy, remains
 unsolved by the police (see Section l.b.).
 Thai unions generally operate independently of the Government
 and other outside organizations. The 1975 act encourages this
 policy by exempting union officials from prosecution in
 pursuing the interests of their followers "provided that the
 activity does not involve politics." Unions are free to
 associate internationally with other trade union organizations
 and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 for Thai private sector workers under the 1975 Labor Relations
 Act. Both labor and management usually seek to resolve
 potential differences informally before turning to formal
 collective bargaining. The 1975 Act defined the mechanisms for
 such negotiations and for government-assisted conciliation and
 arbitration in cases under dispute. Under the 1991 State
 Enterprise .Employee Relations Act, associations may negotiate
 working conditions, but not wages, with a government-dominated
 labor relations committee in each enterprise. (The Cabinet
 decides state enterprise wages based on recommendations of the
 overall State Enterprise Labor Relations Committee.) A system
 of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over
 most aspects of labor law for the private sector. However,
 when Thai courts determine that a worker has been unjustly
 dismissed, they usually order severance pay compensation rather
 than reinstatement. Workers may also seek redress for their
 grievances from a tripartite Labor Relations Committee under
 the Ministry of Interior.
 The State Enterprise Employee Relations Act has no explicit
 provision allowing public sector employees to appeal to the
 labor courts. Instead they may apply to an overall state
 enterprise labor relations committee.
 
 
 1011
 THAILAND
 There are several special Export Processing Zones (EPZ's) in
 Thailand, with many more planfied to stimulate the growth of
 export-oriented industry. No separate labor legislation
 applies to EPZ's, in which wages and working conditions, in
 fact, usually exceed national norms. There are some trade
 unions and a few collective bargaining agreements in Thai EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 As was the case with the former Constitution, the new one
 contains provisos prohibiting forced or compulsory labor except
 in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law. On
 October 31, the Police made a highly publicized raid on a
 factory where 31 boys, aged 13 to 17, were detained and-forced
 to work 16 hours a day. The owners are under arrest. The
 Government has announced that it is developing a program to
 combat such violations of rights, including harsher penalties
 against perpetrators. The question of adult and child
 prostitution is discussed in Section 5.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 In January 1990, the Government raised the minimum age for
 employment from 12 to 13. The Government's policy is to raise
 the minimum employment age gradually to the ILO standard of 15,
 although no timetable for meeting this standard has been set.
 The law still permits the employment of children between the
 ages of 13 and 15 in "light work", although the employment of
 children at night (10 p.m. to 6 a.m.) is prohibited. The
 Government has estimated that there are 100,000 children
 between 13 and 15 in the labor force, but the actual number is
 probably much greater. The current 5-year plan, which runs to
 1996, provides for an increase in the minimum requirement for
 schooling from 6 to 9 years by the end of the period, and there
 are reasonable prospects it will be successful.
 Child labor continued to cause considerable domestic and
 foreign criticism in 1991 as noted above. Foreign trade union
 and human rights groups have focused heavily on the
 exploitation of working children. In June the ILO Standards
 Committee issued a "special paragraph" chastising the Thai
 Government for its lack of effective implementation of laws
 prohibiting child labor. The "special paragraph" is the most
 severe rebuke the ILO can mete out to member states.
 Complaints against Thailand allege that Thai standards continue
 to be low, that enforcement is inadequate despite recent
 increases in the number of labor inspectors, and that penalties
 for violations of the law are not severe enough. Police raids
 on sweatshops, including that noted in Section 6.c. above, have
 found children under age 13 working illegally. There are
 continued reports of children over age 13 illegally employed in
 dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise harmful circumstances.
 Thai efforts to remedy these problems are hampered mostly by
 inadequate resources devoted to inspection and enforcement, and
 fines which do not sufficiently deter potential violators. The
 Department of Labor division responsible for child labor issues
 has more than doubled its corps of inspectors in the last 2
 years and has received authorization to increase further the
 size of the corps by nearly 100 percent. In addition, the
 number of general labor inspectors has also more than doubled
 in the last 2 years. Despite these efforts, fully adequate
 enforcement of child labor laws will require eveh more manpower
 and funding and more effective penalties for violations.
 
 
 1012
 THAILAND
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A tripartite wage committee consisting of government, employer,
 and worker representatives in 1991 increased the daily legal
 minimum wage. Rates vary by region, but they are minimally
 adequate to provide a worker and his family with a decent
 standard of living. The unskilled workers who pour into
 Bangkok from the far poorer countryside often are willing to
 work at less than the minimum wage. In rural Thailand too,
 many workers are willing to work for less than the minimum wage
 mandated there. The rural minimal wage provides workers and
 their families with a marginally adequate standard of living,
 given the lower cost of living in these areas. Government
 officials report that large groups of laborer sestimated at
 about one-third of the total-receive less-than the legal
 minimum wage. The Government has tasked labor inspectors with
 enforcing prescribed rates more effectively.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the
 entire labor force. Commercial employees work a maximum of 54
 hours per week, employees in industry 48, and those in
 "dangerous" work 42. Transportation workers are restricted to
 no more than 8 hours per day.
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. In medium and
 large factories government health and safety standards are
 maintained. However, Thailand's large informal sector is
 subject to minimal inspection, and health and safety standards
 mandated under Thai law are generally little understood by
 workers and seldom followed by employers.
 
 
 1013
