 THAILA1D
 Thailand's government is a constitutional monarchy with a
 strong executive branch and a weaker bicameral legislature
 composed of a 347-member elected House of Representatives and
 a 260-member appointed Senate. The elected house wields less
 power than the bureaucracy and the military, the latter playing
 a strong and often dominant role in Thai political life. The
 Senate, which has few legislative powers, is composed largely
 of active duty or retired military men. The monarchy exerts
 strong informal influence. The Prime Minister and members of
 his Cabinet are subject to votes of confidence, although they
 need not be elected members of Parliament themselves. Free
 national elections for the House of Representatives were held
 in July 1986 with record participation, following which the
 current- Prime Minister, General (retired) Prem Tinsulanon, who
 has held office since 1980, formed a four-party coalition
 government suppcrted by roughly.two-thirds of the House.
 Thailand is an emerging, middle-income, developing country
 with a free enterprise economic system in which individual
 economic interests and the right to hold private property are
 strongly protected. Although the industrial sector has
 expanded rapidly in recent years, 70 percent of the Thai
 people still live in the countryside, and agriculture remains
 the main source of livelihood.
 Thailand's security services operate within a constitutionally
 mandated framework reflecting the strong executive branch
 orientation of the Government. They have formidable powers,
 sometimes utilized in a heavy-handed or uneven way.
 Nonetheless, human rights abuses attributable to the security
 services are not sanctioned by the Government, which has taken
 steps to ameliorate those abuses that do occur.
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists operate in rural
 areas and use terrorism to advance their respective aims.
 Criminal groups also often resort to violence. In recent
 years, the Government has made notable progress in reducing
 the influence of these groups, particularly of the first two.
 Communist strength has declined markedly due to several
 factors, including an amnesty program for defectors and
 financial assistance to help them reintegrate into society.
 Government efforts to integrate Thailand's Muslim community
 have considerably vitiated the threat of radical fundamentalism
 and separatism. Sporadic low-level violence in southern
 Thailand by Communists and Muslims continues, however.
 Thailand continued to offer sanctuary and assistance to
 Indochinese refugees already present in the country prior to
 third-country resettlement. It is increasingly reluctant,
 however, to accept new arrivals, particularly Laotian
 highlanders who have proven the most difficult to resettle in
 third countries. Were international resettlement to flag
 further, Thai policies might become even more restrictive.
 During 1987 Thailand's citizens continued to enjoy a wide
 range of civil and political liberties. Autonomous political
 parties, gatherings, and associations are allowed, and freedom
 from arbitrary detention or search is generally safeguarded,
 notwithstanding some rarely enforced restrictive laws.
 Although it practices some self-censorship, particularly in
 regard to the military, the press is among the most free in
 Asia. Human rights activists in Thailand are able to bring
 issues to the attention of the Government and public and to
 lobby for corrective action.
 
 
 811
 THAILAND
 International concern about human rights in Thailand has
 centered on the treatment of Indochinese refugees and displaced
 persons, an area where some well-documented abuses have
 occurred. These include the rape and murder of several Khmer
 by Thai security forces. The Government acknowledges the
 seriousness of the problem, and as 1987 came to an end, had
 taken some steps to alleviate the sources of abuses.
 Similarly, the Thai Government has instituted policies
 designed to ensure that asylum seekers from Laos will not be
 forcibly repatriated, as happened in some past instances.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings, including summary
 executions, in which official government involvement was
 alleged. Nonetheless, senior Thai officials have been quoted
 by newspapers as acknowledging that police execution of
 habitual serious criminal offenders without due process
 occasionally does occur, largely in southern Thailand, an area
 which regularly records the nation's highest crime rates and
 parts of which still retain a "Wild West" atmosphere. In late
 1986, a convicted robber, who held a prosecutor and two judges
 hostage, was found hanged in his cell 2 days after his arrest.
 In mid-1987, a convict responsible for leading a prison riot
 was found hanged in his cell on the morning following the
 inmates' surrender. Both incidents were termed suicides.
 In rural areas, Communist insurgents and ethnic separatists
 have continued to use violence, including murder, to pursue
 their respective objectives. Their targets have included
 low-level government officials, local entrepreneurs, and
 security officials.
 In past years, a number of journalists died violently in rural
 areas. Such killings have diminished sharply in recent years,
 and local human rights activists regard the situation as
 distinctly improved. The motivations for these killings are
 not entirely clear. Some of the murdered journalists had
 published exposes on corruption or illegal activity. Others
 apparently had engaged in blackmail or extortion and likely
 were killed in retaliation.
 b. Disappearance
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists have used
 terrorism as a political weapon, resulting in the
 disappearance of civilians and government officials. Such
 incidents are increasingly rare.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Thai Government has stated its opposition to the use of
 cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment. According to human
 rights activists in Thailand, abuses of authority, both real
 and alleged, relating to cruel and inhuman punishment or
 treatment have declined steadily over the last several years.
 There has been widespread international concern, however,
 about reports of human rights abuses in the border camps. In
 1987 paramilitary elements responsible for security at the
 
 
 812
 THAILAND
 Site Two Cambodian border camp were involved in a number of
 robberies, rapes, and murders. In a particularly blatant case
 of abuse, a Thai camp guard beat two Cambodian camp residents
 July 31 in front of witnesses. They fled into a nearby wooded
 area with the Ranger in pursuit. Shots were heard, and the
 two camp residents were found dead a short time later. Thai
 authorities have issued an arrest warrant for the Ranger
 accused of the murders, but he has not yet been apprehended.
 There have also been credible reports that some Thai
 paramilitary .personnel around Site Two have been involved in
 blackmarket activities and prostitution and have physically
 assaulted or killed camp residents in connection with these
 activities. A Lawyers Committee for Human Rights delegation
 visited Thailand in January to look into the security situation
 at Sitd Two and will return in early 1983. Steps to improve
 the Thai security forces and curb the illegal activities are
 being taken, including the establishment of a legal market and
 the replacement of Task Force 80 Rangers with better paid and
 trained security personnel.
 Prison conditions in Thailand remain poor as a consequence of
 low government expenditures, limited staff, corruption, and
 narcotics abuse by prisoners. Prisoners are subject to strict
 regulations, including corporal punishment for infractions.
 Attempted prison escapes are suppressed with force, regularly
 resulting in deaths. Prison conditions vary with the
 prisoner's social and economic status as well as with the
 nature of the offense. Westerners generally receive
 preferential treatment, but there is no systematic
 discrimination.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest
 warrants generally are required, and specific charges must be
 brought within a limited time period against those detained.
 There is a functioning bail system. Reports of arbitrary
 arrest are infrequent.
 A small number of Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 have been detained without trial under martial law provisions.
 Although-these provisions were eased significantly in 1984,
 and most of those arrested under these provisions have since
 been released, some remain in detention. Currently, the only
 legal basis for arrest and detention without specific charges
 for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist
 Activities Act. In early 1987, some 18 alleged Communists
 were arrested under the provisions of this-Act. Five have
 been released, but the others are still in detention.
 According to local human rights groups, those detained under
 the Anti-Communist Activities Act have not been mistreated
 systematically, but activists maintain that the detainees
 often are denied access to medical treatment and that this
 results in'a variety of physical problems. Summary exile is
 not practiced.
 Section 31 of the Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory
 labor except in time of war, during a state of emergency or
 martial law, or to avert imminent "public calamity." There
 are no known violations of this prohibition.
 
 
 813
 THAILAND
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution grants Thai citizens the presumption of
 innocence as well as access to courts or administrative bodies
 to seek redress. Suspects can be deniedthe right to legal
 counsel during the pretrial or investigative period of their
 cases, but before trial they have access to a lawyer of their
 own choosing. Summary punishment is not practiced.
 The Thai legal system provides for trial by judges rather than
 jury. Cases are heard on the basis of specific charges,
 usually well-documented, by a panel of judges. During the
 martial law period (October 1976 to August 1984), military
 courts had jurisdiction over cases involving internal and
 external national security, Thai relations with other nations,
 and offenses against the royal family and public peace. Since
 1984, however, military courts are used solely in cases
 involving only military personnel. All other cases come under
 the jurisdiction of civilian courts. The alleged plotters of
 the 1985 coup bid are being tried in civilian courts.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights, including the right to counsel
 both in the trial and appellate stages. A civilian court
 decision may be appealed; a military court decision may not.
 Both court systems, however, allow appeal for a royal pardon.
 Moreover, prisoners sometimes benefit from periodic royal
 amnesties. On the occasion of his 60th birthday in December,
 the, King granted a royal amnesty (commuting or shortening
 sentences) to some 20,000 inmates in Thai prisons. The courts
 are relatively independent of external pressures. There have
 been allegations, however, of both government and private
 influence being brought to bear on certain cases, often those
 involving narcotics.
 A pilot government program to provide free legal advice to the
 poor continues in operation. Most free legal aid, however,
 comes from private organizations, including the Lawyers'
 Association and the Women's Lawyers' Association.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is essentially an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, the police function is
 seldom abused for security or political purposes, and the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas generally is permitted, although
 those espousing leftist or Communist views are probably
 watched by the security services. Thai law requires that
 police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. There are allegations that
 officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance and then allow
 their subordinate noncommissioned officials to apply them as
 needed. Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act allow
 officials involved in specifically designated "Communist
 suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants,
 but these powers have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution affirms citizens' rights to free speech and a
 free press, but there are laws which impose restrictions on
 those rights. The principal legal'restrictions on these
 
 
 814
 THAILAND
 freedoms are prohibitions against insulting or defaming the
 King, Queen, Heir Apparent, or Regent (lese majeste),
 advocating a Communist system of government, or publishing
 materials which threaten national security. A former Deputy
 Interior Minister was acquitted of lese majeste charges in
 mid-1987, but the verdict was overturned on appeal by the
 prosecution. He has filed an appeal with the Supreme Court.
 In November former police major Anan Senakhan, who was serving
 a 6-year sentence for a lese majeste conviction, was pardoned
 and released. In late 1987, allegations of lese majeste were
 made against two persons. One, a police general, was relieved
 of his duties pending an investigation; the second, a senior
 civil servant, resigned from his post in respoase to the
 threatened court case. In both cases, lese majeste charges
 seemed to some observers intended to achieve other aims, i.e.,
 the removal of political or personal opponents. Traditional,
 rather than legal, strictures exist against severe criticism
 of religious institutions, ethnic groups, or the military.
 Thai citizens enjoy substantial freedom of speech, and the
 Government permits criticism of its policies. However,
 criticism is not entirely without its risks. On two separate
 occasions, a prominent member of the parliamentary opposition
 had first his house, then his newspaper offices, bombed by
 mysterious assailants after particularly vehement attacks on
 the Government arid the military.
 International publications circulate freely in Thailand, as
 does a wide range of political and social commentary presented
 by the privately owned Thai press. Technical publications and
 pamphlets, including those of academics, circulate freely and
 the latter present viewpoints ranging from the non-Communist
 left to the ultraright. Foreign and domestic books are not
 censored, except in rare instances where publications are
 critical of the royal family or the Thai monarchy.
 Television and radio stations are licensed by the Government
 and operated both by government and private entities as
 commercial enterprises. Although the Government's Broadcasting
 Directing Board in theory reviews all television programs
 prior to broadcast, in practice most programs are not
 prescreened, and stations present a range of viewpoints.
 Radio stations are required to carry a government-produced
 newscast four times daily, but are free to originate other
 news and commentary. Opinions critical of government
 positions have been broadcast but, in general, controversial
 issues are treated cautiously, if at all.
 The press continues to operate under the restrictions imposed
 by the Press Law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law
 orders. It is cautious regarding criticism of the military
 and practices self-censorship. Current legislation permits
 the Government to close newspapers and revoke the licenses of
 editors of newspapers which publish stories deemed to be
 libelous or contrary to national security interests. In 1987
 the House of Representatives passed a long-awaited press law
 which would give the press greater flexibility. The Senate
 changed the legislation to retain the Government's authority
 to close newspapers for national security reasons, but the
 House rejected the amended version of the bill. The bill
 currently is not expected to become law in any form before
 mid-1988 at the earliest. The Government infrequently uses
 its statutory power over the press. In 1987 the Government
 closed one newspaper. The newspaper resumed publication
 within a few weeks.
 
 
 815
 THAILAND
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Thai Constitution ensures the rights of assembly and
 association. In practice, these rights are exercised freely
 by politicians, students, labor, and other interest groups
 without government interference. All associations, including
 labor unions, must be registered by the Thai Government. The
 Government, however, has not used the withholding of
 registration to inhibit freedom of association for any groups.
 Permits are not required for assembly in Thailand, but the
 Government has often attempted to discourage those labor
 demonstrations which have political overtones.
 Most of the internationally recognized rights concerning labor
 have been recognized legally since 1975, with the passage of
 the Labor Relations Act. The Act affirms, among other things,
 the rights of employees to form and join unions or employee
 associations of their own choosing; decide on the constitutions
 and rules of their associations and unions; formulate their
 views without government or employer interference; confederate
 with other unions; be protected against discrimination,
 dissolution, suspension, or termination by any outside
 authority because of union activities; and have employee
 representation in direct negotiations with employers. The Act
 also defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for
 conciliation and arbitration under government auspices in
 cases under dispute. The conciliation and arbitration
 procedures are mandatory for state enterprises. All rights
 under the 1975 Act specifically do not apply to government
 workers at any level, though most do apply to state enterprise
 workers.
 Thai labor has organized slowly since these basic rights were
 affirmed 12 years ago. Currently, less than 7 percent of the
 industrial work force claims union membership, a proportion
 which is not expanding rapidly. A benign relationship has
 existed historically between employer and employee, reducing
 the inclination of workers to engage in confrontation with
 management. A provision of Thai labor law permitting the
 formation of labor unions with as few as 10 members contributes
 to a high degree of fractionalization at both the union and
 confederation levels; the Government defends this provision as
 promoting a democratic and grass-roots labor movement
 accessible to employees of even the smallest enterprises.
 Labor leaders recognize that this division weakens their
 overall impact, and are endeavoring to consolidate their
 activities. Thai unions are generally very independent,
 though some critics claim that the above-cited law promotes
 the existence of company unions beholden to management.
 Critics also contend that the legal requirement for union
 leadership to be employed full time in an enterprise
 diminishes their independence from management; however, the
 law also requires that leadership be excused from work to
 pursue union business, and this requirement usually is
 respected. Thai unions tend to be apolitical, in part because
 the 1975 Act withholds certain protections in cases of
 "political" activity. The alleged involvement of several
 prominent labor leaders in a 1985 coup attempt has sparked
 debate about labor's role in politics.
 Thai labor, whether unionized or represented by "employee
 associations," is guaranteed the right of-collective
 bargaining. Thai law prescribes a detailed procedure to
 ensure employee participation in the determination of working
 conditions, wages, and benefits. Such bargaining currently
 
 
 816
 THAILAND
 focuses more on benefit packages and working conditions than
 on wages. Both labor and management often prefer to resolve
 potential differences through a variety of informal channels
 before turning to formal collective bargaining. While strikes
 are legal (but infrequent recently) throughout most of the
 private sector, the right to strike does not extend to civil
 servants or employees of state enterprises, private colleges
 or universities, and a variety of "essential" service jobs
 such as those in transportation and communications. In
 practice, employees in these sectors have struck on occasion,
 often without penalty. In almost all cases, disputes are
 resolved in state enterprises without resort to strikes, in
 part because Thai law prohibits strikes (and lock-outs) in
 state enterprises until conciliation and arbitration
 procedures have run their full course. In most of the private
 sectoi, 24-hour notice to management is the only prerequisite
 to a strike. A system of labor courts exercises judicial
 review over all aspects of the implementation of the Labor
 Relations Act.
 Labor unions in Thailand maintain unrestricted relations with
 recognized international labor bodies--the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions, international trade secretariats, and the
 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Trade Union
 Congress, and with various national labor bodies, notably
 those from the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany,
 Japan, and Israel.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand and
 protected by law and custom. Theravada Buddhism, the de facto
 state religion, has had an abiding and profound influence on
 Thai culture and history, and the preponderance of Thai
 practice it. The King is required by the Constitution to
 profess the Buddhist faith and practice Buddhism.
 Nonetheless, Thailand is a secular society with church and
 state clearly separate. There are no restrictions on
 religious ceremonies, the teaching of religion, or conversion
 from one religion to another. Under applicable regulations,
 missionaries are permitted to live and proselytize in
 Thailand, as has been the case for more than a century.
 Foreign clergy may preach freely. There is no legal or
 organized discrimination against, or persecution of, those
 affiliated with minority religions, such as Christianity or
 Islam. Religious publishing, regardless of faith, is
 allowed. Like private associations, religious institutions
 are registered by the Government. Most senior Thai officials
 and political leaders are at least nominally Buddhist.
 Muslims li,.ving in the four southern provinces, which have
 majority Muslim populations, have the right to have civil law
 cases decided by Muslim judges under Koranic law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from longstanding restrictions on the travel of Chinese
 and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, the only limitations
 on travel of persons other than refugees are restrictions on
 entry into certain rural areas believed by the Government to
 be used as bases by Communist insurgents. The right of.
 citizens to change their residence or workplace is unabridged.
 There are no government restrictions on foreign travel or
 emigration, except for government officials, but single Thai
 
 
 817
 THAILAND
 women and children under the age of 14 must have their passport
 applications approved by the Department of Public Welfare. In
 addition, a 1985 statute requires that all women under age 36
 sit through a series of interviews regarding their employment
 records and finances in connection with passport applications.
 This has been protested by some women's rights advocates. The
 purpose of these provisions of law are the prevention of the
 export of children for sale and women for purposes of
 prostitution. The Government has rarely revoked citizenship.
 Thailand, though not a signatory to international legal
 instruments regarding refugees and their basic rights, has
 acted in the spirit of those agreements in providing asylum to
 about 680,000 refugees from Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since
 1975, and in permitting the temporary evacuation of around
 270,000 Khmer, classed as displaced persons, onto its side of
 the Thai-Cambodian border. Thailand does not intend that the
 refugees remain in Thailand permanently, however, and, in the
 case of Lao refugees, during 1987 there were increasing
 indications that if resettlement in third countries is not
 possible, repatriation, not excluding involuntary
 repatriation, would be considered.
 Thai policy has been to allow U.N.-coordinated assistance to
 be provided to refugees at first-asylum camps. Displaced
 Khmer are afforded temporary haven at border camps until safe
 repatriation can be arranged. Those in camps run by the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) number
 about 108,000. In 1987 Lao highlanders often found it
 impossible to gain access to the Government's program
 (established in 1985) to screen individual Laotian arrivals.
 There were instances of unilateral expulsions by Thai
 officials of groups and individuals, primarily highland Hmong,
 who sought to enter Thailand. In March 135 Hmong who had
 illegally crossed into Thailand were involuntarily repatriated
 to Laos, and in September 24 lowland Lao seeking refuge in
 Thailand were pushed back into Laos where they were
 subsequently imprisoned by the Laotian Government. In
 November, 34 Hmong attempting to enter Thailand illegally were
 returned to Laos. There were conflicting reports of a
 massacre, and the UNHCR has been invited to investigate the
 reports. This issue is complicated by the fact that some of
 these would-be entrants are Lao resistance elements rather
 than simple asylum seekers, as well as by the Lao Government's
 continuing hesitancy to accept back Laotians screened in
 Thailand and found not to be bona fide refugees.
 In September approximately 2,000 Burmese hill tribe people who
 had been living illegally in Thailand were repatriated to
 Burma. There have been reports of some violence associated
 with this repatriation.
 Vietnamese coming overland via Cambodia after April 1981 have
 had to remain at the border for lengthy periods until they
 were allowed to be considered for third country resettlement.
 About 4,000 overland Vietnamese remain on the border.
 Although the Government closed the Khao I Dang holding center
 to new refugee arrivals from Cambodia in early 1980,
 approximately 11,200 Cambodians who surreptitiously entered
 Khao I Dang since then have been given full access to the
 camp's facilities. A majority of this group is now eligible
 to seek resettlement abroad. The group known as "illegals",
 perhaps 1,000 people, is not now considered eligible for
 resettlement. Of this group; approximately 500 have been
 returned to camps for displaced persons that are supported by
 
 
 818
 THAILAND
 the United Nations Border Relief Organization (UNBRO).
 Cambodians who are caught trying to enter Khao I Dang
 illegally or who violate Thai camp rules have also been
 returned to UNBRO camps for the displaced Khmer.
 The UNHCR and the major resettlement countries have supported
 the Thai policy of promoting voluntary repatriation when that
 is possible. About 3,600 Lao have returned to their homeland
 under UNHCR supervision following successful bilateral Thai/
 Lao negotiations in September 1980. UNHCR negotiations with
 the Heng Samrin regime concerning the repatriation of Khmer
 refugees to Cambodia remain stalled. The Government of
 Vietnam has been unwilling to discuss repatriation of
 Vietnamese in Thailand. The vast majority of Indochinese in
 Thailarnd are not willing to return to their home countries.
 Since 1979 nearly 90,000 Vietnamese boat people have arrived
 in Thailand after perilous journeys across international
 waters, often in small, unseaworthy boats. Although
 considerably less than during the peak years of 1979-81, the
 number of arrivals in 1987 averaged about 770 persons per
 month, the highest since 1981. Despite these growing numbers,
 the Royal Thai Government still affords asylum, relief, and
 opportunity to seek resettlement to Vietnamese boat people.
 The Government has attempted to deter pirates from attacking
 Vietnamese boat people. Since 1982 the Government has
 operated an antipiracy program with funds donated through
 UNHCR from 12 donor countries. The main activities are
 prevention through deterrence, both through land-based public
 awareness campaigns and air and sea patrolling, and enforcement
 through the apprehension of suspects based on refugee reports
 and intelligence gathering. Although attacks continue, Thai
 antipiracy efforts have been increasingly successful, reducing
 piracy incidents by two-thirds in the last 2 years.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since the absolute monarchy ended in 1932, the Thai Government
 traditionally has been managed by a career civilian bureaucracy
 heavily influenced by the military, often with a military
 officer as prime minister. Holding key military positions in
 important units in the immediate Bangkok area has been the
 most common avenue to the highest national leadership.
 Governments often have been changed extraconstitutionally,
 usually through bloodless military coups. As Thailand has
 become a more developed, complex society, there has been an
 evolution toward greater popular participation in the
 political process, with free elections assuming a larger
 role. The failed 1985 coup attempt by a small military group
 which lacked general military support was a reminder, however,
 that constitutional processes are still shallowly rooted. It
 is generally assumed that the military has not abjured
 intervention in the political process, but now usually acts
 quietly frbm behind the scenes. The Government normally does
 not make decisions of which the military would strongly
 disapprove. One of the measures to limit military influence
 in government is the constitutional provision barring
 active-duty military officers from holding cabinet posts.
 Prime Minister Prem is supported by parties holding nearly
 two-thirds of the seats in the House. The 1986 national
 elections for the House were open and free, and 16 parties
 fielded a record number of candidates. A four-party coalition
 
 
 819
 THAILAND
 government subsequently was formed. Opposition parties
 regularly present opposing views both within the National
 Assembly and through the mass media. The Thai National
 Assembly almost invariably has dissenting votes on legislation
 and on.procedural decisions.
 Elections are based on universal suffrage for adults over the
 age of 20. The Government encourages voter turnout, but does
 not use either direct or indirect pressure to compel voters to
 cast ballots. Actual voter turnout for both national and
 local elections generally exceeds 50 percent, and the 1986
 parliamentary election reached a record 61 percent of eligible
 voters.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has responded in the past to specific inquiries
 on human rights matters from Amnesty International and the
 International Commission of Jurists. With occasional
 exceptions, it is generally willing to discuss human rights
 problems with both domestic and international human rights
 organizations. Also human rights organizations of all kinds
 are generally permitted to visit Thailand, meet with
 appropriate government officials, and lobby for corrective
 action.
 Local civil and women's rights groups, active on a wide range
 of issues, including prostitution and enforcement of labor
 laws, have devoted most of their efforts to the promotion of
 women's rights and identifying and correcting human rights
 violations. Thai human rights organizations have had
 significant success in recent years. They have, for example,
 successfully encouraged the Government to tighten the
 discipline of police and paramilitary forces fighting the
 Communist insurgency and have brought pressure on the
 Government to alleviate widespread abuses in child labor
 practices. In response to increased awareness of human rights
 issues in society, the House of Representatives is planning to
 create a standing committee on human rights issues.
 Thailand has involved itself directly in international human
 rights efforts, but generally has not taken initiatives in
 United Nations forums. It has, however, taken a leading role
 in preparing annual ASEAN resolutions in regard to Cambodia,
 including those on human rights violations. Thai
 representatives were among the founding members of the
 Regional Council on Human Rights in Asia, a forum for the
 exchange of human rights information established in February
 1982. Thai members of the Council helped draft a declaration
 on human rights to serve as the organization's statement of
 policy and goals.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress, particularly
 considering its limited resources, in accomplishing the
 integration of its minorities. While Thailand traditionally
 has been a tolerant and relatively homogeneous society, social
 and cultural aspirations are sometimes limited by ethnic
 considerations. Although present in Thailand for several
 generations, some hill tribes people are not regarded as
 citizens.
 
 
 820
 THAILAND
 Ethnic Chinese are spread throughout Thailand, with a
 concentration in Bangkok. Although the Chinese are better
 assimilated and integrated in Thailand than elsewhere in the
 region, there is a tradition of popular resentment directed
 against the trading and financial activities of the Chinese.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 the southernmost provinces along Thailand's border with
 Malaysia. The Thai Government is aware of their special needs
 and has put much effort into regionally targeted development
 efforts and the creation of educational opportunities in order
 to integrate Thai Muslims into Thai society. However, Muslims
 continue to be underrepresented in government service, the
 professions, and in higher education.
 A community of Vietnamese living in the northeast since 1954
 cannot, with few exceptions, become Thai citizens, and in most
 cases are restricted in their freedom of movement and in their
 educational and employment opportunities. It was long expected
 that they would eventually be repatriated to Vietnam. In the
 meantime, these restrictions represent, in part, a conscious
 Thai policy to discourage further emigration from Vietnam, and
 in part a reaction to the belief that they represent a kind of
 "fifth column" within Thailand as many appear loyal to
 Communist Vietnam.
 The status and role of women have improved steadily over the
 past several years. For the most part, women have equal legal
 rights in Thailand, with specific guarantees of property and
 divorce rights, and there are no allegations that these rights
 are denied. Women vote in numbers equal to men and participate
 fully in the political process. There are several female
 members of the national legislature. However, women are
 underrepresented in national politics and in high governmental
 positions. They are well represented in the labor force and
 are becoming increasingly so in professional positions,
 particularly those in the commercial sector. In general,
 women are not barred legally from positions traditionally held
 by men. Despite limitations on serving in the armed forces,
 female officers routinely have solid careers, reaching the
 rank of colonel. In rural areas, sex stereotypes are more
 pronounced with respect to social roles. These barriers are
 being modified as mass communications bring modern role models
 to even the most-remote communities.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium and large
 factories, which produce most of Thailand's export goods, work
 8-hour shifts under conditions which meet international
 standards. Health and safety standards are maintained,
 minimum wages are met or exceeded, only adult laborers are
 employed, and employees enjoy various benefits. Outside this
 formal sector, standards can deteriorate significantly.
 Unskilled laborers who pour into Bangkok from the poorer
 countryside often are willing to work at less than minimum
 wage (about $2.90 per day in and around Bangkok, $2.70
 elsewhere), and they similarly do not always insist on minimum
 standards of health and safety. This is particularly so in
 industries like construction and dockwork where casual labor
 is engaged on a short-term basis. A nationwide force of labor
 inspectors is inadequate to the task of pursuing potential
 violations under Thai law, especially in the absence of
 complaints. Another impediment is the fact that the
 businesses in question are often unregistered, avoid taxes,
 
 
 821
 THAILAND
 and thus operate outside the sphere of government regulation.
 Thai officials are attempting to improve enforcement of
 existing law through a series of measures, including the
 possible upgrading of the Labor Department to a full-fledged
 ministry, with concomitant expansion of budget and personnel;
 increasing the penalties for labor law violations; and
 reforming the law to cover a broader range of employee
 categories.
 The use of child labor in the informal sector constitutes a
 serious problem in Thailand. Thai law prohibits the employment
 of children under age 12, and limits their employment between
 the ages of 12 and 15 to "light work." The Thai Government
 itself, in its endorsement of a 1986 study on child labor,
 acknowledges that there is a serious enforcement problem
 associated with these restrictions, as well as others
 affecting child labor in Thailand. The report documents
 widespread instances of children engaged in dangerous or
 unhealthy work; working hours in excess of 8 hours daily;
 violations of minimum wage law; and other violations of child
 welfare standards. There are allegations that poor rural
 parents sometimes permit their underage children to engage in
 unsafe or unhealthy employment in the Bangkok area, sometimes
 in confinement, in exchange for financial remuneration. The
 International Labor Organization is currently investigating
 such allegations. In addition to poverty, traditional family
 practices, such as the employment of one's children in a
 family business, foster an environment in which child labor
 proliferates and complicates efforts to identify and curb
 exploitive practices.
 In December the Government hosted a national conference to
 examine the situation of abandoned and working children in
 Thailand, which will be followed by a regional conference in
 February 1988. The Government said that both conferences are
 intended to increase awareness of the critical problems of
 working children, to enhance cooperation among concerned
 public agencies and private foundations, and to seek
 appropriate approaches toward mitigating them.
 Inherent in the Government's endorsement of the 1986 study and
 sponsorship of the conferences is its recognition that
 corrective measures are required. As a consequence, it has
 announced plans to raise the minimum age from 12 to 13,
 increase inspection authority, reduce the length of the
 workday for children aged 13 to 15 to 7 hours, prohibit child
 labor between 9 p.m. and 6 a.m., and to introduce other
 improvements in child labor protection standards. The Labor
 Department also has instructed its inspectors to give child
 labor problems priority attention in 1988, almost tripling the
 number of enterprises employing women and children that will
 be inspected during the year. The Cabinet also approved a
 plan to provide financial support to students in the 30
 poorest provinces, thereby enabling many of them to continue
 their schooling through grade 9. Additionally, any improvement
 in the status of the'Labor Department or expansion of its
 budget and personnel, as mentioned above, could also have a
 favorable impact on the child labor situation. Efforts to
 raise the penalties for violations of child labor law are also
 under way, but this change may have little effect unless
 enforcement also improves. The Government has stated that its
 social and economic planning also attempts to target the root
 causes of poor labor conditions.
 
 
 822
