 THAILAND
 Thailand's government is a constitutional monarchy with a
 strong executive branch and a bicameral legislature composed
 of a 357-member elected House of Representatives and a
 267-member appointed Senate. The civilian government
 bureaucracy and the military play strong roles in Thai
 political life. The Senate, which has limited legislative
 powers, is composed largely of active duty or retired military
 men and government officials. The monarchy exerts strong
 informal influence. The prime minister and members of his
 cabinet are subject to votes of confidence, although they need
 not be elected members of Parliament themselves. Free
 national elections for the House of Representatives were held
 in July 1988 with record participation, following which the
 current Prime Minister, Major General (retired) Chatichai
 Choonhavan formed a six-party coalition government supported
 by roughly three-fifths of the House.
 Thailand's security services operate within a constitutionally
 mandated framework reflecting the strong executive branch
 orientation of the Government. They have formidable powers,
 sometimes utilized in an uneven way. Human rights abuses
 attributable to the security services are not sanctioned by
 the Government, which has taken steps to ameliorate those
 abuses that do occur.
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists operate in rural
 areas and use terrorism to advance their respective aims.
 Criminal groups also often resort to violence. In recent
 years, the Government has made notable progress in reducing
 the influence of these groups, particularly of Communists and
 Muslim separatists, but sporadic low-level violence in
 southern Thoiland continues to occur.
 Thailand is an emerging, middle-income, developing country
 with a free enterprise economic system in which individual
 economic interests and the right to hold private property are
 strongly protected. Although the industrial sector has
 expanded rapidly in recent years, 70 percent of the Thai
 people still live in the countryside, and agriculture remains
 the main source of livelihood.
 Thailand's citizens continued to enjoy a wide range of civil
 and political liberties. Autonomous political parties,
 gatherings, and associations are allowed, and freedom from
 arbitrary detention or search is generally safeguarded,
 notwithstanding some rarely enforced restrictive laws.
 Although it practices some self-censorship, particularly in
 regard to the monarchy and military, the press is among the
 most free in Asia. Human rights activists in Thailand are
 able to bring issues to the attention of the Government and
 public and to lobby for corrective action.
 Over the years, Thailand has provided first asylum to over 1
 million persons fleeing persecution in the three Indochinese
 states. In 1988, however, Thailand severely curtailed the
 availability of first asylum. Thai authorities began
 interdicting and redirecting Vietnamese boats trying to reach
 Thai shores, and on several occasions have forcibly returned
 to Laos Lao nationals who have crossed the border. While it
 appears that the authorities endeavor not to put asylum
 seekers at risk in carrying out these actions, on several
 occasions deaths and injuries have resulted from them. In
 addition, access to the Lao refugee screening system has been
 
 
 935
 THAILAND
 restricted, resulting in another weakening of the practice of
 first asylum. On the positive side, Thailand made significant
 progress in 1988 in reducing incidents of abuse by Thai
 paramilitary personnel of Cambodian displaced persons housed
 in camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings in which government involvement is alleged
 are rare. In January, according to eyewitness survivors, an
 army paramilitary unit (thahan phran) summarily executed four
 Muslim villagers near the Malaysian border. The army
 subsequently arrested two members of the unit, replaced its
 local commander, and is believed to have paid compensation to
 the families of the victims. The two men arrested were
 charged with murder and are incarcerated in a military
 prison. At year's end their case was still pending in the
 military courts. Senior Thai officials have been quoted by
 newspapers as acknowledging that police execution of habitual,
 serious, criminal offenders without due process occasionally
 does occur, largely in southern Thailand, an area which
 regularly records the nation's highest crime rates and parts
 of which still retain a "Wild West" atmosphere. In rural
 areas, Communist insurgents and ethnic separatists have
 continued to use violence, including murder, in pursuit of
 their objectives. Their targets have included low-level
 government officials, local business people, and security
 officials. In 1988 Muslim separatists in the south
 perpetrated an increased number of terrorist attacks directed
 primarily against civilians. They murdered several
 construction workers and 3 school teachers and are believed
 responsible for burning 14 schools. They also killed six
 policemen and two defense force volunteers.
 In past years, a number of journalists died violently in rural
 areas. Such killings have diminished sharply in recent years,
 and local human rights activists regard the situation as
 distinctly improved. Nevertheless, four journalists were
 killed during the first 6 months of 1988. The motivations for
 these killings are not entirely clear. In-previous years,
 some of the murdered journalists had published exposes on
 corruption or illegal activity. Others apparently had engaged
 in blackmail or extortion and likely were killed in
 retaliation.
 b. Disappearance
 While there are no reports of abduction or kidnaping attributed
 to government forces, Communist insurgents and Muslim
 separatists have used them as a political weapon, resulting in
 the disappearance of civilians and government officials. Such
 actions are increasingly rare.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Government has stated its opposition to the use of cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading punishment. According to human rights
 activists in Thailand, abuses of authority, both confirmed and
 alleged, relating to cruel and inhuman punishment or treatment
 
 
 936
 THAILAND
 have declined steadily. In the past several years, there has
 been significant international attention given to reports of
 torture, murder, and rape of Khmer by Thai paramilitary forces
 charged with external security for the displaced persons camps
 where these Khmer reside. Significant progress was recorded
 by the Government in 1988 in addressing these problems. The
 former Thai Rangers (the source of most of the allegations of
 abuse of Khmer) were replaced in June 1988 with the Displaced
 Persons Protective Unit (DPPU), a better trained, more
 professional, and disciplined force. There was a significant
 decline in reports of violence by Rangers in the first half of
 1988. There have been no reports of violent incidents by DPPU
 personnel at the Site 2 Camp, the area where past abuses have
 been most prevalent, since the DPPU was deployed.
 A new problem of inhumane treatment of Indochinese asylum
 seekers emerged, however, in 1988, following a Thai decision
 in late January to close the east coast of Thailand to new
 Vietnamese boat arrivals. The initial result was an upsurge
 in piracy incidents against refugees and credible, if generally
 unverifiable, reports from refugees and Thai sources of
 official Thai involvement in boat "pushoffs" and abuses of
 asylum seekers. An estimated 100-150 persons died as a result
 of piracy incidents and boat sinkings following officially
 sanctioned "pushoffs" in January-February 1988. The Lawyers
 Committee for Human Rights alleged in a report issued January
 10, 1989 that between January and September 1988 some 530
 refugees were killed by pirates after being pushed out to
 sea. In response to international concern, the Thai
 Government now permits small numbers of Vietnamese asylum
 seekers to land and be transferred to Ban That, a camp on the
 Cambodian border run under the auspices of the U.N. High
 CommissioneX for Refugees (UNHCR). Boat "pushoffs" continue,
 however, and there have been allegations that in some
 instances victims of such "pushoffs" were physically abused by
 Thai government personnel. Restrictions, based on national
 security considerations, on international access to places
 where such abuses reportedly occurred made it difficult to
 confirm or refute these allegations. There was, however,
 extensive access to the new camp at Ban That by international
 observers who found no credible evidence of physical abuse of
 asylum seekers after arrival at Ban That as has been alleged
 by some refugee advocate groups.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest
 warrants generally are required, and specific charges must be
 brought within a limited time period against those detained.
 There is a functioning bail system. Reports of arbitrary
 arrest are infrequent.
 A small number of Cormaunist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 have been detained without trial under martial law provisions.
 Although these provisions were eased significantly in 1984,
 and most of those arrested under these provisions have since
 been released, some remain in detention. Currently, the only
 legal basis for arrest and detention without specific charges
 for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist
 Activities Act. No arrests under this Act were made in 1988,
 but at least three cases involving 12 persons arrested in 1984
 and 1987 were still being heard in military court in Bangkok.
 All 12 remained under detention without bail. According to
 
 
 937
 THAILAND
 local human rights groups, those detained under the
 Anti-Communist Activities Act have not been mistreated
 systematically, but activists maintain that the detainees
 often are denied access to medical treatment and that this
 results in a variety of physical problems. Human rights
 groups believe that 18-20 Muslim separatists remained under
 detention at the end of the year.
 Summary exile is not practiced. With regard to forced or
 compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution grants Thai citizens the presumption of
 innocence as well as access to courts or administrative bodies
 to seek redress. Suspects can be denied the right to legal
 counsel during the pretrial or investigative period of their
 cases, but before trial they have access to a lawyer of their
 own choosing.
 The Thai legal system provides for trial by judges rather than
 jury. Cases are heard on the basis of specific charges,
 usually well documented, by a panel of judges. During the
 martial law period (October 1976 to August 1984), military
 courts had jurisdiction over cases involving internal and
 external national security, Thai relations with other nations,
 and offenses against the royal family and public peace. Since
 1984, however, military courts are used solely in cases
 involving military personnel. All other cases come under the
 jurisdiction of civilian courts. The alleged plotters of the
 1985 coup bid were tried in civilian courts.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights, including the right to counsel
 both in the trial and appellate stages. A civilian court
 decision may be appealed; a military court decision may not.
 Both court systems, however, allow appeal for a royal pardon.
 Moreover, prisoners sometimes benefit from periodic royal
 amnesties. On the occasion of a royal celebration in July,
 the King granted a royal amnesty to some 62,000 inmates in
 Thai prisons; 40,000 had their sentences reduced, and 22,000
 were released. The courts are relatively independent of
 external pressures. There have been allegations, however, of
 both government and private influence being brought to bear on
 certain cases, often those involving narcotics. A pilot
 government program to provide free legal advice to the poor
 continues in operation. Most free legal aid, however, comes
 from private organizations, including the Lawyers' Association
 and then Women's Lawyers' Association.
 In 1988 human rights groups drew attention to the unclear
 legal status of at least 2,000 persons who formerly were
 associated with the Communist Party of Thailand (CPT) in its
 jungle hideouts. Earlier in the decade, these persons were
 permitted to return to their villages to resume normal lives,
 under the terms of an order issued by the then Prime Minister
 Prem. However, the order is not a law, and as a result, the
 past association of the 2,000 with the CPT leaves them open to
 a variety of criminal charges which carry a 20-year statute of
 limitations. Although there is no indication that the
 Government intends to bring such charges against any of the
 2,000, the option does exist.
 
 
 938
 THAILAND
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is essentially an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, the police function is
 seldom abused for security or political purposes, and the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas generally is permitted, although
 those espousing leftist or Communist views are probably
 watched by the security services. Thai law requires that
 police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. There are allegations that
 officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance and then allow
 their noncommissioned subordinates to apply them as needed.
 Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act allow officials
 involved in specifically designated "Communist suppression
 operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these
 powers have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution affirms citizens' rights to free speech and a
 free press, but there are laws which impose restrictions on
 those rights. The principal legal restrictions on these
 freedoms are prohibitions against insulting or defaming the
 King, Queen, Heir Apparent, or Regent (lese majeste),
 advocating a Communist system of government, or publishing
 materials which threaten national security. In January 1988,
 three persons were arrested in Bangkok on charges of lese
 majeste. In June three more persons were arrested. All six
 remain under detention. A seventh person is undergoing a
 court hearing, and an eighth is under investigation. Also in
 1988 the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of a former
 deputy interior minister for lese majeste, and he served 1
 month in prison before the King granted him amnesty at the
 request of the then prime minister. Thai citizens enjoy
 substantial freedom of speech in other respects, and the
 Government permits criticism of its policies. However,
 criticism is not entirely without its risks, and members of
 the parliamentary opposition occasionally have been subjected
 to violence by mysterious assailants after particularly
 vehement attacks on the Government and the military.
 International publications circulate freely, as does a wide
 range of political and social commentary presented by the
 privately owned Thai press. Technical publications and
 pamphlets, including those of academics, circulate freely and
 the latter present viewpoints ranging from the non-Communist
 left to the ultraright. Foreign and domestic books are not
 censored, except in rare instances where publications are
 critical of the royal family or the monarchy. Television and
 radio stations are licensed by the Government and operated
 both by government and private entities as commercial
 enterprises. Although the Government's Broadcasting Directing
 Board in theory reviews all television programs prior to
 broadcast, in practice most programs are not prescreened, and
 stations present a range of viewpoints. Radio stations are
 required to carry a government-produced newscast four times
 daily but are free to originate other news and commentary.
 Opinions critical of government positions have been broadcast
 but, in general, controversial issues are treated cautiously,
 if at all. The press continues to operate under the
 restrictions imposed by the Press Law of 1941 and remnants of
 past martial law orders. It practices self-censorship and is
 
 
 939
 THAILAND
 particularly cautious about criticism of the military or
 monarchy. Current legislation permits the Government to close
 newspapers and revoke the licenses of editors of newspapers
 which publish stories deemed to be libelous or contrary to
 national security interests. In 1987 the House of
 Representatives passed a long-awaited press law which would
 give the press greater flexibility. The Senate changed
 thelegislation to retain the Government's authority to close
 newspapers for national security reasons, but the House
 rejected the amended version of the bill. The bill died with
 the April 1988 dissolution of Parliament, and neither the new
 Government nor Parliament has reintroduced this or similar
 legislation. The Government infrequently uses its statutory
 power over the press. In 1987 the Government closed one
 newspaper, which resumed publication within a few weeks; in
 1988 none were closed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution ensures the rights of assembly and
 association. In practice, these rights are exercised freely
 by politicians, students, labor, and other interest groups
 without government interference. All associations, including
 labor unions, must be registered by the Government. The
 Government, however, has not used the withholding of
 registration to inhibit freedom of association for any
 groups. Permits are not required for assembly.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies
 to labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand and
 protected by law and custom. Theravada Buddhism, the
 de facto state religion, has had an abiding and profound
 influence on Thai culture and history, and most Thai practice
 it. The King is required by the Constitution to profess the
 Buddhist faith and practice Buddhism. Nonetheless, Thailand
 is a secular society with church and state clearly separate.
 There are no restrictions on religious ceremonies, the
 teaching of religion, or conversion from one religion to
 another, but controversies occasionally arise. In 1988 a
 nonconformist Buddhist sect was declared "outlaw" by the
 Juridical Council, but the Government has made no attempt to
 force it to abide by the rules of the mainstream Buddhist
 order or to disband. Early in the year, a government
 official's refusal to allow women students at a teacher
 training college to wear traditional Muslim dress to class
 resulted in mass protests, and eventually the official
 reversed his decision.
 Under applicable regulations, missionaries are permitted to
 live and proselytize in Thailand, as has been the case for
 more than a century. Foreign clergy may preach freely. There
 is no legal or organized discrimination against, or
 persecution of, those affiliated with minority religions, such
 as Christianity or Islam. Religious publishing, regardless of
 faith, is allowed. As with private ass6ciations, religious
 institutions are registered by the Government. Most senior
 Thai officials and political leaders are at least nominally
 Buddhist. Muslims living in the four southern provinces,
 which have majority Muslim populations, have the right to have
 civil law cases decided by Muslim judges under Koranic law.
 
 
 940
 THAILAND
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from longstanding restrictions on the travel of Chinese
 and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, the only limitations
 on travel of persons other than refugees are restrictions on
 entry into certain rural areas believed by the Government to
 be used as bases by Communist insurgents. The right of
 citizens to change their residence or workplace is unabridged.
 There are no government restrictions on foreign travel or
 emigration, except for government officials, but single Thai
 women and children under the age of 14 must have their
 passport applications approved by the Department of Public
 Welfare. In addition, a 1985 statute requires that all women
 under age 36 sit through a series of interviews regarding
 their employment records and finances in connection with
 passport applications. This has been protested by some
 women's rights advocates. The purpose of these provisions of
 law is the prevention of the export of children for sale and
 women for purposes of prostitution. The Government has rarely
 revoked citizenship.
 Thailand, though not a signatory to international legal
 instruments regarding refugees and their basic rights, in the
 past acted in the spirit of those agreements in providing
 asylum to about 710,000 refugees from Laos, Cambodia, and
 Vietnam since 1975, and in permitting the temporary evacuation
 of around 300,000 Khmer, classed as displaced persons, onto
 its side of the Thai-Cambodian border. In 1988, however, the
 Government severely restricted first asylum for new
 Indochinese asylum seekers. The Thai began systematically
 pushing off boats carrying Vietnamese asylum seekers in late
 January 1988. In the following months, restrictions on new
 arrivals eased slightly and some boats were allowed to land.
 Thus, 1,983 new boat Vietnamese were granted asylum in the
 period February through August 1988. It was more difficult to
 determine the number of persons denied asylum in the case of
 those whose boats were pushed off or redirected to Malaysian
 or Cambodian shores, but a conservative estimate would be that
 at least 1,000 persons were pushed off, and the figure could
 well be much higher. "Pushoffs" seemed to decline
 significantly by August, but restrictions on international
 access to new arrivals in these areas of coastal Thailand made
 it difficult to monitor the state of first asylum for boat
 Vietnamese in Thailand.
 Laotian asylum seekers faced a similarly restricted attitude
 toward first asylum. The Laotian refugee screening process,
 the officially sanctioned mechanism for granting first asylum,
 essentially ceased to function after March in several
 important provinces along the Thai-Lao borders. The decision
 to legalize in December 1987-January 1988 the status of nearly
 10,000 Laotian highlanders living illegally at the Ban Vinai
 refugee camp in Thailand, as well as the screening of nearly
 1,700 highlanders living in adverse conditions in the province
 of Nan near the village of Nam Phun, represented significant
 accomplishments in improving treatment of highland Lao asylum
 seekers. Nonetheless, new Laotian highlander arrivals
 continued to face difficulty in obtaining access to the
 screening process, and several groups were forcibly returned
 to Laos during the course of 1988. For several years, it has
 been Thai policy to treat new asylum seekers from Cambodia as
 displaced persons, rather than to recognize them as refugees.
 This policy continued in 1988, and there were reports,
 difficult to confirm or deny, that Thai military officials
 
 
 941
 THAILAND
 along the Thai-Cambodian border took a more restrictive
 attitude toward allowing new Cambodian asylum seekers into the
 border displaced persons camps. At the same time, as noted
 previously in this report, Thai authorities took a number of
 steps to improve security and protection for Khmer in the
 displaced persons camps.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change their Government
 As Thailand nas become a more developed, complex society,
 there has been an evolution toward greater popular
 participation in the political process, with free elections
 assuming a larger role. The failed 1985 coup attempt by a
 small military group which lacked general military support was
 a reminder, however, that constitutional processes are still
 shallowly rooted. It is generally assumed that the military
 has not abjured intervention in the political process but now
 usually acts quietly from behind the scenes. The Government
 normally does not make decisions of which the military would
 strongly disapprove. One of the measures to limit military
 influence in government is the constitutional provision
 barring active-duty military officers from holding cabinet
 posts.
 Prime Minister Chatichai, himself a Member of Parliament and
 the leader of the party with the largest number of seats in
 the Parliament elected in July, is supported by parties
 holding roughly three-fifths of the seats in the House. The
 July national elections for the House were open and free, and
 16 political parties fielded a record number of candidates. A
 six-party coalition government subsequently was formed.
 Opposition parties regularly present opposing views both
 within the National Assembly and through the mass media. The
 National Assembly almost invariably has dissenting votes on
 legislation and on procedural decisions.
 Elections are based on universal suffrage for adults over the
 age of 20, and are required by the Constitution at least once
 every 4 years. The Government encourages voter turnout, but
 does not use either direct or indirect pressure to compel
 voters to cast ballots. Actual voter turnout for both
 national and local elections generally exceeds 50 percent, and
 the 1988 parliamentary election reached a record 64 percent of
 eligible voters.
 While women vote in numbers equal to men and participate fully
 in the political process, they are underrepresented in
 national politics and in high governmental positions. There
 are, for example, only 10 female Members of Parliament (3
 percent), one female cabinet member (out of 44), and no female
 provincial governors or district officers.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has responded in the past to specific inquiries
 on human rights matters from Amnesty International and the
 International Commission of Jurists. With occasional
 exceptions, it is generally willing to discuss human rights
 problems with both domestic and international human rights
 organizations. Also, human rights organizations of all kinds
 are generally permitted to visit Thailand, meet with
 
 
 942
 THAILAND
 appropriate government officials, and lobby for corrective
 action.
 Local civil and women's rights groups, active on a wide range
 of issues, including prostitution and enforcement of labor
 laws, have devoted most of their efforts to the promotion of
 women's rights and identifying and correcting human rights
 violations. Thai human rights organizations have had
 significant success in recent years. They have, for example,
 successfully encouraged the Government to tighten the
 discipline of police and paramilitary forces fighting the
 Communist insurgency and have brought pressure on it to
 alleviate widespread abuses in child labor practices and in
 prisons. In response to increased awareness of human rights
 issues in society, the House of Representatives is planning to
 create a standing committee on human rights issues, and the
 number of nongovernmental human rights organizations has
 increased. Thailand has involved itself directly in
 international human rights efforts, but generally has not
 taken initiatives in U.N. forums. It has, however, taken a
 leading role in preparing annual ASEAN (Association of
 Southeast Asian Nations) resolutions in regard to Cambodia,
 including those on human rights violations. Thai
 representatives were among the founding members of the
 Regional Council on Human Rights in Asia, a forum for the
 exchange of human rights information established in February
 1982. Thai members of the Council helped draft a declaration
 on human rights to serve as the organization's statement of
 policy and goals.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress, particularly
 considering its limited resources, in accomplishing the
 integration of its minorities. While Thailand traditionally
 has been a tolerant and relatively homogeneous society, social
 and cultural aspirations are sometimes limited by ethnic
 considerations. In 1988 the Government began a comprehensive
 new plan for improving the living conditions of the hill
 tribes and providing more of them with the opportunity to
 obtain citizenship and otherwise integrate into the mainstream.
 Ethnic Chinese are spread throughout Thailand, with a
 concentration in Bangkok. The Chinese are better assimilated
 and integrated in Thailand than elsewhere in the region.
 There is a tradition of popular resentment directed against
 the trading and financial activities of the Chinese, but this
 resentment has never been so virulent as to provoke violent
 persecution and is dissipating as the Chinese are assimilated
 into Thai society.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 the southernmost provinces along Thailand's border with
 Malaysia. The Government is aware of their special needs and
 has put much effort into regionally targeted development
 efforts and the creation of educational opportunicies in order
 to integrate Thai Muslims into Thai society. However, Muslims
 continue to be underrepresented in government service, the
 professions, and in higher education.
 A community of Vietnamese which fled Indochina in the 1940's
 and 1950's to northeastern Thailand lives under tight
 restrictions on its freedom to travel and access to
 educational and economic opportunities. In theory, these
 
 
 943
 THAILAND
 people, including offspring born in Thailand, may not become
 Thai citizens, although, increasingly, younger members of this
 group are finding it possible to acquire citizenship and to
 integrate into local society. It was long expected that these
 Vietnamese would eventually be repatriated. In the meantime,
 the continuation of restrictions represents, in part, a
 conscious Thai policy to discourage further emigration from
 Vietnam, and in part a reaction to the belief that the
 Vietnamese represent a kind of "fifth column" within Thailand,
 as it is widely believed that many of these Vietnamese owe
 allegiance to the Communist Government in Hanoi.
 The status and role of women have improved steadily over the
 past several years. For the most part, women have equal legal
 rights in Thailand, with specific guarantees of property and
 divorce rights, and there are no allegations that these rights
 are denied. Thai law, however, denies Thai nationality to
 children born of alien fathers and Thai mothers, regardless of
 place of birth. Women are well represented in the labor force
 and are becoming increasingly so in professional positions,
 particularly those in the commercial sector. In general,
 women are not barred legally from positions traditionally held
 by men. However, women continue to be concentrated in
 traditionally lower paid jobs, and there is a significant gap
 between average salaries earned by men and women.
 Despite limitations on serving in the armed forces, female
 officers routinely have substantially full careers, reaching
 the rank of colonel. However, by regulation women may not
 attend Thailand's Command and General Staff College. The de
 facto result is an absence of promotions for women beyond the
 rank of Special Colonel (brigadier general). There are
 currently only a handful of female special colonels. A few
 women have attended the Army War College and the Supreme
 Command National Defense College, but they are not considered
 the route to command positions.
 In rural areas, sex stereotypes are more pronounced with
 respect to social roles. These barriers are being modified as
 mass communications bring modern role models to even the most
 remote communities.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Most internationally recognized worker rights, including the
 right of association, were recognized legally in 1975, when
 the Thai Labor Relations Act was passed. The Act affirmed,
 among other things, the rights of employees to form and join
 unions or employee associations of their own choosing; decide
 on the constitutions and rules of their associations and
 unions; formulate their views without government or employer
 interference; confederate with other unions; be protected
 against discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or
 termination by any outside authority because of union
 activities; and have employee representation in direct
 negotiations with employers.
 All rights under the 1975 Act specifically do not apply to
 government workers at any level. Civil servants, therefore,
 may not unionize, though they may form "employee associations."
 Under Thai law, state enterprise workers may unionize, and in
 fact the state enterprise sector is the backbone of the Thai
 labor movement. The right to strike, however, is not extended
 
 
 944
 THAILAND
 to state enterprise workers regardless of the nature of their
 activity. The American Federation of Labor and Congress of
 Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) has reported that there are
 several limitations on the right of association, including
 restrictions on the right to strike in the private sector, the
 prohibition of unionization and strikes by civil servants, the
 prohibition on strikes in state enterprises, the requirement
 that union leaders also be full-time workers in the plants or
 industries which they represent, and reported abuses of child
 labor. Despite their illegality, strikes do occur in the
 public sector and are usually tolerated by the Government.
 Several major strikes in June 1988 were centered in state
 enterprises, notably strikes carried out by the state railway
 and the port unions. The Government negotiated in good faith
 with the concerned unions and reached a negotiated settlement
 in response to the strikers' demands without particular
 reference to the "illegal" nature of the strikes. No strikers
 were arrested or detained by government authorities. In most
 of the private sector, 24-hour notice to management is the
 only legally mandated prerequisite to a strike. However, the
 Government has the authority "to restrict the right to strike
 whenever a strike would affect national security or cause
 severe negative repercussions for the population at large."
 Thai labor has organized slowly since basic worker rights were
 affirmed in 1975. In 1988 about 12 percent of the industrial
 work force claimed union membership, mostly in the state
 enterprise sector, and membership is expanding very slowly. A
 cultural factor in this phenomenon is the historically benign
 and paternalistic relationship between employer and employee,
 reducing the inclination toward confrontation between labor
 and management. A provision of Thai labor law permitting the
 formation of labor unions with as few as 10 members also
 contributed to a high degree of fractionalization at both the
 union and confederation levels. This manifested itself in a
 steady increase in the number of registered unions to over
 500, while overall union membership remained virtually
 constant. It has been claimed that the above-cited law
 promoted the existence of company unions beholden to
 management and was thus an infringement of the right of
 association. The Government effectively protects the person
 and property of unionists in Thailand. Following expressions
 of foreign labor union interest in the murder of one unionist
 in 1988, the Government reportedly arrested two policemen in
 connection with the case, which has yet to be prosecuted.
 Thai unions generally operate independently of the Government
 and other outside organizations. There has been a history of
 voluntary association and common cause between Thai unionists
 and military elements, but the importance of such connections
 appeared to decline in 1988 with a rise in the relative
 political strength and independence of Thai unions. Labor
 leaders recognized that fractionalization weakened their
 overall impact and were largely successful in 1988 in
 consolidating and coordinating the activities of the four
 leading federations. Their overall influence on policy issues
 increased as a result. Thai unions have tended to be
 apolitical, in part because the 1975 act withholds certain
 protections in cases of "political" activity. Debate on
 labor's role in Thai politics has been particularly lively
 since the alleged involvement of several prominent labor
 leaders in a 1985 coup attempt. The last official links
 between a Thai political party and labor federation were
 severed in 1988.
 
 
 945
 THAILAND
 Unions made a strong effort to influence political parties
 during the 1988 national election campaign, although the
 unions maintained their independence from the
 partiesthemselves. Key issues were safety legislation and
 enforcement, resistance to the privatization of state
 enterprises, and labor's call for amendment of the Labor
 Relations Law. On some of these issues, notably minimum wages
 and privatization, unionists exerted some influence on policy
 in 1988 under the newly elected Government of Prime Minister
 Chatichai. Historically, prominent unionists have been
 appointed to the Thai Senate, although none have been elected
 to the more influential House of Representatives.
 Labor unions in Thailand have maintained generally
 unrestricted relations with recognized international labor
 bodies, such as the International Labor Organization (ILO),
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU)
 and its associated International Trade Secretariats, the ASEAN
 Trade Union Congress, and various national labor bodies,
 notably those from the United States (AFL-CIO), the Federal
 Republic of Germany, Japan, and Israel. Thai unionists have
 also participated in meetings and seminars sponsored by the
 World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), both abroad and on
 Thai soil. In 1988 the Government implemented a new regulation
 requiring the approval by an interministerial body headed by
 the Permanent Secretary of Interior of applications by foreign
 organizations to either hold meetings or open offices in
 Thailand. While there were no cases of approval being denied,
 some critics claimed that the bureaucratic involvement was
 itself a deterrent to free association with international
 labQr organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Thai labor, whether unionized or represented by "employee
 associations," is guaranteed the right of collective
 bargaining. Thai law prescribes procedures to ensure employee
 participation in the determination of working conditions,
 wages, and benefits. In 1988, as before, such bargaining
 focused more on benefit packages and working conditions than
 on wages. Both labor and management in Thailand usually seek
 to resolve potential differences through informal channels
 before turning to formal collective bargaining. The 1975 Act
 also defined the mechanisms for such negotiations and for
 conciliation and arbitration under government auspices in
 cases under dispute. The conciliation and arbitration
 procedures are mandatory for state enterprises.
 A system of labor courts implemented in 1980 exercises judicial
 review over most aspects of Thai labor law. There is a
 tripartite labor relations committee under the Ministry of
 Interior at which unionists may also seek redress for their
 grievances. Thai law does not fully protect unionists against
 antiunion discrimination and retribution. The law requiring
 union leaders also to work full time in the plants or
 industries which they represent tends to make them vulnerable
 to employer action in cases of conflict. Unionists have no
 explicit protection against dismissal for unionizing activities
 prior to the formal registration of their union. The Thai
 Court Law of 1980 prohibits "unfair dismissal," but Thai
 courts have not been uniform in their interpretation of this
 law.
 There are no special export processing zones, and labor
 legislation is applicable uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 946
 THAILAND
 C. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except
 in the case of national emergency, wartime, or martial law.
 There were no allegations of forced or compulsory labor. The
 ILO's Committee on Application of Conventions and
 Recommendations at its 1988 session expressed the hope that
 the Government will bring its legislation into compliance with
 ILO Convention 105 on the Abolition of Forced Labor, which
 Thailand ratified in 1969.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor continued to be a source of considerable domestic
 and foreign criticism in 1988. Foreign interest groups have
 focused heavily on the alleged exploitation of working
 children. Thai law prohibits the employment of children under
 age 12, and limits their employment between the ages of 12 and
 15 to "light work." Employment of children at night (10 p.m.
 to 6 a.m.) is prohibited. Complaints against Thailand alleged
 that both Thai standards and their enforcement were
 inadequate. There was no substantial new evidence of the
 employment of children under age 12 in 1988. However, there
 continued to be strong anecdotal indications that children
 over age 12 were employed in dangerous, unhealthful, or
 otherwise harmful circumstances. Occasional fires or
 accidents involving children working or living in factories
 and construction sites have concentrated public attention on
 deficiencies in the construction and manufacturing sectors.
 Thai efforts to correct these problems were hampered in 1988
 by inadequate budget resources devoted to inspection and
 enforcement, and to low penalties and fines which did not
 sufficiently deter potential violators. The Cabinet,
 acknowledging the seriousness of child labor problems, in June
 1988 approved in principle the revision of Thai labor
 protection regulations applicable to working children in the
 nonagricultural sector. Key features of the cabinet
 recommendation included an immediate increase in the minimum
 age to 13 and a long-term increase to 15; improved inspection
 and enforcement; increased penalties for violators; an
 increase in the resources allocated to keeping children in
 school; and a broad campaign to sensitize the Thai public to
 the problems of child labor. Thai authorities expected the
 strengthened regulations to be issued shortly as an
 announcement of the Interior Ministry.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium and large
 factories, which produce most of Thailand's export goods,
 generally work 8-hour shifts under conditions which meet
 international standards. Health and safety standards are
 maintained, minimum wages are met or exceeded, no underage
 laborers are employed, and employees enjoy various additional
 benefits. Outside this formal sector, standards can
 deteriorate significantly. Unskilled laborers who pour into
 Bangkok from the far poorer countryside often are willing to
 work at less than the minimum wage ($3.16 per day in the
 Bangkok area, less in most other provinces).
 A 1988 Thai Government report stating that 32 percent of
 laborers received less than the legal minimum wage resulted in
 a call from the then Prime Minister for employers to comply
 with the law and for the Labor Department to enforce it more
 vigorously. The new Prime Minister indicated in August 1988
 
 
 947
 THAILAND
 that he favored an early increase in the minimum wage, which
 had last been raised in April 1987. In late 1988 organized
 labor sought and won a two-stage increase in the Bangkok area
 which will raise the minimum wage to $3.16 by April 1989.
 This wage is expected to to be adequate to provide workers and
 their families a decent standard of living, given Thailand's
 level of economic development.
 Thai workers often have no leverage for insisting upon minimum
 standards of health and safety. This is particularly so in
 industries such as construction and dockwork where casual
 labor often is engaged on a short-term basis. The collapse of
 a building under construction in September renewed the call
 for tighter regulation of construction practices and increased
 protection for workers. Government programs for industrial
 safety have relied primarily on informational campaigns and
 voluntary compliance.
 While the programs themselves have been praised as among the
 best in the region, more resources are required to meet health
 and safety challenges posed by rapid industrialization. A
 nationwide force of labor inspectors was inadequate to the
 task of investigating and pursuing all potential violations
 under Thai law, especially in the absence of complaints.
 Another impediment was the fact that the businesses in
 question often were unregistered, evading taxes and operating
 outside the sphere of government inspection and regulation.
 The nature of Thai labor inspection and enforcement practices
 generally was cooperative rather than coercive. Some
 observers criticized this approach as ineffectual. The
 Government has yet to give full legal effect to the 4&-hour
 workweek.
 
 
 948