 THAILAND
 Thailand is a constitutional monarchy with a strong executive
 branch, an elected house of representatives, and an appointed
 senate. The civilian bureaucracy and the military play strong
 roles in political life. The monarch exerts strong informal
 influence. The Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet are
 subject to votes of confidence by the House, but need not be
 elected members of Parliament. The present Government, a
 six-party coalition headed by General (retired) Chatichai
 Choonhavan, an elected member of Parliament, took office
 following free national elections in July 1988.
 Thailand's security services operate within a constitutional
 framework reflecting the strong executive branch orientation
 of the Government. They have wide-ranging powers which they
 sometimes utilize in an uneven way. The Government does not
 sanction human rights abuses by the security services and has
 taken steps to ameliorate those abuses that do occur.
 Residual Communist insurgent and Muslim separatist groups use
 terrorism to advance their respective aims. The Government
 has made notable progress in reducing the influence of these
 groups, but sporadic low-level violence continues in the south.
 An emerging, middle-income, developing country, Thailand has a
 free enterprise economic system. Individual economic
 interests and the right to hold private property are strongly
 protected. While the industrial sector is expanding rapidly,
 over 60 percent of the Thai people still live in the
 countryside, and agriculture remains the main source of
 livelihood.
 Thailand's citizens enjoy a wide range of civil and political
 liberties. Autonomous political parties, gatherings, and
 associations are allowed. The domestic press practices
 self-censorship, particularly in regard to the monarchy and
 military, and occasionally receives official warnings about
 reports unfavorable to the Government. Issues of the
 international press are sometimes banned. Despite this, there
 remains a wide measure of press freedom. Human rights
 activists in Thailand are able to bring issues to the
 attention of the Government and public, and they lobby
 successfully for corrective action.
 Over the years, Thailand has provided first asylum to over a
 million persons fleeing the Indo-Chinese states. In 1989 it
 recommitted itself to providing t emporary refuge to all
 Vietnamese and Lao asylum seekers. The Government also agreed
 to initiate refugee screening for Vietnamese asylum seekers
 which would ensure the integrity and fairness of final
 decisions on the refugee status of each person. It also
 agreed to permit the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) early access to all new arrivals and
 continued access following the determination of their status.
 Thailand undertook these commitments in June 1989 when it
 endorsed the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) for
 Indo-Chinese refugees in Geneva. Thailand also continues to
 cooperate fully with the international community in providing
 assistance to the more than 300,000 displaced Cambodians
 located in camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.
 
 
 987
 THAILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Allegations of government involvement in political killings
 are rare. In predominantly Muslim areas of south Thailand
 where separatist groups are active, however, security forces
 sometimes shoot first and ask questions later. On December
 31, 1988, a contingent of Thai Marines mistakenly opened fire
 on a group of Thai Muslim defense force volunteers in a
 village in Narathiwat province, killing four .of the
 volunteers. The Government promised to disciplie-the Marines
 if an investigation showed they had acted improperly, but by
 year's end no results had been announced. While the results
 of the.investigation were not made public, members of the
 Muslim community professed satisfaction with the Government's
 response.
 Communist insurgents and ethnic separatists continued to use
 violence, including murder, in pursuit of their objectives.
 Their targets have included low-level officials, as well as
 police and security forces. In 1989 Muslim separatists
 primarily attacked civilians, targeting places of
 entertainment and businesses, often in support of extortion
 effoyts.
 The number of journalists killed in rural areas has diminished
 sharply in recent years. Nevertheless, a journalist was slain
 in Samut Sakhon province in June. The press reported that
 police believed the journalist may have been killed because of
 his reporting on local business. In previous years, some
 murdered journalists had exposed corruption or illegal
 activity. Others apparently had engaged in blackmail or
 extortion and were killed in retaliation.
 In previous years, senior Thai officials have been quoted in
 the press as acknowledging that police executions of habitual,
 serious, criminal offenders without due process occasionally
 occurs, particularly in southern Thailand, the area with the
 nation's highest crime rate.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction or kidnaping attributed to
 government forces in 1989. Communist insurgents and !uslim
 separatists sometimes use abduction of civilians and
 government officials as a political weapon. In October a
 MusIim separatist group kidnaped a public school teacher in
 Yala province and held her until the Government released the
 arrested wife of a separatist leader.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 . Treatment or Punishment
 Thailand's criminal code forbids the use of cruel, inhuman, or
 degrading treatment or punishment, and the Government
 maintains that it is opposed to such treatment or punishment.
 However, there also continued to be many credible reports of
 police beatings of prisoners and detainees. A Thai human
 rights organization announced in August that it had compiled
 at least 132 instances of injury and 27 deaths between 1983
 and 1988 as a result of police brutality, most often during
 
 
 988
 THAILAND
 interrogations. In July the Bangkok police commissioner set
 up a committee to investigate charges that two officers of the
 juvenile welfare division had beaten a 14-year-old boy
 arrested for sniffing paint thinner. Also in July, a man
 filed a complaint alleging six policemen tortured him with an
 electric baton following his arrest on fraud charges. In
 August a Bangkok policeman was photographed by journalists
 standing on the chest of a deranged man who had attempted
 suicide by jumping off a house. The police suspended the
 officer and launched an investigation into the conduct of two
 others who were on the scene. Witnesses alleged the three
 officers had been drinking before the incident.
 Human rights advocates charge that offending policemen often
 try to cover up abuses by offering payoffs to victims or their
 families. Nevertheless, charges of police misconduct appear
 freely in the press, and victims, often assisted by human
 rights activists, have successfully won redress for documented
 abuses in the courts. However, few police or security
 officials are ever convicted for such abuses, and even when
 convictions occur penalties are so light that they do not
 serve as an effective deterrent.
 In recent years, international attention has focused on
 reports of torture, murder, and rape of Khmer residing in
 displaced persons camps by Thai paramilitary forces charged
 with providing security for the camps. Since the formation of
 the Displaced Persons Protective Unit (DPPU) by the Government
 in June 1988, violent incidents and abuse by security forces
 have been "virtually eliminated" according to the
 International Committee of the Red Cross.
 The major complaints by camp residents about degrading and
 abusive treatment now concern acts committed by Khmer against
 other Khmer. The principal camp where, such violations have
 been reported is Site Two, where more than 140,000 Khmer
 reside at close quarters. Up to 90 incidents of violence were
 reported monthly in the Khmer camps in 1989, resulting in
 fewer than 10 deaths per month. Suicide attempts also remain
 relatively high.
 The civilian population in camps controlled by the forces of
 Democratic Kampuchea (DK) are another area of concern. While
 conditions in the U.N.-assisted camps under DK control are not
 markedly worse than those in other U.N.-assisted camps along
 the border, thousands of civilians live in areas inaccessible
 to the international community. Forced movement of the
 population is relatively frequent, often resulting in exposure
 to military risks such as shellings and land mines.
 Discipline in Khmer Rouge camps is alleged to be harsh and
 excessive by many voluntary and international agencies who
 have interviewed former camp residents.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest
 warrants generally are required, and specific charges must be
 brought against those detained within a limited time period.
 There is a functioning bail system. Reports of arbitrary
 arrest are infrequent.
 A small number of Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 remain detained without trial by'order of the Prime Minister
 
 
 989
 THAILAND
 -under martial law provisions. Although these pr6visions were
 eased significantly in 1984 and most of those originally
 detained under these provisions have since been released, some
 20 remain in detention. Currently, the only legal basis for
 arrest and detention without specific charges for long periods
 (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act. No
 arrests under this Act were made in 1989, and the Cabinet
 voted to consider repealing the Act and replacing it with a
 new internal security law. Additionally, the Government
 dropped 3 cases involving 12 persons arrested in 1984, 1986,
 and 1987 under the provisions of an amnesty law passed by the
 Parliament in July.
 Thailand does not use exile for political control. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution grants citizens the presumption of innocence,
 and access to courts or administrative bodies to seek
 redress. Suspects can be denied the right to legal counsel
 during the pretrial or investigative period of their cases,
 but before trial they have access to a lawyer of their own
 choosing.
 The legal system provides for trial by judges rather than
 jury. Cases are heard by a panel of judges on the basis of
 specific charges, usually well documented. Persons tried in
 both military and ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range
 of legal rights, including the right to counsel both in the
 trial and appellate stages, but a serions flaw in providing
 due process rights is the lack of appeal from decisions of a
 military court. Since 1984, the jurisdiction of military
 courts has been limited to cases involving military
 personnel. Most prisoners benefit from periodic amnesties
 reducing the length of sentences, and any prisoner may apply
 for a royal pardon. The courts are relatively independent of
 external pressures. There have been allegations, however, of
 government and private influence on certain cases, often those
 involving narcotics. A pilot government program to provide
 free legal advice to the poor continues. Most free legal aid,
 however, comes from private groups, including the Lawyer's
 Association and the Women Lawyers' Association.
 In 1988 eight persons, allegedly involved in printing and/or
 distributing defamatory leaflets, were arrested for defaming
 the royal family (lese majeste). Three of the eight were
 convicted and sentenced in November 1988; two to 3 1/2 years
 and one to 4 1/2 years. As the trials were held'in camera,
 details are not available. No arrests for defaming the
 monarchy occurred in 1989.
 Twenty to 30 persons originally detained under the
 Anti-Communist Activities Act but later convicted of criminal
 offenses did not come under the terms of the 1989 amnesty and
 remain imprisoned. The Government disputes human right
 advocates' categorization of all of these persons as political
 prisoners, pointing out that some were convicted of such
 charges as robbery and murder. Human rights groups maintain
 that at least some of these prisoners were tried on trumped up
 charges. Eighteen to 20 Muslim separatists remained
 imprisoned in 1989 on charges including extortion, unlawful
 weapons-possession, and murder. Some of them face consecutive
 sentences totaling 200 to 300 years. Human rights advocates
 note that such long sentences violate Thai legal norms.
 
 
 990
 THAILAND
 Fourteen members of a self-styled "revolutionary council" were
 arrested in 1989 under sedition charges after they published
 documents announcing the dissolution of the Parliament and the
 establishment of a "revolutionary" regime. At preliminary
 hearings in July, all 14 pleaded not guilty. Only two of the
 members of the group succeeded in raising funds for bail. As
 of December, the other 10 remained in jail.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is essentially an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, and the police function
 is seldom abused for security or political purposes. The
 unmonitored exchange of ideas generally is permitted, although
 those espousing leftist or controversial views are probably
 watched by the security services. Thai law requires that
 police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. There are allegations that
 officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance and then allow
 their noncommissioned subordinates to apply them as needed.
 Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act allow officials
 involved in specifically designated "Communist suppression
 operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these
 powers have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution affirms citizens, rights to free speech and a
 free press, but there are laws which restrict those rights.
 The principal legal restrictions on these freedoms are
 prohibitions against insulting or defaming the King, Queen,
 heir apparent, or Regent (lese majeste), advocating a
 Communist system of government, or publishing materials which
 threaten national security or insult religion. Thai citizens
 enjoy substantial freedom of speech in other respects, and the
 -Government permits criticism of its policies. However,
 criticism is not entirely without risks, and prominent critics
 occasionally have been the targets of violence by mysterious
 assailants.
 Television and radio stations are licensed by the Government
 and operated by the Government, the army, and private entities
 as commercial enterprises. Although the Government's
 Broadcasting Directing Board in theory reviews all television
 programs prior to broadcast, in practice most programs are not
 prescreened, and stations present a range of viewpoints. In
 September 1989, however, the Board decided not to allow
 broadcast of a feature program on the Vietnam war on the
 grounds that the program supported the ideology of the
 Communist Vietnamese Government and would be beneficial for
 Thai Communists. Radio stations are required to carry a
 government-produced newscast four times daily but are free to
 originate other news and commentary. Opinions critical of
 government positions have been broadcast but, in general,
 controversial issues are treated cautiously, if at all.
 While international publications generally circulated freely,
 in November the Government briefly banned sale and
 distribution of "The Asian Wall Street Journal" for having
 published an article deemed insulting to Thailand's senior
 Buddhist monk. The ban, which was lifted following an appeal
 by the Journal's editor, came under the 1941 Press Law
 
 
 991
 THAILAND
 empowering.the chief of police to.prohibit the import of
 printed matter dangerous to public order and morals. Earlier,
 ,the Government used thesame.law to ban temporarily import of
 the South China Morning Post for reporting an alleged coup
 plot. The police also considered but in the end rejected
 taking action against the Hong Kong based weekly magazine The
 Far Eastern Economic Review for an article allegedly
 implicatng goveinieht.tourism officials in promoting
 prostitdtion.' The, privately 6wned Thai press tresented a iiide
 range o  politica., and social commentary.' Technical
 pu]'lications' and pamphlets, Jncluding those of.acadeinics,
 cirbulate freely, and the- latter-present yiewpoints ranging
 frqhe non-Communist left to the ultraright. Foreign and
 domestic bboks narmaliy are not censored, unless they are
 critical of the royal -fmily-or the monarchy. However, in
 March the police special branch announced it would take steps
 to halt the sale of the controversial novel "The Satanic
 Verses," following rallies by Thai Muslims demanding such a
 ban. 'The police later raided several bookstores and arrested
 the-oinbr-of .a store found selling the book. Similarly, the
 Interior Ministry ordered the seizure of the August edition of
 Bangkokanagaine which bore a cover photograph satirizing a
 Buddhipt monk. The. police warned-the publisher not to publish
 anything insulting to religion or he would'face legal action.
 Additionally, some 219 publications,-many of them treatises on
 Chinese communism, remained banned under an executive order
 dating from the martial law period.
 -The press c.ontidues to operate under the restrictions imposed
 by the Press Law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law
 ,orders. It practices self-censorship and is particularly
 *.cautious -about criticism of the military-or monarchy. Current
 legiilation permits the Government to close newspapers and
 revoke the :licenses of editors of newspapers which publish
 stories deemed to be libelous or contrary to national securiy
 interests. In 1987 the Government closed one newspaper, which
 resumed-publication within a few weeks; in 1988 and 1989 none
 were closed. Nevertheless, on several occasions in 1989, the
 -police-warned.the press not to print stories on controversial
 subjects. Additionally, the army and some cabinet members
 more-frequently invoked-existing restrictive laws to issue
 warnimgs to publi-cations-printing critical articles.
 b. Freedom- of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution ensures -the rights of assembly and
 association. In-practice, these rights are exercised freely
 by politicians, students, labor, and-other interest groups
 without government interference. All associations, including
 labor unions, must be registered by the Government. The
 Government, however, does not use the withholding of
 registration to inhibit freedom of association for any
 groups. Permits are not required for assembly.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor udions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is generally practiced throughout Thailand
 -and protected by law and custom. Theravada Buddhism, the de
 facto state religion, has had an abiding and profound
 influence-on Thai culture and history, and most Thai practice
 it. The King is required by the Constitution to profess the
 Buddhist faith and practice Buddhism. Nonetheless, Thailand
 
 
 992
 THAILAND
 is a secular society with church and state clearly separate.
 There are no restrictions on religious ceremonies, the
 teaching of religion, or conversion from one religion to
 another, but controversies occasionally arise.
 In 1989 the Government moved against Santi Asoke, a
 nonconformist Buddhist sect. Police arrested the founder of
 the order, Rak Rakphong, also known as Photirak, in June, for
 failing to comply with the Buddhist Sangha Supreme Council's
 ordpr to leave the monkhood. The charge against Photirak
 under the Sangha Act, which sets forth the regulations of the
 Buddhist hierarchy, carries a penalty of 6 months in jail or a
 $40 fine. At year's end, hearings in the case were continuing
 in a Bangkok court, although press coverage of the proceedings
 was limited under a gag order.
 In August Photirak was also charged with 79 counts of inciting
 his followers to violate Article 208 of the Criminal Code by
 representing themselves falsely as monks even though they were
 not legally ordained. The 79 followers were also detained for
 falsely dressing as monks before being released on bail. This
 offense is punishable by a maximum of 1 year in jail or an $80
 fine. On September 8, in a preliminary hearing, public
 prosecutors deemed the evidence insufficient to sustain the
 charge.
 Under applicable regulations, missionaries are permitted to
 live and proselytize in Thailand, as has been the case for
 more than a century. Thailand does restrict the number of
 missionaries and places limited restrictions on their
 activities, but foreign clergy in the country are permitted to
 preach freely. There is no legal or organized discrimination
 against, or persecution of, those affiliated with minority
 religions, such as Christianity or Islam. Religious
 publishing, regardless of faith, is allowed. As with private
 associations, religious institutions are registered by the
 Government. Most senior Thai officials and political leaders
 are at least nominally Buddhist. Muslims living in the four
 southern provinces, which have majority Muslim populations,
 have the right to have civil law cases decided by Muslim
 judges under Koranic law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Longstanding restrictions on the travel and place of residence
 of Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand remained
 in place in 1989. The right of citizens to change their
 residence or workplace was unabridged. The only limitations
 on travel of persons other than aliens and refugees were
 restrictions on entry into certain rural areas believed by the
 Government to be used as bases by Communist insurgents. Apart
 from prohibiting direct travel between Thailand and Cambodia,
 the Government did not restrict emigration or foreign travel,
 except by government officials. Passport applications by
 single Thai women and children under the age of 14 must be
 approved by the Department of Public Welfare. In addition, a
 1985 statute criticized by some women's rights advocates
 requires that female passport applicants under age 36 sit
 through a series of interviews regarding their employment
 records and finances. These provisions are intended to
 prevent the export of children for sale and women for purposes
 of prostitution. The Government has not revoked citizenship
 for political reasons.
 
 
 993
 THAILAND
 Thailand is not a party to international legal instruments
 regarding refugees and their basic rights. However, it has
 acted in the spirit of those agreements by providing first
 asylum to approximately 710,000-refugees from Laos, Cambodia,
 and Vietnam since 1975, and by permitting the temporary
 relocation of 350,000 Khmer, classed as displaced persons, on
 its side of the Thai-Cambodian border.
 In 1988 the Government severely restricted first asylum and
 began to push off boats carrying Vietnamese asylum seekers.
 The push-off policy, which was never uniformly enforced, ended
 in April- 1989 after the Government committed itself to restore
 first asylum at the preparatory conference on Indo-Chinese
 refugees in Kuala Lumpur, and then at the UN International
 Conference on Indo-China refugees in Geneva in June. There
 were no confirmed reports of Thai Government pushoffs between
 April and the end of December.
 Attacks on Vietnamese asylum seekers by Thai pirates in the
 Gulf of Thailand resulted in a dramatic upsurge in the number
 of deaths, rapes, abductions, and missing persons in 1989.
 The Government .arrested 14 suspected pirates in 1989. By
 year's end, two had been convicted and sentenced to long
 prison terms.
 Following the civil disorders in Rangoon in 1988, 3,000 to
 4,000 Burmese students fled to the Thai-Burma border area.
 Although most students reside in camps on the Burmese side of
 the border, some live on the Thai side and in Bangkok on a
 permanent basis. Thailand's official policy is to consider
 undocumented Burmese as illegal immigrants subject to
 deportation.
 In practice, the Government usually has provided refuge to the
 students when they have crossed the border fleeing military
 hostilities or probable persecution. The Government has on
 occasion arrested students and workers as illegal immigrants,
 taken them to the border, and directed them to return to
 Burma. These.repatriations generally have been only to areas
 in Burma controlled by ethnic minority insurgent groups
 hostile to the Rangoon regime. There have been no confirmed
 reports of forced repatriation into the hands of the Burmese
 mil-tary or civil authorities. Those repatriated often return
 .to Thailand once there is no longer a Thai government presence
 in the border area.
 In late 1988 and early 1989, the Government initiated a
 program to repatriate voluntarily Burmese students.
 Approximately 160 students returned to-Rangoon under Thai
 military auspices. Some groups, including Amnesty
 International and the ICRC, allege the returns were "less than
 voluntary" -and that the Government had pressured the students
 to return to Rangoon. Some have alleged that a number of the
 students who returned have disappeared and others have been
 subject to human rights violations.
 Lao asylum seekers in Thailand are screened by the UNHCR to
 determine their eligibility for refugee status. The screening
 program was revised following the 1989 International
 Conference onIndo-Chinese refugees. Although there were
 isolated reports of pushbacks of Lao asylum seekers by the
 Government in 1989, there were fewer than in previous years.
 Thailand is cooperating with UNHCR in a trilateral program
 with Laos for the return of certain Lao asylum seekers.
 
 
 994
 THAILAND
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution provides a means for citizens peacefully to
 change their government, and the political system has become
 more open in the past 10 years. However, in practice there
 are still impediments. The traditional military-bureaucratic
 elite retains considerable influence and remains a
 significant, possibly decisive, factor in determining who
 governs Thailand. Constitutional processes are shallowly
 rooted. Most politicians and political parties have little
 contact with the population at the grass roots except during
 election campaigns, and critics charge they more closely
 reflect private business interests than the popular will.
 Many Thais assume that the military, rather than abjuring
 intervention in the political process, has simply chosen to
 exert its influence from behind the scenes. In 1989 the
 Government continued to exercise caution regarding policies
 and actions of which the military would strongly disapprove.
 Prime Minister Chatichai, himself a Member of Parliament and
 the leader of the party which won the largest number of seats
 in July 1988, is supported by parties holding roughly
 three-fifths of the seats in the House. The appointed Senate
 has limited legislative powers and is composed largely of
 active duty and retired military and government officials. In
 the 1988 national elections for the House, which were open and
 free, 16 political parties fielded a record number of
 candidates. The election resulted in the formation of a
 six-party coalition Government. Opposition parties regularly
 present opposing views both within the National Assembly and
 in the mass media. The National Assembly almost invariably
 has dissenting votes on legislation and procedural decisions.
 Elections are based on universal suffrage for adults over the
 age of 20, and are required by the Constitution at least once
 every 4 years. The Government encourages voter turnout but
 does not use either direct or indirect pressure to compel
 voting. Voter turnout for both national and local elections
 generally exceeds 50 percent, and in the 1988 Parliamentary
 election reached a record 64 percent.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has responded to specific inquiries on human
 rights matters from Amnesty International and the
 International Commissiof of Jurists. With occasional
 exceptions, it is generally willing to discuss human rights
 problems with both domestic and international human rights
 organizations. Also, human rights organizations of all kinds
 are generally permitted to visit Thailand, meet with
 appropriate government officials, and lobby for corrective
 action.
 Thai human rights organizations have had significant success
 in recent years. They have, for example, successfully
 encouraged the Government to tighten the discipline of police
 and paramilitary forces fighting the Communist insurgency and
 have brought pressure to alleviate widespread abuses in child
 labor practices and in prisons. The number of nongovernmental
 human rights organizations has increased. Local civil and
 women's rights groups, active on a wide range of issues,
 including combating prostitution and seeking improved
 
 
 995
 THAILAND?
 enforcement of labor laws, have devoted most of their efforts
 to the promotion of women's rights and identifying and
 correcting human rights violations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress, particularly
 considering its limited resources, in accomplishing the
 integration of its minorities. In 1988 the Government began a
 comprehensive new plan for improving the living conditions of
 hill tribes and providing more of them with the opportunity to
 obtain citizenship and otherwise integrate into the
 mainstream. Although much of the plan appears to move toward
 integrating the hill tribes .into Thai society while leaving
 them physically in place, there are provisions for resettling
 those living in restricted areas. such as national forests.
 Thai officials have-stated that-any.such relocations would be
 accomplished by persuasion rather-than by force.
 Ethnic Chinese, found throughout Thailand, with a
 concentration in Bangkok, are relatively well assimilated, but
 there is a tradition of popular resentment directed against
 their trading and financial activities. This resentment has
 never provoked violent perseuion and is dissipating as the
 Chinese are-assimilated into Thai society.
 Muslims'are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 Thailand's southernmost provinces bordering Malaysia. The
 Government has put much effort into regionally targeted
 development efforts and the creation of educational
 opportunities in order to integrate Thai Muslims into Thai
 society. However, Muslims continue to be underrepresented in
 government service, the professions, and in higher education.
 The community of Vietnamese which fled Indochina in the 1940's
 and 1950's to northeastern Thailand lives under a set of laws
 and regulations restricting their movements, residences,
 education, and occupation. Persons who travel illegally can
 be imprisoned. Since 1980 these Vietnamese have been
 forbidden to buy new cars. While some of these restrictions
 are laxly enforced, the approximately- 40,000 Vietnamese in
 this category remain worried that their situat2on could change
 for the worse. Those born in Vietnam have no chance of
 obtaining Thai citizenship under existing laws, although their
 children born in Thailand can do so in some cases if they pass
 a background investigation. ..In December 1988, Prime Minister
 Chatichai directed relevant government agencies to draft a law
 providing for the naturalization of long-resident aliens and
 their children. No draft-has emerged to date, however, and
 the law is likely to make slow progress through the
 bureaucracy and Parliament. In-the meantime, the continuation
 of restrictions represents, in part, a conscious Thai policy
 to discourage further emigration from Vietnam, and in part a
 reaction to the belief that the Vietnamese represent a kind of
 "fifth column"-within Thailand, as it is widely believed that
 many of- these Vietnamese owe allegiance to the Communist
 Government in Hanoi.
 The status and role of women have improved steadily over the
 past several years. With few exceptions, women have equal
 legal rights, with specific guarantees of property and divorce
 rights, and there are no allegations that these rights are
 denied. Thai law, however, denies Thai nationality to
 children born of alien fathers and Thai mothers, regardless of
 
 
 996
 THAILAND
 place of birth. In March Prime Minister Chatichai approved
 the establishment of a new body to promote women's rights, the
 National Commission for the Promotion and Coordination of
 Women's Affairs.
 Thai law contains prohibitions on both wife beating and child
 abuse, and the Government has enunciated a policy emphasizing
 ending physical abuse of women and children. Enforcement is
 uneven, however. Human rights advocates point out that the
 Thai legal system lacks any means to intervene short of
 criminal prosecution of the abusive spouse or parent. Rules
 of evidence often make prosecuting these cases difficult,
 especially when the victims are children. For a combination
 of these reasons and ingrained cultural attitudes, police are
 frequently reluctant to pursue such cases. Women's and
 children's rights groups actively and effectively assist
 victims of abuse who come to their attention in pursuing legal
 action. Reliable data on the extent of abuse of women and
 children are not available. However, some critics believe
 that wife beating is common.
 Prostitution is a significant social problem in Thailand,
 driven by a combination of longstanding cultural attitudes,
 rural poverty, and the profits derived from the sex-based
 component of the modern tourism industry. Despite periodic
 well-publicized raids on brothels, overall enforcement of laws
 prohibiting prostitution is lax, in part due to petty police
 corruption. Children's rights advocates and the Government
 differ on the number of minors engaged in prostitution, but
 the official estimate is 30,000. Estimates of the total
 number of women engaged in prostitution range up to 800,000.
 Studies have shown that the majority of women engaged in
 prostitution come from impoverished rural areas. In the case
 of minors, the majority have been "sold" by their parents to
 procurers or owners of brothels. Research by human rights
 groups also suggests that most adults and minors engaged in
 prostitution are not held against their will (although there
 are such cases) and view the activity as a legitimate means of
 improving the financial lot of their families. The social
 stigma attached to money earned through prostitution has
 decreased markedly in rural areas. Human rights advocates
 also report that women engaged in prostitution are rarely
 subjected to beatings or other violent mistreatment.
 Women are well represented in the labor force and becoming
 increasingly so in professional positions, particularly in the
 commercial sector. According to the latest available Thai
 government statistics, women accounted for almost 54 percent
 of employment in trade, 47 percent in agriculture, 44 percent
 in services, and 39 percent in industry. In general, women
 are not barred legally from positions traditionally held by
 men. However, women continue to be concentrated in
 traditionally lower paid jobs, and there is a significant gap
 in average salaries. No accurate statistics are available on
 this gap, which appears to be narrowing. In rural areas, sex
 stereotypes are more pronounced with respect to social rqles.
 These barriers are being modified as mass communications bring
 different role models to even the most remote communities.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Labor Relations Act of 1975 affirmed the rights of
 employees to form and join unions'or employee associations of
 
 
 997
 THAILAND
 their own choosing; decide on the constitutions and rules of
 their asSociations and unions; formulate their views without
 government or employer interference; confederate with other
 unions; be protected against discrimination, dissolution,
 suspension, or termination by any outside authority because of
 union activities; and have employee representation in direct
 negotiations with employers. No Thai law, including the 1975
 Act, however, explicitly protects workers from discrimination
 due to their participation in organizing new unions which have
 not yet been registered.
 The 1975 Act specifically withholds union rights from
 government workers. Civil servants, therefore, may not
 unionize, though they may and do form "employee associations,W
 which are influential in determining salary scales, benefits,
 and cbnditions of employment. All state enterprise workers
 may unionize, except those at the Bank of Thailand and the
 airports authority. The state enterprise sector is the
 backbone.of the labor movement in terms of the number of union
 members and Of the relative strength of its unions.
 In addition to a prohibition on strikes in "essential
 services" (defined to include ports, education,
 transportation, fuel and-energy, telecommunications,'
 hospitals, and waterworks), the right to strike is denied all
 state enterprise workers. Nevertheless, strikes do 6ccur in
 the public sector and are usually tolerated by the
 Government. In 1989 industrial peace prevailed in the state
 enterprise sector, except for the ports, which saw work
 stoppages in August and September to resist proposed
 privatization of a new deep-sea port near Bangkok. Though
 such strikes are prohibited,'no action was taken against the
 port unions. Another stoppage took place in June at the
 Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand, in protest of a
 proposed change of board membership that also had strong
 privatization implications. That stoppage ended when the
 Government reconstituted the board of directors.
 In most of the private sector, 24-hour notice to management is
 the only legally mandated prerequisite to a strike. However,
 the Government has the authority "to restrict the right to
 strike whenever a strike would affect national security or
 cause severe negative repercussions for the population at
 large." The Government used this provision to end one strike
 in the banking sector in 1989. It was also used to end
 lockouts in two large manufacturing enterprises, which in both
 cases had been precipitated by failed strikes prote'ting
 working conditions. This in fact represented a pattern for
 industrial disputes in the private sector: strikes leading to
 lockouts terminated by government intervention, often then
 leading, to labor court cases filed by labor demanding an award
 of severance pay to those workers who cease their employment
 in the affected enterprise.
 Thai labor has organized slowly since basic worker rights were
 affirmea. In 1989 about 12 percent of the industrial work
 force (defined by the Government as those working in
 "enterprises," which represents less than 10 percent of the
 total labor force) was unionized. Union membership and power
 is heavily concentrated in the state enterprise sector. A
 cultural factor in the slow growth of organized labor is the
 historically benign and paternalistic relationship of
 employers to employees. A provision of Thai labor law
 permitting the formation of labor unions with as few as 10
 members also contributed to a high degree of fractionalization
 
 
 998
 THAILAND
 at both the union and confederation levels. This manifested
 itself in a steady increase in the number of registered unions
 to almost 600, while overall union membership remained
 virtually constant at around 300,000. Critics believe that
 this promotes the company unions beholden to management and
 thus is an infringement of the right of association.
 The law effectively guarantees unionists security of their
 person and protection of their property, and there were no
 allegations that Thai unionists were particularly subject to
 violent incidents related to their union activities.
 Thai unions generally operate independently of the Government
 and other outside organizations. However, unionists, along
 with employers, are represented in a variety of tripartite
 committees charged with formulating and implementing national
 labor policy. Despite a history of voluntary association and
 common cause between unionists and military elements, the
 importance of such connections continues to decline as the
 relative political strength and independence of unions rose.
 Leaders of the main labor federations recognized that
 fractionalization weakened their impact and continued to
 coordinate on such national issues as minimum wage,
 privatization, social security, "temporary" labor abuse, and
 health and safety issues. Thai unions have tended to be
 apolitical, in part because the 1975 Act withholds certain
 protections in cases of "political" activity.
 Continuing an effort begun in 1988 when the Chatichai
 Government came to power, unionists frequently express their
 views to the Government on key issues. Increases in the
 minimum wage and salary levels for civil servants and state
 enterprise workers went into effect in early 1989 after
 extensive union lobbying late in 1988. Strongly supported by
 labor, Thailand's Social Security Law passed the House of
 Representatives in July, and awaits Senate consideration in
 the spring of 1990. A legislative initiative to create a
 labor ministry failed to be introduced into the Parliament in
 1989 due to disagreement about its eventual scope. Two more
 prominent unionists were appointed to the Senate in 1989, but
 no unionists serve in the more influential House of
 Representatives.
 Unions have maintained relations freely with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the Asean Trade Union
 Congress, and various national labor bodies, including those
 of the United States, the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan,
 and Israel. Thai unionists have also participated in meetings
 and seminars sponsored by the World Federation of Trade Unions.
 The American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
 Organizations (AFL-CIO) repeatedly has alleged the existence
 of severe limitations on the right of association in
 Thailand. Among these have been restrictions on the right to
 strike in the private sector, the prohibition of unionization
 by civil servants, the prohibition of strikes in state
 enterprises, the inadequate legal protection of union
 activists against dismissal from their jobs, and the
 requirement that union leaders also be full-time workers in
 the plants or industries which they represent. The AFL-CIO
 has also cited alleged widespread abuse of "temporary" labor
 and reported abuses of child labor. The U.S. Government has
 found that a basis for many of these allegations exists and
 accordingly in 1989 continued to encourage the Thai Government
 to improve worker rights.
 
 
 999
 THAILAND
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All Thai workers are guaranteed the right of collective
 bargaining. The law prescribes procedures to ensure employee
 participation in the determination of working conditions,
 wages, and benefits. In recent years, such bargaining has
 focused, more on benefit packages and working conditions than
 on wages. There were no instances of industrywide collective
 bargaining agreements. Both labor and management usually seek
 to resolve potential differences informally before turning to
 formal collective bargaining. The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 defined the mechanisms for such negotiations and for
 conciliation and arbitration under government auspices in
 cases under dispute. The conciliation and arbitration
 procedures are mandatory for. state enterprises.
 A system of labor courts implemented in 1980 exercises
 judicial review over most aspects of labor law. Workers may
 also seek redress for their grievances from a tripartite labor
 relations committee under the Ministry of Interior. The law
 does not fully protect workers against antiunion
 discrimination and retribution. The law requiring union
 leaders also to work full time in the plants or industries
 which they represent tends to make them vulnerable to employer
 action in cases of conflict, especially as they have no
 explicit protection against dismissal for union activities
 prior to the formal registration of their union. The Thai
 Court Law of 1980 prohibits "unfair dismissal," but Thai
 courts have not been uniform in their interpretation of this
 law.
 Employers continued to have at their disposal significant
 means to prevent the unionization of their enterprises.
 Employees who were determined to have been dismissed
 "unfairly" by the labor court were seldom reinstated.
 Instead, there was a widespread reliance on severance pay as
 compensation to resolve labor disputes. Additionally, the
 common use of "temporary" or contract labor was also an
 effective means of discouraging or preventing unionization.
 An Interior Ministry announcement on temporary employment
 issued in October sought to enhance labor protection and to
 improve benefits for temporary workers by eliminating the
 legal distinction between temporary and permanent workers. By
 year's end, however, it was unclear what practical effect the
 announcement would have, and many unionist were highly
 critical of the change.
 There are several special export processing zones (EPZ's) in
 Thailand, with many more planned to stimulate further the
 growth of export-oriented industry. No separate labor
 legislation is applicable within the export processing zones,
 where wages and working conditions in fact usually exceed
 national norms. There are trade unions and collective
 bargaining in Thai EPZ's.
 c." Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except
 in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law. There
 were no allegations of forced or compulsory labor in 1989.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor continued to be a source of considerable domestic
 and foreign criticism in 1989, including from the AFL-CIO.
 
 
 1000
 THAILAND
 Foreign interest groups have focused heavily on the
 exploitation of working children. Thai law prohibits the
 employment of children under age 12, and limits their
 employment between the ages of 12 and 15 to "light work."
 Employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6 a.m.) is
 prohibited. Complaints against Thailand alleged that Thai
 standards are low and that their enforcement is inadequate.
 There was no substantial new evidence of the employment of
 children under age 12 in 1989. However, there continued to be
 strong anecdotal indications that children over age 12 were
 employed in dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise harmful
 circumstances. Occasional fires or accidents involving
 children working or living in factories and construction sites
 have concentrated public attention on deficiencies.
 Thai efforts to correct these problems again were hampered in
 1989 by inadequate budget resources for inspection and
 enforcement, and by low penalties and fines which did not
 sufficiently deter potential violators. The Cabinet,
 acknowledging the seriousness of child labor problems,
 approved a threefold increase in manpower for the Department
 of Labor division responsible for child labor issues.
 Implementatation of the increase began in late 1989.
 Additionally, large increases in manpower for general labor
 inspection were also approved and funded. The Cabinet in June
 also approved increasing the level of compulsory education
 from 6 to 9 years, though implementation of this decision had
 not begun by year's end.
 A revision of Thai labor protection regulations applicable to
 working children in the nonagricultural sector, approved in
 principle by the Cabinet and expected in 1988, was still
 pending in 1989. The key feature of the proposed revision was
 an immediate increase in the minimum age to 13 and a long-term
 increase to 15. In addition to improved inspection and
 enforcement expected from the manpower increases noted above
 and the increase in the level of cohpulsory education, the
 Government, led personally by Prime Minister Chatichai,
 initiated a broad campaign to sensitize the public to the
 problems of child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium and large
 factories, which produce most of Thailand's export goods,
 generally work 8-hour shifts under conditions which meet
 international standards. Health and safety standards are
 maintained voluntarily, minimum wages usually are exceeded,
 children are not employed, and employees enjoy various
 additional benefits. However, in Thailand's large informal
 sector, which is susceptible to minimal inspection,
 enforcement, and educational efforts by the Government,
 internationally recognized health and safety standards are
 generally little understood or upheld. As government health
 and safety initiatives take firmer hold in larger enterprises,
 the Government will need to develop special outreach programs
 to bring both education and enforcement into the informal and
 .small enterprise sector. Government programs for industrial
 safety have relied primarily on informational campaigns and
 voluntary compliance. While the programs themselves have been
 praised as among the best in the region, more resources are
 required to meet health and safety challenges posed by rapid
 industrialization. The national force of labor inspectors,
 even after the increase approved in 1989 is fully implemented,
 will remain inadequate to the task of investigating and
 pursuing all potential violations under Thai law, especially
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1001
 THAILAND
 in the absence of complaints. Another impediment is the fact
 that many businesses in violation of the law are often
 unregistered, evade taxes, and operate outside the sphere of
 government inspection and regul-ation.* The cooperative rather
 than coercive nature of Thai labor inspection and enforcement
 practices is. criticized by some observers as being ineffectual.
 Unskilled laborers who pour into Bangkok from the far poorer
 countiyside often are willing to work at less than the minimum
 wage ($3 per day in the Bangkok area, less in most other
 plovinces). In rural Thailand too, many-workers are also
 willing to work for jess than the minimum wage.- The   -
 established minimum wage levels are adequate to-provide
 workers and their families a decent standard of living, given*
 Thailand's leveilof economic development. -Government
 officials continued to report that large groups of
 laborers--estimated at about one-third of the total--received
 less than the legal minimum wage, and to exhort labor
 - inspectors to enforce prescribed rates more effectively.
 The Government has yet to give full-legal effect to the
 48-hour workweek. Commercial employees are not permitted to
 exceed 54 hours per week; employees in industry 48 hours per
 week; those in "dangerous" work 42 hours per week.
 Transportation workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours
 per day.
 
 
 1002
