 THAILAND
 Thailand's government is a constitutional monarchy with a
 strong executive branch and a considerably weaker bicameral
 legislature composed of a 324-member elected Lower House and a
 243-member appointed Senate. The military plays a strong and
 often dominant role in Thai political life. The Prime
 Minister and members of his cabinet are subject to
 parliamentary confirmation and votes of confidence, although
 they themselves need not be popularly elected. Upon
 completion of the National Assembly's constitutionally
 mandated four-year term in the spring of 1983, free national
 elections were held and the current Prime Minister, General
 (retired) Prem Tinsulanon, who has held office since February
 1980, formed a four-party coalition government supported by
 roughly two-thirds of the Lower House. Both under the
 absolute monarchy, which ended in 1932, and successor civilian
 and military regimes, Thailand has enjoyed self-government
 under an established bureaucracy and laws from which the
 majority of those governed did not dissent.
 Thailand is an emerging middle-income developing country with
 a free enterprise economic system in which individual economic
 interests and the right to hold private property are strongly
 protected.   Thailand is one of the world's few net food
 exporters, and its industrial sector, after rapid expansion in
 recent years, now rivals agriculture in contributing to the
 gross domestic product. The country has maintained an annual
 real growth rate in the seven percent range for the past two
 decades, has cut its yearly birth rate to 1.6 percent, and
 continues to expand its economic infrastructure and social
 services. Problems and inequities remain, however, notably in
 the broad income disparities between urban and rural areas,
 and in chronic underemployment, particularly in the poorer
 rural areas. The Government recognizes the seriousness of
 these problems and has sought to address them with policy and
 resource allocation measures within generally conservative
 fiscal policies which preclude heavy deficit spending. Of
 particular importance is the national drive to eliminate
 health disparities among regions and between the urban and
 rural sectors. Continued attention is being paid to
 population control with the aim of generally improving the lot
 of the urban poor and women.
 Thailand's security apparatus operates within a
 constitutionally mandated framework, but numerous police,
 civilian and military agencies share responsibility, often
 with overlapping jurisdictions and ill-defined powers. Human
 rights abuses attributable to the security services have been
 infrequent in recent years. Human rights groups have
 continued to note improved government control over
 paramilitary forces used to fight Communist insurgency,
 particularly in border areas.
 Communist insurgents, Muslim separatists, and Mafia-type
 criminal gangs operate in rural areas and use terrorism to
 advance their respective aims. Communist strength has
 declined markedly in recent years due to several factors,
 including internal party strife, loss of external support, and
 government programs that emphasize political means to counter
 subversion. These include an amnesty program for defectors
 and financial assistance to help reintegrate them into Thai
 society. The Government is also continuing efforts to assist
 
 
 876
 THAILAND
 Thailand's Muslim community. Sporadic violence at a low level
 in Southern Thailand in 1984 continued to call attention to
 Muslim separatist activities in provinces along the Malaysian
 border.
 Thailand continued throughout 1984 to offer sanctuary and
 assistance to Indochinese refugees. Over 600,000 have been
 given asylum in Thailand since 1975. Approximately 127,000
 remained in camps in Thai territory by mid-1984, in addition
 to almost 250,000 displaced Khmer living in self-administered
 camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.
 During 1984, the human rights climate continued the
 improvement of the past several years. With the elimination
 of most of the serious abuses that arose during the repressive
 Thanin regime of 1976-77, the areas of progress have tended to
 be more focused on individual cases or specific laws.
 Political gatherings and associations are allowed, and freedom
 from arbitrary detention or search is generally safeguarded,
 notwithstanding some rarely enforced restrictive laws still on
 the books. Human rights activists in Thailand are able to
 bring issues to the attention of the public and lobby for
 corrective action, such as revision of the country's
 controversial Anti-Communist Activities Act.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no 1984 reports of killings, including summary
 executions, in which government involvement was alleged. In
 rural areas, Communist insurgents and ethnic separatists have
 continued to use violence, including murder, to pursue their
 respective objectives. Their targets have included low-level
 government officials, local entrepreneurs, and security
 officials. The Government has both the will and the ability
 to prevent or punish any killings that might be perpetrated by
 forces under its control.
 In past years, the local press has noted the large number of
 journalists killed in rural areas for a variety of reasons
 other than political. The killings diminished sharply in 1983
 and 1984. Local human rights activists regard the situation
 as distinctly improved, but would like the Government to
 examine further the circumstances surrounding some 1982
 deaths. The human rights aspect of this problem is difficult
 to assess. Some of the murdered journalists had published
 exposes of corruption or illegal activity. At the same time,
 however, some Thai journalists have in fact only a nominal
 attachment to the journalistic profession, and often become
 involved in extortion, blackmail, and similar activities which
 can lead their victims to use murder as a means of retaliation.
 b. Disappearance
 Local human rights groups have alleged the existence of police
 department death squads whose mandate included eliminating
 habitual criminals in rural areas. Allegations that such
 death squads may have been responsible for the disappearance
 
 
 877
 THAILAND
 of 43 community leaders, politiciand and journalists in recent
 years remain unsubstantiated. It is likely that the
 Government would do whatever possible to prevent such
 disappearances.
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists have used
 terrorism as a political weapon resulting in the disappearance
 of civilians and government officials.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Allegations of torture have been made in the past by the
 Coordinating Group for Religion in Society (CGRS), a Thai
 human rights group, and by others. However, torture is not
 used as an instrument of government policy and allegations of
 its use have not been substantiated.
 The Thai Government has stated-its opposition to the use of
 cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment. The CGRS, in its
 periodic reports, cites alleged cases of brutality and
 mistreatment by police and military personnel, but with less
 frequency than in the past. One 1984 case involving the
 severe beating of two suspects resulted in the dismissal of
 five police officers. According to human rights activists in
 Thailand, abuses, real or alleged, of authority relating to
 cruel and inhuman punishment or treatment, and arbitrary
 arrest and imprisonment have declined steadily over the last
 several years.
 Prison conditions in Thailand are poor as a consequence of
 serious overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and use of harmful drugs by prisoners.
 Prisoners are subject to strict regulations including corporal
 punishment for infractions. Between seventy to eighty
 thousand prisoners are currently occupying cells designed to
 hold slightly less than half that number. Prison conditions
 vary with the prisoner's social status as well as the nature
 of the offense. In rural areas there are persistent
 allegations that detainees who have not been formally charged
 are used as unpaid or underpaid labor. Overall, however,
 there is no systematic discrimination save that Westerners
 generally receive preferential treatment. The 1982 United
 States-Thailand prisoner exchange agreement has not yet come
 into force.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest
 warrants are generally required, and specific charges must be
 brought against those detained within a limited time period.
 A small number of Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 have been detained without trial under martial law
 provisions. Otherwise, the only legal basis for arrest and
 detention without specific charges for long periods (up to 480
 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act. These powers are
 infrequently used, and fewer than one hundred persons are
 being detained under this act. Of these, twenty-two were
 
 
 878
 THAILAND
 arrested in Bangkok in mid-1984. The remainder are
 concentrated in Southern Thailand, where insurgents are most
 numerous. According to local human rights groups, these
 detainees have not been mistreated.
 Martial law powers allowing arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 were significantly reduced by the repeal of martial law Order
 No. 22 in 1979. The geographic area remaining under martial
 law was sharply reduced in 1984 when the Prem government
 lifted its application in 29 provinces, including Bangkok.
 There were allegations that Communists had been clandestinely
 imprisoned in rural areas, but there have been no new
 allegations in the last two years. Summary exile is not
 practiced. A few politically active Thai have elected to go
 abroad and remain there.
 e. Denial of Pair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees Thai citizens the presumption of
 innocence and access to courts or administrative bodies to
 seek redress. Suspects can be denied the right to legal
 counsel during the pretrial or investigative period of their
 case, but before trial can have access to a lawyer of their
 own choosing. In recent cases with political overtones, such
 as the arrests of persons suspected of violating the
 Anti-Communist Activities Act, the Government moved quickly to
 allow rapid access by legal counsel and visitors during the
 pretrial period of the case. There is a functioning bail
 system.
 A number of amendments to the criminal code to improve rights
 of defendants are under active consideration. One amendment,
 adopted in October, 1984 contains specific provisions that
 mandate confidential legal counsel for suspects. Proposals
 that remain under consideration would guarantee counsel during
 the investigative phase, access by visitors during this
 period, and the right to contest extensions of the pretrial
 period of detention.
 The Thai have an evidentiary legal system although not a jury
 process. Cases are heard on the basis of specific--usually
 well-documented--charges by a panel of judges. Military
 courts have jurisdiction over cases involving internal and
 external national security, Thai relations with other nations,
 and offenses against the Royal Family and public peace.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights including the right to counsel of
 their choice both in the trial and appeal stages. A military
 court verdict cannot be appealed, although a civilian court
 decision can be appealed to a higher court. Both court
 systems, however, allow for a Royal pardon. Moreover,
 prisoners sometimes benefit from a Royal amnesty which takes
 the form of commutation or abrogation of sentences. The
 courts are independent of external pressures. There have
 been allegations, however, of both governmental and
 non-governmental influence being brought to bear on cases,
 usually those involving narcotics.
 There is no evidence of persons having been imprisoned solely
 for political beliefs in 1984.
 
 
 879
 THAILAND
 Thai human rights activists have expressed concern for
 approximately 100 prisoners who were sentenced to jail without
 due process during the period 1975-78. Under laws in force at
 that time they were given summary justice without a trial or
 access to counsel. A case-by-case review of those cases is
 continuing and so far has resulted in release of approximately
 half of these prisoners.
 A pilot government program to provide free legal advice to the
 poor is now in operation. Most free legal aid, however, comes
 from private organizations including the Lawyers' Association
 and the Women's Lawyers' Association.
 The court and investigatory apparatus in the Bangkok area have
 been overtaxed in recent years. As a consequence, the time
 required for criminal trials has at times exceeded three years
 in the court of first instance. Defendants acquitted after
 such lengthy trials receive no compensation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is generally an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, where the police
 function is not abused for security purposes, and where the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas is permitted. Thai law requires
 that police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. Depending on the nature of the
 offense, these warrants are issued either by the public
 prosecutor, the courts, commissioned police officers, district
 and military officers, or governors. There have been
 allegations that officers endorse warrants in advance and then
 allow their subordinate, non-commissioned officials, to apply
 them as needed. Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act
 allow officials involved in specifically designated 'communist
 suppression operations' to conduct searches without warrants,
 but these powers have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution generally affirms the citizens' right to free
 speech and a free press, but there are laws which impose
 restrictions on those rights. The principal legal
 restrictions on these freedoms are statutory prohibitions
 against insulting or defaming the Monarchy (lese majeste),
 advocating a Communist system of government, or publishing
 materials which threaten national security. Publications
 deemed to violate Thailand's lese majeste laws are
 confiscated, while individuals thought to have violated these
 laws are subject to prosecution.
 In 1984 the question of lese majeste was brought to the
 forefront of public attention by the arrest of an
 internationally known writer and social critic and two of his
 associates. Charges against the three were dismissed shortly
 after the prosecution made its initial presentation. The
 cases against three other less well-known persons who were
 arrested in 1984. are still pending.
 In practice; Thai citizens enjoy substantial freedom of
 speech, and the Government permits criticism of its policies.
 International publications circulate freely in Thailand, as
 
 
 880
 THAILAND
 does a wide range of political/social commentary presented by
 the privately owned Thai press. Technical publications and
 pamphlets, including those of academics, circulate freely, and
 present viewpoints ranging from the non-Communist left to the
 ultra right. Foreign and domestic books are not censored,
 except in rare instances where publications are critical of
 the Royal Family, or Thailand's monarchical institution.
 Television stations are government owned, but present a range
 of viewpoints. The Government regulates television coverage
 of international news, requiring that news received via
 satellite be prescreened. Radio stations, both private and
 government ones, present a variety of viewpoints including
 some critical of the Government.
 The press continues to operate under the restrictions imposed
 by the press law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law
 orders. These laws permit the Government to close newspapers
 and revoke the licenses of editors of newspapers which publish
 stories deemed to be libelous or contrary to national security
 interests. Existing regulatory guidelines are now being
 reexamined, and various alternative statutes are now under
 parliamentary and/or ministerial study.
 In the meantime, the Government's relations with the domestic
 media remain generally good. The Government now infrequently
 uses its statutory power over the press, although awareness of
 this power contributes to self-censorship which is a restraint
 on local press activities. In 1984, only one national
 publication was closed. It reopened under a new masthead
 within a month. As in the similar case which occurred in
 1983, the authorities judged a number of its articles to be
 inaccurate and detrimental to the public order and hence
 contrary to national security interests. The journalistic
 community did not regard its closure as portending a general
 lessening of press freedoms.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A martial law order intermittently enforced since the 1950s,
 remains nominally in effect in areas where martial law has not
 been lifted. It prohibits political gatherings of five or
 more persons, and requires prior police permission for use of
 sound amplification devices at rallies. Since 1979, however,
 organized labor, politicians, and various special interest
 groups, including those critical of the Government, have held
 sizable rallies without significant interference from the
 authorities. During 1983's national elections, politicians
 routinely attracted tens of thousands to campaign rallies and
 no charges of police harassment or interference in the
 campaign process were raised. In 1984, a series of meetings
 attended by from 300 to 3,000 persons was held to express
 concern at and protest over the arrest of 22 persons suspected
 of violating the Anti-Communist Activities Act.
 Private associations are permitted, but they must register
 with the Ministry of Interior. That ministry has in some
 instances not registered a group, but then has permitted the
 group to function.
 During the past several years, the Government has maintained a
 moderate policy toward organized labor. It has generally not
 restricted the development of the labor movement or labor's
 participation in political activities. Nonetheless, less than
 
 
 881
 THAILAND
 10 percent of the labor force in non-agrarian occupations is
 unionized. Thailand's largest labor congress attempted to
 play an active role in Thai politics and its leaders helped
 found a political party designed to promote labor interests
 through electoral politics. It met with little success at the
 ballot box and the union leaders subsequently decided to
 concentrate more on economic issues while distancing the union
 movement from day-to-day political infighting., Unions in the
 private sector as well as some state enterprises have the
 right to strike if negotiations conducted in accordance with
 Thai labor laws fail to resolve the dispute. In practice, the
 Government has rarely acted against strikers, even when they
 ignored the cumbersome negotiating procedures required under
 labor law. Workers are represented on the government wage
 committee, the national labor advisory board, and on the labor
 courts which arbitrate labor disputes and grievances. Unions
 freely exercise the right to maintain relations with
 international organizations that promote the interests of
 labor.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand, and is
 protected by law and custom of long standing. Theravada
 Buddhism, the de facto state religion, has had an abiding and
 profound influence on Thai culture and history and a large
 preponderance of Thai practice it. The King is required by
 the Constitution to profess the Buddhist faith and practice
 Buddhism. Nonetheless, Thailand is a secular society. State
 and church are clearly separate. There are no restrictions on
 religious ceremonies, the teaching of religion, or conversion
 from one religion to another. Missionaries are permitted to
 live and proselytize in Thailand as has been the case for more
 than a century. Foreign clergy may preach freely. There is
 no discrimination against or persecution of those affiliated
 with minority religions, such as Christianity or Islam.
 Religious publishing, regardless of faith, is freely allowed.
 Like private associations, religious institutions are
 registered by the Government. There are, however, no reports
 or allegations of a religious organization being denied
 registration. There is no decisive advantage to being
 Buddhist in Thailand, though most senior Thai officials and
 political leaders are at least nominally Buddhist. Muslims
 living in the four southern provinces which have a majority
 Muslim populations have the right to have civil law cases
 decided by Muslim judges under Koranic law. Efforts are being
 made to preserve Muslim cultural and religious traditions,
 including the building of mosques with government funds.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from long-standing restrictions on the travel of Chinese
 and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, including those who
 have lived in Thailand for a generation, the only limitations
 on travel are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas
 believed by the Government to be used as bases by Communist
 insurgents. The right of citizens to change their residence
 or workplace is unabridged. There are no government
 restrictions on foreign travel or emigration, except for
 government officials, but Thai women and children under 14
 must have their passport applications approved by the
 Department of Public Welfare. This provision of law is
 
 
 882
 THAILAND
 designed to prevent the export of children for sale and women
 for purposes of prostitution. The Government has rarely
 revoked citizenship.
 Since 1975, about 617,000 persons from Vietnam, Laos and
 Cambodia have fled to Thailand for refuge. Thai policy has
 been to provide assistance to them until such time as they can
 be repatriated or resettled in third countries, to afford
 first asylum to Lao arriving by land and Vietnamese boat
 refugees, and to promote voluntary repatriation along with
 resettlement, particularly of the Khmer and Lao, who comprise
 95 percent of Thailand's refugee population. The current
 refugee population on Thai territory is about 127,000. In
 addition, about 50,000 Vietnamese who arrived before 1954
 remain in Thailand, along with about 10,000 Chinese who were
 Kuomintang supporters and an equal number of Karen hill tribe
 refugees from Burma.
 With few exceptions, the Thai Government has not given asylum
 to new arrivals from Cambodia since early 1980, but it permits
 about 250,000 Cambodians to live in camps along the border, an
 increase of about 23,000 since January, 1984. Thailand has
 assisted international voluntary agencies to provide food and
 medical care to Khmer in camps along the border. The Thai
 Government permitted more than 83,000 of these displaced Khmer
 to move temporarily into Thailand in the wake of attacks by
 forces of Vietnam and the Heng Samrin regime in Cambodia in
 early 1984. By OctobeX, only about 28,000 had been able to
 return to the border. Since early 1980, small groups of Khmer
 caught trying to move illegally from border camps into refugee
 camps inside Thailand have been returned by Thai authorities
 to the border region.   Some Khmer have volunteered to leave
 the refugee camps for the border, but such movements have all
 but ended as a result of Vietnamese attacks on border
 encampments.
 Vietnamese coming overland via Cambodia after April 1981 have
 had to remain at the border for lengthy periods until they
 were permitted to transit Thailand for third country
 resettlement. About 3,700 overland Vietnamese refugees are
 currently on the border.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and
 the major resettlement countries have supported the Thai
 policy of promoting voluntary repatriation. About 2,500 Lao
 have returned to their homeland under UNHCR supervision
 following successful bilateral Thai-Lao repatriation
 negotiations in September 1980. UNHCR negotiations with the
 Heng Samrin regime concerning the repatriation of Khmer
 refugees remain stalled. The Government of Vietnam has been
 unwilling to discuss repatriation of Vietnamese refugees in
 Thailand. In any case, the majority of Indochinese refugees
 are not presently willing to return home.
 Since 1979, nearly 65,000 Vietnamese refugees have arrived in
 Thailand after perilous journeys, often in small, unseaworthy
 boats, across international waters. Although the number of
 arrivals in 1984 was estimated to be only a small fraction of
 that of previous years (about 5 percent of the cumulative
 1979-83 arrivals), refugees continue to suffer the results of
 pirate attacks, rough seas, equipment breakdowns, and
 navigational problems which cause sickness, starvation, and
 death.
 
 
 883
 THAILAND
 As its contribution in connection with this regional problem
 of criminal attacks against Vietnamese boat people, the Royal
 Thai Government, with financial and technical assistance from
 the UNHCR and twelve donor nations, conducts sea, air, and
 land patrols, and law-enforcement activities designed to
 deter, detect, and punish crimes against these refugees. The
 Thai authorities apply the same asylum, relief, and
 resettlement policies to boat refugees as to all others.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Thai Government traditionally has been a stable civilian
 bureaucracy heavily influenced by the military and often with
 a military officer as Prime Minister. The traditional method
 of changing governments has been nearly bloodless military
 coups d'etat. Holding key military positions in the immediate
 Bangkok area has been the most common avenue to national
 leadership. The governmental changes of 1973 and 1976, which
 occasioned violence in Bangkok, were exceptions to this
 pattern. There has been some evolution away from the
 tradition since 1978, with constitutional processes, including
 free elections, assuming a larger role. However, the military
 dominates the Senate and governmental decisions which the
 military strongly disapproves are generally not taken.
 Civilians hold all posts in the current Government, and Prime
 Minister Prem is supported by parties holding two thirds of
 the seats in the National Assembly as a result of the 1983
 national election. The election itself was an open and free
 one which saw four major and a dozen minor parties field
 candidates.
 As provided in the 1978 Constitution, the largest
 non-government party became the formal opposition. Both it
 and the smaller opposition parties have regularly presented
 opposing views both within the National Assembly and through
 the mass media. The Thai National Assembly almost invariably
 has split votes on legislation and on procedural decisions.
 Special interest groups, including the Confederation for
 Democracy, a loose coalition of progressives including human
 rights activists, have lobbied openly for changes in the
 Constitution to increase public participation in the governing
 process.
 The overwhelming majority of adult Thai, both men and women,
 have the right to vote. Thai children of an alien father who
 wish to vote must, however, have lived in Thailand for ten
 years and completed the equivalent of a sixth grade
 education. Women vote in numbers equal to men and participate
 fully in the political process. However, women are
 underrepresented in national politics and in high governmental
 positions.
 The Government encourages voter turnout but does not use
 either direct or indirect pressure to compel voters to cast
 ballots. Actual voter turnout for both national and local
 elections generally exceeds fifty percent.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1984 the Government did not have any specific inquiries
 from international human rights organizations, however, in
 
 
 884
 THAILAND
 past years, it has responded to specific inquiries from
 Amnesty International and the International Commission of
 Jurists. The Government is generally willing to discuss human
 rights problems with both domestic and international human
 rights organizations. It permits human rights organizations
 of all kinds to visit Thailand, meet with appropriate
 government officials and lobby for corrective action.
 Local civil rights groups, active on a wide range of issues
 including prostitution and enforcement of labor laws, have
 generally devoted most of their efforts to identifying and
 correcting human rights violations. Thai human rights
 organizations have had significant success in recent years,
 furthering the progress that Thailand has made in democracy
 since the repressive Thanin era (1976-77). They have, for
 example, successfully encouraged the Government to tighten the
 discipline of police and paramilitary forces fighting the
 Communist insurgencies. Prominent individual members of these
 human rights groups have lobbied for constitutional changes to
 further popular participation in politics and to enhance the
 rights of the accused. The Lawyer's Association of Thailand
 has played a leading and effective role in opposing the
 martial law restrictions on civil liberties which remain in
 effect in approximately half of the country. Both the CGRS
 and the Union for Civil Liberty have been especially active in
 drawing attention to abuses of authority by rural officials;
 CGRS and the Justice and Peace Commission seek in particular
 to make the rural population aware of their legal rights. The
 Federation of Journalists of Thailand has sought to have the
 remaining legal restrictions on the press lifted.
 In 1984, as in 1983, the Government did not harass individual
 human rights activists nor obstruct the investigations
 conducted by domestic groups interested in human rights.
 These groups have had the opportunity to examine fully areas
 of abuse, to publish periodic reports on their findings, and
 to take their cases to the press or the courts. When
 government officials have been suspected of violating human
 rights, these groups have made specific accusations and
 demanded government action. They have also reported on the
 judicial status of cases involving government officials
 accused of wrongdoing. In the past year, neither the national
 police system, operating under the Ministry of Interior, nor
 the Internal Security Operations Command (ISOC) which directs
 anti-insurgency operations in rural areas, have been accused
 of interference with human rights efforts.
 Thailand has involved itself directly in international human
 rights efforts, but generally not taken initiatives on that
 subject in United Nations forums. It has, however, taken a
 leading role in preparing ASEAN (Association of Southeast
 Asian Nations) resolutions on Cambodia, including human rights
 violations, which are considered annually by the U.N. Thai
 representatives were among the founding members of the
 Regional Council on Human Rights in Asia, a forum for the
 exchange of human rights information established in February
 1982. Thai members of the Asian Council helped draft a
 declaration On human rights to serve as the organization's
 statement of policy and goals. The 1984 meeting of the
 Council took place in Bangkok amidst clear signals from the
 Government that it was well disposed toward the group's
 activities. The Amnesty International 1984 Report expressed
 concern about legislation outlawing criticism of the Royal
 
 
 885
 THAILAND
 Family being used to prosecute government opponents, and the
 trial of civilians for political offenses in military courts
 employing judicial procedures falling short of internationally
 accepted standards. Freedom House's 1984-85 report lists
 Thailand as 'partly free.*
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Thai economy has performed well in the face of a sluggish
 international economic environment. Real economic growth was
 estimated to have been 5.8 percent in 1983. The inflation
 rate was 3.5 percent. Per capita GNP was $790 in 1982.
 Agricultural exports were down in 1983 because of poor
 harvests in 1982-83; this caused a large trade imbalance in
 1983. Government efforts in 1984 to reduce imports, and thus
 right the balance, slowed the pace of economic growth during
 the first six months of the year. The industrial sector, on
 the other hand, maintained an acceptable growth rate and in
 1983 accounted for about 21 percent of gross domestic product,
 rivaling agriculture as the leading sector of the economy.
 Industry, however, remains concentrated in the Bangkok
 metropolitan area. Efforts to induce industrial growth and
 hence better jobs in the countryside have been largely
 unsuccessful. Income disparities among regions and
 occupational groups are increasing. Between 1976 and 1980,
 per capita real income in Bangkok grew at an annual rate of
 6.0 percent while that of the rest of the Kingdom grew at the
 rate of only 2.7 percent.
 The right to own property, alone as well as in association
 with others, is protected under Thai law. In practice, large
 government-owned corporations in areas such as cement and road
 transportation, as well as oligopolistic industries such as
 distilling and brewing, place some limits on the private
 sector's ability to compete in all areas of the Thai economy.
 The delivery of health care services is 80 percent vested in
 the private sector. According to the latest available
 statistics (1975), Bangkok had one doctor per 1,549 people
 while the ratio nationwide was one to 8,366. The Government
 has tried to encourage doctors to practice upcountry by
 requiring newly-licensed doctors to practice in
 government-operated provincial hospitals for two to three
 years before entering private practice. In spite of this
 imbalance in doctor to patient ratio, the overall level of
 health has improved steadily. Life expectancy has increased
 from 50.8 years in 1960 to 57.1 in 1970 and 63.7 in 1984.
 Family planning services are now widespread and well
 accepted. The yearly population growth rate for Thailand's
 51.7 million inhabitants has declined from higher than 3
 percent in the 1960s to 1.9 percent in 1984. As a result of
 government efforts, the general health of women and young
 children, especially in rural areas, has improved
 significantly.
 Thailand is one of the world's five major grain-exporting
 countries. There is almost no evidence of caloric intake
 deprivation. Poor nutritional habits, however, often the
 result of ignorance, affect a small but significant percentage
 of the population.
 The literacy rate is about 86 percent. In 1970, the national
 adult illiteracy rate was 21.4 percent (12.8 percent male,
 29.7 percent female). In urban areas, the figure was 12.3
 
 
 886
 THAILAND
 percent versus 22.9 percent in rural areas. Education is
 available to all Thai citizens, but certain classes of aliens,
 in particular Vietnamese long-resident in rural Thailand, are
 not permitted to move freely, and thus generally have no
 access to higher educational facilities. The primary school
 enrollment ratio was 82 percent in 1979. The Government's
 goal is universal education through the fourth grade.
 The status and role of women has continued to progress at a
 moderate but noticeable pace over the past several years. For
 the most part, women have equal legal rights in Thailand, with
 specific guarantees of property and divorce rights; and there
 are no allegations that these rights are denied. Women are
 not, however, permitted to participate fully in Buddhist
 religious institutions or to become monks. They are well
 represented in the labor force, and are becoming increasingly
 well represented in professional positions, particularly those
 in the commercial sector. In general, women are not legally
 barred from positions traditionally held by men. Thailand
 does, however, have limitations on women serving in the armed
 forces. In rural areas, sex stereotypes exist with respect to
 occupational and social roles. These barriers are being
 modified as mass communications bring modern role models to
 even the most remote communities.   In 1980, a group called
 the Friends of Women was founded to advance the cause of
 women's rights in Thailand. Their efforts are aided by other
 groups such as the CGRS which follows certains issues such as
 exploitation of women as prostitutes.
 Hill tribes and other ethnic minorities are not legally
 excluded from any of the benefits of society, but their
 isolation and poor land has kept their living standards
 lower. While language and cultural barriers disadvantage the
 ethnic Malay Muslim minority in south Thailand, there is no
 official policy of discrimination. To promote higher
 education for the Muslim minority, the Government has reserved
 a certain number of university seats exclusively for Muslim
 students and has committed extensive personnel and financial
 resources to improving education of Muslim youth to make them
 more able to compete in the country's economic life.
 Attention has also been given to the improvement of
 administration and development in the South. To help
 coordinate efforts to assist Thailand's Muslim community, the
 Government established in 1983 a national foundation for
 Muslim affairs staffed with representatives from various
 government agencies.
 
 
 887
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1982     1983    1984
 ---      ----------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        36.4    28.7     41.9
 LOANS ..............       17.7     7.0     18.1
 GRANTS .............       18.7    21.7     23.8
 A.AID  .................       31.2    22.6     35.9
 LOANS ..............       17.7     7.0     18.1
 GRANTS ..............      13.5     15.6    17.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        5.0      5.8      9.1
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         5.2     6.1      6.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        5.2     6.1      6.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.3     2.7      3.0
 NARCOTICS ........        2.9      3.4     3.0
 OTHER ............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        80.7    96.2    101.2
 LOANS ..............       74.7    76.0     94.0
 GRANTS .............        6.0     20.2     7.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       4.5     18.5     5.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       74.7    76.0     94.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        1.5      1.7     2.2
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       117.1    124.9   143.1
 LOANS ..............       92.4    83.0    112.1
 GRANTS .............       24.7     41.9    31.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       24.4     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       24.4     0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........   874.1    671.1    288.8  5300.5
 IBRD             634.1    393.1    152.6  3469.5
 IFC                0.0     62.8    57.7    231.7
 IDA                0.0      0.0     0.0    125.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADB              222.4    210.6     75.0   1355.7
 AFOB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               2.9      4.6      0.0    69.2
 OTHER-UN          14.7      0.0      3.5    49.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 57
 
 
 888
