 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy with a history of
 frequent military coups and powerful military-bureaucratic influence over political
 life. The King exerts strong informal influence on carefully selected issues.
 Thailand's return to democratic government was solidified in 1993, as the popu-
 larly elected civilian government has revitalized the country's democratic institu-
 tions. After prodemocracy protests were violently suppressed by the military in May
 1992, free and fair elections were held that September. The military leaders respon-
 sible for the crackdown were removed from their positions or demoted but have not
 been prosecuted, although many were removed from their positions or demoted. Ac-
 cording to government and nongovernmental organization (NGO) sources, approxi-
 mately 48 protesters are still listed as "missing. Prime Minister Chuan, a veteran
 legislator widely respected for his strong democratic beliefs, heads a five-party coali-
 tion that enjoys a 12-seat majority in the Parliament. He has committed his admin-
 istration to extending the benefits of Thailand's rapid economic growth to all sec-
 tions of the country.
 The Thai security apparatus has wide-ranging legal powers, largely deriving from
 past militarily controlled administrations. The military has been supportive of the
 new democratic government. Nonetheless, military leaders continued to have an in-
 formal but influential role in internal politics, especially in areas outside the capital.
 There continued to be credible reports of summary executions and physical abuse
 of detainees by police officers, as well as infringements by security forces on the
 right of peaceful assembly. It is unusual for victims or their families to initiate legal
 action against the police or military, in part because convictions are rare. Enforce-
 ment of a broad range of laws and regulations by police is noticeably lax.
 A newly industrializing country with a free enterprise economic system, Thailand
 continued to enjoy remarkable economic growth, averaging greater than 8 percent
 annual growth for the past 5 years. The Thai political system generally provides
 strong protection for individual economic interests, including property rights. Al-
 thou gh the industrial sector is still expanding rapidly, 65 percent of the population
 still lives in rural areas and depends on agriculture as the chief means oflivelihood.
 There has been little progress in rectifying the gap between urban and rural in-
 comes.
 Under the Chuan administration, the Government commitment to human rights
 and civil liberties has become more pronounced. The Government expanded protec-
 tion of the right to freedom of speech and assembly, increased the number of women
 in government, sought to reduce child labor and prostitution, and visibly supported
 human rights organizations operating in Thailand. Government control of the media
 relaxed somewhat and several new newspapers were established. Areas of human
 rights abuse in 1993 included instances of extrajudicial killing and abuse of criminal
 suspects by police along with government failure to prosecute offenders; legal and
 societal discrimination against women; violence (including trafficking for purposes
 of prostitution) against women and children, persistent widespread use of child
 labor, and selected restrictions on free speech and press.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There is no credible evidence that
 criminal suspects are systematically or regularly targeted for violence. However,
 there continued to be credible reports by legal organizations, reputable nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's), and the press that police summarily executed crimi-
 nal suspects, particularly in areas outside the capital. Reliable NGO sources who
 have access to court records report that over 60 deaths occurred either during arrest
 or while in police custody in 1992. These figures represent only the 34 district courts
 (of a total 95) that reported their 1992 statistics. It is difficult to determine what
 percentage of police homicides were justified. NGO legal advocacy groups pursued
 legal action against the police in approximately 15 percent of the cases in 1993. Offi-
 cial government statistics on the number of criminals and suspects killed by police
 in 1993 were unavailable.
 For example, on August 7, five police officers from Ban Pong district, Ratchaburi
 province, were accused of killing a vegetable exporter who ran a traffic light. The
 Ministry of Interior (MOI) agreed to conduct an autopsy and initiate an investiga-
 tion into the incident. Relatives of the vegetable vendor have retained an attorney
 to help track progress of the MOI investigation, which was still in progress at year's
 end.
 Although in the past there have been reports that police killed detainees to keep
 them from reporting abuse to authorities, there were no such cases reported in
 1993. However, police beat to death a demonstrator during protests against falling
 rice prices. (See Section 2.b.)
 Convictions of police in summary execution cases are rare, as evidence is often
 lacking due to witnesses reportedly being intimidated or paid not to testify. The law
 allows personal suits against police officers for criminal actions taken while making
 an arrest. However, due to flaws in the legal process and ingrained cultural atti-
 tudes, victims or their families rarely rile suits against the police. During the initial
 police inquiry, most police investigations routinely determine that no wrongful ac-
 tion was taken on the part of the police; judges generally follow the prosecutor's rec-
 ommendations. In cases of police homicide, a blood relative of the deceased has the
 legal right to sue. If pursued by the family, the case is handled by the same office
 in some instances by the same prosecutor, who has already ruled that no wrongfui
 death occurred. Reliable law advocacy organizations know of four cases that were
 filed against the police for homicide in 1992. There is no information to determine
 how many cases are settled out of court, but in cases where suits are filed, the fam-
 ily of the deceased often receives compensation from the Government and the suit
 is dro pped.
 In August the Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO) Muslim separatist
 group was blamed for an attack on a train that resulted in one death. In August
 and September a wave of violence erupted in southern Thailand, resulting in the
 deaths of several soldiers and one civilian. Muslims and particularly PULO were
 blamed for the violence, but as of September, the Government had not produced any
 evidence to link PULO to the violence.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no new cases of disappearance in 1993.
 After months of debate, NGO's, the MOI, and police officials agreed on a list of
 approximately 48 "missing" protesters following the military's violent suppression of
 prodemocracy protesters in May 1992. Local investigations into their whereabouts
 continue, and many family members and NGO's suspect the majority are dead. An
 amnesty decree, reaffirmed in November 1992 by the new administration, effectively
 prtects military leaders and protesters accused of criminal activities during the
 ay events from criminal prosecution. In response to the decree, NGO's and the rel-
 atives of the missing filed a civil suit against three of the top military leaders in-
 volved in the May violence. At year's end, the court had postponed the preliminary
 hearing on the suit while it considered a petition by the plaintiffs that they be al-
 lowed to sue in forma pau peris.
 Also in response to the May 1992 violence, legislation was passed in July requir-
 ing full Cabinet approval before military force can be used to quell civil disturb-
 ances. There was no progress in the cases of eight Cambodian criminal suspects who
 disappeared after being turned over to Thai police in April 1992. With the closure
 of all Cambodian displaced person camps earlier this year and the repatriation of
 all displaced Khmer to Cambodia, the Government appears to have dropped this
 case.
 No instances of disappearance at the camps for displaced persons along the Thai
 borders were reported. On March 2, the MOI charged a police lieutenant colonel
 with the kidnaping in February 1990 of a Saudi Arabian businessman suspected of
 
 
 739
 involvement in the 1989 murder of Saudi Arabian diplomats in Bangkok, but in
 September the charges were dropped. The businessman and two other Thai suspects
 have been missing since 1990 and family members believe they are dead. The fami-
 lies of the two Thai suspects claim that police repeatedly harassed the men and
 eventually detained them to try to elicit a confession. The police have no official
 record of arrests or release of any of the three involved, but all were last seen in
 police custody.
 One lingering disappearance case that began in 1991, that of Labor Congress of
 Thailand (LCT) Predent Thanong Po-An, remained unresolved at year's end. The
 LCT continued to press the current administration to make a more serious attempt
 to locate Thanong. A government-appointed committee reported in August that it
 had no additional evidence to determine the fate of Thanone. It is widely believed
 that Thanong was kidnaped and killed because of his criticism of the military re-
 gime that took over the country in February 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although Thailand's Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
 or pumshment, there continued to be credible reports of police beatings of prisoners
 and criminal suspects. Security forces do not use systematic physica abuse or vio-
 lence to target any particular group. However, criminal suspects regularly complain
 of police attempts to secure confessions or evidence through the use of torture such
 as electric shocks.
 In general, access to prisoners is not restricted. The foreign prison population reg-
 ularly receives visitors, and there are scheduled visiting times for both Thai and for-
 eign prisoners. Solitary confinement is sometimes use to punish difficult prisoners.
 Conditions in most prisons do not, in general, threaten the life or health of in-
 mates. However, there have been continuing unsubstantiated reports of sporadic
 physical abuse of both Thai and foreign prisoners by prison guards in response to
 disciplinary problems. International observers have commented that conditions at
 the Suan Phlu immigration detention center are so bad as to constitute cruel and
 unusual punishment, noting extreme overcrowding and lack of medical care. Immi-
 gration detention facilities are not administered by the Department of Corrections
 and are not subject to many of the regulations found in the regular prison system,
 such as those mandating exercise and medical care or limiting length of detention.
 Detainees are therefore held for extended periods without being allowed to leave
 their cells or exercise and may be incarcerated for an indefinite period of time. Thai
 immigration law requires that prosecutors formally charge detainees in court within
 91 days of their detainment. However, some detainees unable to put up bail or pay
 deportation costs, or detainees whose countries refuse to readmit them, can and
 have been held longer.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Thailand's Criminal and Penal Codes are
 based largely on Western European models. Except in cases of crimes in progress,
 arrest warrants are generally required. Specific charges must be brought against de-
 tainees within 48 hours, but police have the authority to extend the detention period
 to 7 days if required to complete an investigation. Detainees do not have the right
 to have their lawyers present during questioning.
 There is a functioning bail system, but it is also evident that judges have consid-
 erable discretion in determining eligibility for bail. In a recent prominent case of
 an alleged plot to assassinate the President of the Supreme Court, the presiding
 judge denied bail to two of four co-defendants, releasing the others (including the
 alleged mastermind) on bail. The only legal basis for detention without specific
 charlges for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act. No
 one has been detained under the act's provisions since 1984. Nevertheless, some de-
 tainees at the Suan Phu immigration detention center reportedly have been held
 as long as a year. In response to the amnesty decree, all remaining detainees ar-
 rested during the May 1992 events were released from police custody and charges
 were dropped.
 Of the approximately 50,000 inmates in Thailand, it is impossible to ascertain
 what percentage are pretrial detainees. Prison officials do not maintain statistics on
 sentencing and detention and pretrial detainees are not segregated from the general
 prison population.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Thai legal system provides for the presump-
 tion of innocence and access to courts or administrative bodies to seek redress. The
 civilian judicial system has three levels of courts: courts of first instance, courts of
 appeal, and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal and civil
 cases pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during periods of
 martial law. Also, Islamic courts hear civil cases concerning members of the Muslim
 minority. A serious flaw in providing due process rights is the lack of appeal from
 decisions of a military court. Trials or misdemeanors are decided by a single judge,
 
 
 740
 although two or more judges are required in more serious cases, in courts of first
 instance, and by a panel of judges at the appellate level. While most trials are pub-
 lic, the court may order a trial closed. This is most often done in cases touching on
 national security or the royal family.
 Career civil service judges preside over the courts. Judicial appointments and
 structures are not subject to parliamentary review. Although generally regarded as
 independent, commentators frequently charge the judiciary with venality and com-
 plain of competition for preference among judges. In March a former Supreme Court
 judge filed a malfeasance suit against former Prime Minister Anand for failing to
 comply with a resolution concerning the reassignment of judges. The lawsuit
 stemmed from Anand's 1992 effort to increase executive branch control over the Ju-
 dicial Commission, which is responsible for assigning judges.
 The widely publicized lese majeste trial against Sulak Siwarak began June 2 after
 his return from r 'f-exile in December, 1992. The trial was open to the public and
 Sulak Siwarak renained free on bail during the court proceedings; the trial is ex-
 pected to continue until mid-1994.
 The trial continued in the lese majeste and secession case of four Shiite Muslims,
 who have been held in prison since their arrest in Pottanim in 1990. Suspects in
 other similar cases have been released on bail, but repeated attempts to secure bail
 for the four have been denied without justification.
 The 10 officials of the former Chatchai government found to be "unusually
 wealthy" filed suit to recover assets seized by the former military junta, following
 a Supreme Court ruling that the decree under which the assets were seized was un-
 constitutional. In the wake of a subsequent lower court ruling in favor of one of the
 plaintiffs, the Government announced it would not appeal the order to return the
 seized assets. It also decided that as a result of the precedent set in this case, it
 would return the assets of all "unusually wealthy" politicians (minus any outstand-
 ing taxes owed) without waiting for the courts to rule on each case. At year's end,
 the assets of most of the 10 politicians had been returned.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights.
 Although they have no right to counsel during the investigative phase of their cases,
 detainees are granted access to a lawyer of their own choice before and during the
 trial. A government program provides free legal advice to the poor, but indigent de-
 fendants are not automatically provided with counsel at public expense. Most free
 legal aid comes from private groups, including the Thai Lawyers' Association and
 the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 Well-informed legal sources estimate that there are at most 10 political prisoners
 in Thailand. Political affiliation and questionable evidence may influence the ability
 of the accused to receive a fair trial or fair punishment.
 The trial of 2 members of the outlawed Communist Party of Thailand indicted in
 1991 on charges of having joined in a 1982 plot to assassinate the Queen, the Prime
 Minister, and the army commander continued in 1993. Ex-Major General Manun
 Rupkhachon, accused of masterminding the plot, returned to Thailand in November
 1992 to face similar charges and was released on bail. Little progress was made in
 the case since his return; only two of 134 state witnesses have testified, and several
 others refused to appear in court. Attempts to speed up the judicial process were
 unsuccessful.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires that police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home without the
 owner's consent. However, search warrants are issued by the police with prior ap-
 proval only from the MOI or provincial governor and are not subject to prior judicial
 review. There have been credible reports that officers sometimes endorse warrants
 in advance and then allow their noncommissioned subordinates to apply them as
 needed. The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged in eCommunist
 suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these powers
 rarely have been invoked in recent years and were not invoked in 1993.
 Thai society is essentially an open one; membership in political organizations is
 voluntary and the unmonitored exchange of ideas is generally permitted. However,
 it is widely suspected that security services monitor persons espousing leftist or con-
 troversial views.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and Thai citizens
 generally enjoy, a substantial measure of freedom of speech, especially with regard
 to criticism of government personalities and policies. However, criticism of the royal
 family (lese majeste), threats to national security (or advocating a Communist sys-
 tem of government), or speaking in a manner likely to incite disturbances or insult
 religion are not permitted under the law.
 
 
 741
 The Government permits open criticism of its policies by both journalists and pri-
 vate citizens. Privately owned newspapers and periodicals practice some self-censor-
 ship especially with regard to the monarchy and national security issues. Strong
 criticism of political parties, personalities and the Government is common and quite
 robust. In the past, there were rare instances of journalists being killed in order to
 suppress, or retaliate for, their reporting; there were no such cases in 1993. In fact,
 journalists report they feel free to comment on government activities without fear
 of reprisal.
 The Government maintains tighter control over the electronic media than it does
 over the print media. Radio stations aregovernment licensed and operated by gov-
 ernment, military, and private entities. They are required by law to broadcast gov-
 ernment-produced newscasts four times daily and a military-produced commentary
 once a day. However, in 1993, two prominent university stations refused to broad-
 cast the military commentary. There was no government retaliation for their ac-
 tions.
 Although programmers are generally free to determine the content and nature of
 television broadcasts a government committee set up in 1975 reviews television and
 radio programming. It is common for internal censorship boards to edit or "blackout"
 portions of programming deemed politically sensitive. In January a popular politi-
 cally oriented talk show was censored because the frank and open conversation was
 considered too controversial.
 Authorization for the establishment of two new, privately owned television chan-
 nels was approved last year, and the bidding process began in October. Of the exist-
 ing five national television channels, two are run by the army and three by the Gov-
 ernment. Two cable networks (totalling nine stations) are available in the capital
 and operate without significant government interference; satellite television is also
 available in other areas of the country.
 Representatives of the Thai film industry continued to criticize the police-con-
 trolled film censorship board, which regularly deletes all references in films to a
 number of topics deemed politically sensitive or considered pornographic. Among the
 topics subjected to censorship are olice corruption, criticism of the Thai military,
 misconduct by members of the Buddist clergy, and the 1976 student uprising. Thai
 domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and social com-
 mentary in 1993.
 Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and domestic books
 normally are not censored and circulate freely. The 1941 Press Law empowers the
 police Director General to prohibit the import of printed matter deemed dangerous
 to public order and morals. He publishes a list of books barred from import in the
 "Royal Gazette" each year. While the list mainly consists of literature widely re-
 garded as pornographic, it also still includes books written by Communists. The
 Government imposed no new permanent or temporary bans on the import of foreign
 publications during 1993; the last case of a foreign publication being barred from
 import occurred in 1989. Academic and technical research was conducted freely, in-
 cluding widely publicized research on corruption in political parties and the police,
 in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-While the Thai legal system
 generally recognizes the right to peaceful assembly, in practice government officials
 at times act to restrict this right.
 Official intolerance of public demonstrations appears highest in rural areas, par-
 ticularly in the northeast of the country. Residents of these areas who stage peace-
 ful public protests are sometimes detained for inciting unrest and assembly of 10
 or more persons with intent to commit violence; rarely are protesters actually
 charged. n one ongoing case, students were charged with inciting unrest after ar-
 ranging a protest in which one student committed self-immolation; the trial began
 in 1990 and all defendants are free on bail.
 In 1993 there was one notable incident of violence during a peaceful protest.
 Thousands of farmers in Kamphaeng Phet protested falling rice prices and their
 rally blocked the main roads leading to the provincial hall. After several days of
 peaceful protest, farmers allegedly injured several policemen monitoring the scene.
 Police responded by beating the protesters with batons, causing 25 injuries and one
 death. After one farmer died from massive head injuries while in police custody,
 local politicians demanded an investigation into the killing. Soon after the incident,
 relatives of the victim decided not to pursue legal action against the police after re-
 ceiving an amount equivalent to $4,000 from the provincial administration. Local of-
 ficials deny that the compensation was awarded to the relatives to persuade them
 to stop legal action. An interim report by the government panel investigating the
 death that was leaked to the press in June absolved the Government of responsibil-
 
 
 ity for the violence. A police probe to identify those officers responsible for beating
 the farmer is ongoing.
 Freedom of association is generally guaranteed for Thai citizens as long as it is
 not perceived to threaten national security. Private associations must register with
 the Government, but permits are not required for private meetings or gatherings
 unless held on public property.
 c. Freedom of Religwn.-Freedom of religion is generally practiced and protected
 by law and custom. The de facto state religion is Theravada Buddhism, but other
 faiths are not restricted. Religious publishing, regardless of faith, is allowed. For-
 eign clergy are permitted to preach freely, although there are limits on the number
 orforeign missionaries admitted.
 There are no restrictions on religious ceremonies or instruction, or on conversions
 from one faith to another, but members of minority religious movements have on
 occasion been subjected to legal action. One example of this has been the ongoing
 trials (begun in 1990) of dissident Buddhist leader Phra Potirak and his followers,
 who have been accused of violating the law governing the Buddhist ecclesiastical hi-
 erarchy and impersonating Buddhist monks or nuns. Phra Potirak and his followers
 remain free on bail and have continued their religious activities.
 Like other private associations, relipious groups are generally required to register
 with the Government. Since the 1970s, in an effort to limit the number of separate
 registrations by Christian denominations, the Government has required Christian
 church bodies to register with one of five umbrella groups. Fixed numbers of work
 permits for Muslim and Christian missionaries and religious workers are allocated
 to each umbrella group.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right of citizens to change their residence or workplace was un-
 abridged. Travel was restricted in certain border areas where foreign or vestigial do-
 mestic insurgent groups remain active. Longtanding restrictions on the travel and
 place of residence of certain Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand re-
 mained in place in 1993. In addition, some long-term noncitizen residents of Thai-
 land must seek permission from local authorities for domestic or international trav-
 el.
 Foreign travel by women may be restricted by a new regulation enacted by immi-
 gration authorities which requires women to list their marital status. The Govern-
 ment states the new regulation is intended to help reduce trafficking in women for
 purposes of prostitution. There is also a law dating to the last century that requires
 women to obtain their husbands' permission before traveling outside Thailand.
 Available evidence indicates this law is used only to combat trafficking in women
 for purposes of prostitution. An additional, often criticized requirement that female
 passport applicants under age 36 sit through a series of interviews regarding their
 employment records and finances remained intact. Passport applications by single
 Thai women and children under the age of 14 must also be approved by the Depart-
 ment of Public Welfare. These provisions are intended to prevent the export of chil-
 dren for sale and women for purposes of prostitution.
 The Government has not revoked citizenship for political reasons.
 While not a party to international conventions on the status of refugees, Thailand
 has acted impressively in the spirit of those agreements by providing first asylum
 to over 1 million people from Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since 1975.
 In May Thai police and soldiers removed 563 Cambodians from the Site 2 border
 camp and transported them to a U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
 reception center in Cambodia. The group had refused to join the UNHCR repatri-
 ation convoys that returned 370,000 Cambodians from camps in Thailand between
 April 1992 and April 1993. Although the return of the 563 was involuntary, they
 were not entitled to third country resettlement, and there is no evidence that exces-
 sive force was used.
 Thailand continued to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and Lao asylum seekers
 and to process them in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA)
 agreed to in Geneva in 1989. There were no reports of any pushoffs of Vietnamese
 asylum seekers in 1993.
 While there were unconfirmed reports of pushbacks of Lao asylum seekers by
 Thai government officials in 1993, Lao asylum seekers in Thailand continued to be
 screened under provisions of the CPA to determine their eligibility for refugee sta-
 tus. Thailand announced that all Lao camps are to be closed by 1995 and continued
 to cooperate with the UNHCR and Laos in a trilateral program to facilitate the vol-
 untary repatriation of certain Lao in Thailand.
 Official Thai policy since April 1, 1989, has designated Burmese asylum seekers
 in Thailand as illegal immigrants subject to deportation. However, senior Thai offi-
 cials stated on several occasions in 1993 that no Burmese recognized by the UNHCR
 
 
 743
 as a "person of concern" would be deported. In November 1992, the Government
 opened a first asylum camp in Ratchaburi province, commonly referred to as the
 "Safe Area, for Burmese dissidents residing in Bangkok. Residents of the Safe Area
 have regular access to UNHCR which has concluded that the conditions at the safe
 site meet broadly accepted international standards for the protection and welfare of
 asylum seekers. The camp provides legal status for eligible Burmese who have been
 subject to arrest and deportation as illegal immigrants. About 150 of the 738 Bur-
 mese explicitly authorized to live in the camp resided there by year's end. Despite
 threats of a crackdown, the majority of eligible Burmese refused to move to the
 camp. Some cited a fear of summary deportation, while others preferred the relative
 freedom of life in Bangkok. In September the UNHCR temporarily withdrew its con-
 tractor from the camp in response to acts of violence by a few residents against her
 and her property.
 Approximately 1.500 Burmese young people, students, and dissidents live in
 camps along the Thai-Burma border. By year's end, there were also about 73,000
 ethnic minority Burmese residing in some 30 camps in Thailand near the Burma
 border. In 1993 there were increasing reports that some of these camps served as
 support bases for combatant activities in Burma by ethnic insurgent groups against
 the Burmese military. On this basis, the Thai Government ordered the relocation
 of several camps to Burma. The Thai Government continued to permit voluntary
 agencies to provide food, medical, and sanitation assistance along the border. Thai-
 land also allowed the UNHCR greater access to Burmese border camps in Thailand.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The right of Thai citizens to criticize and peacefully alter their government in-
 creased in 1993. The democratically elected coalition Government was generally suc-
 cessful in its efforts to strengthen demgratic institutions. Although Thailand s his-
 tory has been marked by frequent military coups and powerful military-bureaucratic
 influence over political life, since th 'May 1992 violence the military's role in politics
 has significantly declined. The xpiltiparty elections held in September 1992 were
 widely deemed the most free awd fair in Thailand's history. Although future military
 intervention in politics canpot be ruled out, the coalition Government of Prime Min-
 ister Chuan is strongly-6mmitted to protecting democratic principles. Thailand's
 current military leadership appears genuinely supportive of the civilian government
 and of democracy.
 While there are no legal restrictions on political participation, women are gen-
 erally underrepresented in national politics and in high governmental positions.
 However, the number of women in local and national politics increased in 1993 as
 a result of more progressive government attitudes and the 1992 MOI decision to
 abolish reglations that banned women from serving as deputy district officers. In
 January the Cabinet approved Thailand's first female governor and deputy gov-
 ernor, and in March the first 13 women were appointed deputy district officers by
 the MOI's Department of Local Administration (DOLA). In May three more cat-
 egories of civi service positions were opened to women, and the first female police
 major general was named in August. As, in September, a woman was named dep-
 uty minister of public health-the first woman to be appointed to a Cabinet position
 by the current Government.
 Although there are no laws that prohibit p articipation of ethnic and religious mi-
 norities, these groups remain noticeably underrepresented in national politics. Eth-
 nic minorities in the north often lack documentation of Thai citizenship, effectively
 barring their participation in the political process. (See Section 5.)
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Htuman Rights
 Local human rights organizations, which operated without government restriction,
 were more visiblethan previously in their attempts to press the Government to insti-
 tutionalize democratic reforms. Local human rights organizations have been cred-
 ited with helping to bring about changes in laws concerning child prostitution, pub-
 licizing environmentally threatening development, and promoting the status of
 women. They also continued to pressure the Government to account for those still
 missing after the 1992 demonstrations.
 The Government took a more active role in human rights issues in 1993 and has
 generally received positive assessments from NGO's and other groups concerned
 with the protection of human rights.
 In February the Government allowed a group of seven Nobel Peace Prize Laure-
 ates, including the Dalai Lama and Bishop Desmond Tutu, to visit Thailand and
 advocat e    release of fellow Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, who has been under
 
 
 744
 house arrest in Burma since 1989. The decision to allow the Nobel Laureates to visit
 Thailand was significant as it reaffirmed the Government's commitment to human
 rights, even in the face of some military and civilian opposition.
 international human rights NGO's have worked freely in Thailand on potentially
 controversial and sensitive issues including AIDS, narcotics, and refueees. Although
 the Government often criticizes these groups for being politically motivated and bi.
 ased, it has not penalized or repressed human rights observers.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women generally have equal legal rights, with specific guarantees of
 equality with men in the areas of education, matrimonial property, the right to
 choose habitation and employment, and child custody. There has been a National
 Commission on Women's Affairs since 1991. Inequality remains in the area of do-
 mestic law. A man may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife has committed
 adultery, while a woman faces the additional legal burden of proving her husband
 has maintained or honored another woman in a manner equal to his wife. There
 are no laws in place to punish men who refuse to pay child support.
 Though no Thai law specifically addresses domestic violence, the Criminal Code's
 provisions on assault and abuse make both spousal and child abuse criminal of-
 fenaes. While reliable statistics are hard to come by, one NGO that counsels abused
 women states that in 1993, 175 cases of spousal abuse were reported. This NGO
 notes that between 1980 and 1993, there were an estimated 2,598 reports from bat-
 tered wives. NGO's concerned with these issues believe the number of abuse cases
 is rsing, and women's rights groups have set up counseling and shelters for victims.
 Although the Government denounces domestic violence, law enforcement has not
 been vigorous; physical abuse often goes unreported. There is no legal procedure to
 combat domestic violence short of criminal prosecution. Rules of evidence often
 make prosecuting such cases difficult, especially when the victims are children. Due
 to these reasons and ingrained cultural attitudes that permit spouse abuse, police
 are often reluctant to pursue these cases. Private women's and children's rights
 groups provide limited legal assistance to victims of abuse.
 Prostitution is acknowledged as one of the country's most pervasive and troubling
 social problems. Estimates of the numbers of women and children engaged in pros-
 titution vary widely. According to the Public Health Department, there are approxi-
 mately 75,000 prostitutes in Thailand. The large number of temporary sex workers
 and the migratory nature of prostitution in Thailand makes an accurate estimate
 of the number of women involved in the sex industry difficult. Several well-informed
 NGO groups estimate that the number of prostitutes at any given time ranges be-
 tween 200,000 and 500,000; other credible sources place the figure at close to a mil-
 lion. However, all NGO's generally discount the 75,000 figure reported by the Gov-
 ernment as grossly misleading.
 Women engage in prostitution typically come from poor rural areas, particularly
 from the north. With scant economic opportunities in their home villages, many turn
 to working as prostitutes in urban areas as a way of fulfilling familial obligations
 and improving the standard of living for themselves and their families. It is common
 for procurers to advance the parents of young women a substantial sum against
 their future earnings; the money frequently is used to pay off debts or to build a
 new house. The women are then obligated to work in a brothel for a fixed period
 of time in order to pay back the loan. No data are available on the number of
 women forced into prostitution against their will. Human rights monitors believe
 that the majority of the women who engage in prostitution are not kept under phys-
 ical constraint, although such cases exist, particularly with women lured into pros-
 titution from Burma.
 In order to combat the lure of prostitution, the Government in January set up a
 vocational training rehabilitation program to keep women and children from reen-
 tering the sex trade. The Government and NGOs also initiated efforts to educate
 women in rural areas about the dangers of prostitution.
 The trend of trafficking in women from hill tribes and neighboring countries con-
 tinued. Brothel operators reportedly favor such women because they are cheaper to
 buy and their inability to speak Thai makes them easier to control. In a widely pub-
 licized brothel raid in Ranong in July, 150 Burmese women were arrested by police
 as illegal immigrants and prostitutes. Many of the women claimed they were tricked
 into coming to Thailand by offers of employment. The women were kept locked in
 dormitory style rooms, and many complained they were physically abused by the
 brothel operators if they refused to work as prostitutes. Because they are considered
 illegal immigrants, the women have no right to legal counsel or health care while
 imprisoned. Women's rights groups lobbied the Government to allow them to pro-
 
 
 745
 vide basic health care to the women until they are deported back to Burma, but
 were denied access to the jail.
 There have also been a number of well-documented cases of local networks that
 "export" women for prostitution to such countries as Germany, Japan, and the Unit-
 ed States. Recent press reports publicized the return of 2,000 Thai prostitutes who
 had been working illegally in Japan. Recruiters reportedly receive $12,000 for each
 prostitute who successfully enters Japan, thereby making the export of women lu-
 crative for both the procurer and the women themselves, who can earn significantly
 more money abroad.
 Despite occasional high profile raids on brothels, laws against prostitution have
 not been effectively enforced. In many cases, brothels pay off local government rep-
 resentatives and police. One NGO has reported publicly that it knows of many in-
 stances where Thai police drove Burmese women into Thailand in police vehicles
 and delivered them directly to brothels. In the much publicized raid against broth-
 els, hundreds of prostitutes were arrested while very few brothel owners or police
 were arrested. Of these, only a small number were charged and even fewer pros-
 ecuted. There are currently four laws designed to combat adult and child prostitu-
 tion, but observers note that these laws are rarely enforced. Under the Penal Code,
 prostitutes are considered criminals, whereas brothel owners, procurers, and clients
 are not subject to criminal statutes. In September a Cabinet resolution was passed
 to begin drafting a revision of the antiprostitution laws to include customers, pro-
 curers, and brothel owners and to reduce punishments for the prostitutes them-
 selves. Poor legislation, police corruption, and ingrained cultural norms are widely
 blamed for the lack of effective measures against prostitution.
 Statistics compiled by NGO's concerned with women's issues note that women
 represent half of the economically active population; women outnumber men in non-
 farm enterprises. Women are also more likely to migrate to urban areas for employ-
 ment, and female workers dominate the primary export industries of textiles, shoe
 manufacture, food production, and tourism.
 The number of women in professional positions has increased, and government
 regulations require employers to fix the same wages and benefits for similar work
 regardless of sex. However, discrimination in the workplace continue to exist, and
 there is a significant gap between average salaries earned by men and women as
 a result of the concentration of women in traditionally lower payng jobs. In rural
 areas, sex stereotypes are more pronounced with regard to employment and social
 status bet even urban women face discrimination and negative stereotypes.
 NG6's concerned with the status of women became more active in 1993. Local
 NGO's have been credited with pressing the Government to abolish discriminatory
 practices within the civil service (see Section 3). Primarily privately financed and
 run, women's organizations focus on providing legal assistance, health care, and
 counseling for victims of abuse. These groups report that while they receive gen-
 erally positive feedback from the Government and other NGO's, they face difficulty
 in combating ingrained cultural stereotypes of women.
 Children.-Ther is widespread abuse of children in prostitution and child labor.
 The Government is committed to eliminating child prostitution, and the Cabinet
 passed a resolution in September to begin revision of the existing Criminal Code to
 include clients and procurers of child prostitution. As in the case of adult prostitu-
 tion, the current laws against prostitution have not been adequately enforced. Al-
 though NGO's have attempted to track the number of children involved in the sex
 industry, there are no accurate statistics. In the past few years, NGO's and govern-
 ment agencies have begun to counsel young people about the dangers of prostitution
 and the threat of AIDS.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 As in the case of domestic violence against women, police are often reluctant to pur-
 sue abuse cases, and rules of evidence makes prosecution of child abuse cases dif-
 ficult.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Progress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into Thai society has been limited. Only half of the estimated 500,000 to 700,000
 members of hill tribes are believed to possess documentation as Thai citizens, which
 prevents them from exercising their basic rights, including participation in the polit-
 ial process. Advocates consistently cite the difficulties faced by many hill tribe
 memers in obtaining Thai citizenship as the primary obstacle to their successful
 integration into society. The hill tribe population has higher incidences of disease,
 unemployment, drug abuse, and prostitution than other groups in Thailand.
 Vietnamese who entered Thailand prior to 1900 enjoy all the rights of ethnically
 Thai citizens. However, the approximately 45,000 Vietnamese who fled Indochina in
 the 1940's and 1950's and reside in northeastern Thailand live under a set of laws
 
 
 and regulations restricting their movements, residences, education, and occupations.
 As the threat to Thai national security declined, the Government has seen it in Thai
 interest to incorporate the Vietnamese population into Thai society. The Govern-
 ment has pursued a more lenient policy toward longtime Vietnamese residents in
 recent years and moved quickly to process naturalization applications of approxi-
 mately 30,000 third generation Vietnamese born in Thailand who became eligible
 for citizenship in 1992. Vietnamese residents must apply for permission to travel
 within Thailand or to study in the universities, but permission is usually granted.
 Noncitizen Chinese and their descendants who migrated to Thailand in the 1960's
 and live in border areas must seek permission from local authorities to travel.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent a significant minority within Thailand
 as a whole and constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces that bor-
 der Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integrate the Muslim
 community into Thai society through development efforts and expanded educational
 opportunities, recent violence in the south demonstrates that divisions remain. The
 southern provinces are not only separated by religion but by language and culture
 as well. Discrimination against Muslims is widespread. There are no de jure restric-
 tions on Muslim participation in the political process and several Muslims hold pow-
 erful positions within the Government. However, Muslims remain underrepresented
 in postsecondary education and consequently in many professions.
 Following a spate of arson attacks and other violence in southern Thailand in Au-
 gust 1993, security forces arrested and charged four Muslim suspects believed to be
 supporters of the separatist PULO. The trial of the first suspect arrested has begun,
 but could take several years as over 40 prosecution witnesses are scheduled to take
 the stand. The Government has been criticized by some Muslims for its decision to
 try the suspects in Bangkok in order to protect witnesses from being intimidated.
 In the wake of the violence army troops have engaged PULO fighters in occasional
 skirmishes which have produced minimal casualties on both sides.
 People with Disabilities.-Since the disabled rehabilitation bill was approved by
 Parliament in 1991, the Government has taken few steps to implement the bill's
 provisions. The bill established a quota system and employer incentives for hiring
 the disabled but did not include provisions for special education or training in the
 workplace. Where are no laws or regulations mandating access for disabled persons.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Labor Relations Act of 1975 as amended in
 1991, grants freedom of association only to private sector workers. he 1975 Act ex-
 tends to these workers the right to form and join unions of their own choosing with-
 out prior authorization; to decide on the constitutions and rules of these associations
 and unions; to express their views without government or employer interference; to
 confederate with other unions; to receive protection from discrimination, dissolution,
 suspension, or termination by any outside authority because of union activities; and
 to have employee representation in direct negotiations with employers. However, no
 law explicitly protects workers from discrimination due to their participation in or-
 ganizing new unions which have not yet been officially registered. There are wide-
 spread reports that workers seeking to organize unions face discrimination from em-
 ployers. The 1975 Act specifically withheld from government workers the right to
 form unions. Nonetheless, civil servants may and do form "employee associations,"
 which are influential in determining salary scales, benefits, and conditions of em-
 ployment.
 Since the advent of the democratically elected Chuan Government, the labor envi-
 ronment has improved. On September 23 a new Ministry of Labor was created to
 take over functions which were previously the responsibility of the Ministry of Inte-
 rior, reflecting a change from the traditional tendency in the Government to view
 organized labor as a security problem. In 1993 the Government also passed laws
 which improved maternity and overtime benefits for state enterprise workers.
 In April 1991, the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly amended the
 1975 Act to exclude state enterprise workers, who represented half of organized
 labor in Thailand, and enacted a new State Enterprise Labor Flelations Act
 (SELRA), which dissolved all unions in this sector. In place of unions, workers in
 each state enterprise could form a single "association" after at least 30 percent of
 the enterprise's employees submitted a petition to the Department of Labor to reg-
 ister such association. These associations may submit employee grievances to man-
 agement and propose changes in benefits and working conditions, but may not nego-
 tiate wages. Associations  not have the right to confederate or to join private sec-
 tor federations. Unofficial contacts between public and private sector unions have
 continued, however, and the democratically elected Government that took office late
 in 1992 has not interfered with these relationships. A number of associations have
 
 
 747
 maintained affiliations their predecessor unions had with international labor organi-
 zations.
 The SELRA, like the 1975 Act, denies all state enterprise workers the right to
 strike. In the past, public sector unions circumvented this prohibition by holding
 "extraordinary meetings" which took workers off the job for days at a time. The
 SELRA requires associations to hold general meetings only on weekends and holi-
 days, with severe sanctions for holding unauthorized meetings during work hours.
 Also, under Announcement 54 nf 1991, bth management and labor must select out-
 side advisers from those who have been certified by the Ministry of Labor as having
 the requisite qualifications. The ministry offers training courses for those not fully
 qualified on the basis of prior experience. Advisers canbe removed for violations of
 the government-established standards. Labor leaders maintain that government in-
 volvement in the selection of labor advisers weakens their ability to organize and
 to bargain collectively. Seven labor leaders from the state enterprises have been cer-
 tified as labor advisers, out of a total of 600. However, many state enterprise labor
 leaders refuse to apply to become labor advisers, believing that to do so would lend
 credibility to a system which they do not want to support. Announcement 54 also
 requires that a proposed strike in the private sector be approved by a majority of
 the union members in a secret ballot.
 In November 1991, the International Labor Organization (ILO) strongly criticized
 the SELRA. The ILO faulted it for dissolving unions, transferring their assets, limit-
 ing the number of associations which may be formed in each state enterprise, set-
 ting unusually high minimum membership requirements for associations, denying
 associations the right to affiliate with private sector unions, and completely forbid-
 ding strikes in state enterprises. Enforcement of these restrictions, like enforcement
 of laws generally, is less than complete. The ILO continues to request that the Gov-
 ernment rescind the law. The Chuan Government proposes to replace the SELRA
 with a new version of the law which effectively restores the rights enjoyed by state
 enterprise workers prior to the promulgation of the SELRA. The proposed law has
 been endorsed by state enterprise labor leaders. It has been approved by the Cabi-
 net and by the Juridical Council, but the last parliamentary session in 1993 ended
 before the legislature could consider the bill. The Government has said the new
 SELRA will be a priority agenda item when the parliament reconvenes in May 1994.
 With respect to the private sector, under the 1975 Act the Government has the
 authority to restrict the right to strike whenever a strike would affect national se-
 curity or cause severe negative reperussions for the population at large." The Gov-
 ernment seldom invokes this prvision and did not do so in 1993. However, local
 enforcement officers often threaten to use this provision when dealing with strikes
 in progrss. Thai labor law also forbids strikes in essentil 1services," defined much
 more broadly than the ILO standard. No strikes were disapproved on those grounds
 in 1993.
 Labor unrest has been relatively minimal since a period of social upheaval in the
 mid-1970's. Because of the red tape involved in getting government approval for a
 work stoppage and the lack of understanding of proea or procedures on the part
 of many union leaders, the number of approved strikes has averaged fewer than 10
 annually for the past 15 years-there were 7 in the first 6 months of 1993. Unau-
 thorizedstrikes are far more numerous, with 103 occurring from January to June.
 In these work stoppages (deemed "unauthorized" because the law's procedures had
 not been followed) management often ends up making some of the concessions de-
 manded by workers. However, gains from such strikes are frequently won only at
 the cost of excessive acrimony (by Thai standards) which could be avoided by a more
 effective bargaining process. There were also seven lockouts in 1993. In two of these
 instances, the Ministry of Labor determined that management had not bargained
 in good faith, as required by the 1975 labor law, so as to justify the lockout.
 Almost 60 percent of the work force is employed in the largely unorganized agri-
 cultural sector. Even before the dissolution of state enterprise unions, less than 3
 percent of the total work force, or about 12 percent of the industrial work force, was
 unionized. Factors discouraging the growth of organized labor are the antiunion sen-
 timent and paternalistic approach of employers, the Thai preference to avoid con-
 frontation, and a provision of Thai labor law permitting the formation of private sec-
 tor labor unions with as few as 10 members. This provision has resulted in a pro-
 liferation of small, weak unions-about 700-grouped into 7 national federations. It
 also helped to create a type of labor hustlers who formed small unions and threat-
 ened strikes in order to extract payoffs.
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 disappearance of leading
 labor activist Thanong Podhiarn remains unsolved. There are often reports of in-
 timidation of union leaders by management. In one highly publicized case, the man-
 agement at the Thai Durable Textile Company announced a layoff of 376 workers
 
 
 748
 to pave the way for increased productivity. Those to be laid off included the senior
 local union management. The Government intervened on behalf of the workers, and
 the Interior Minister threatened to invoke the law and order the company to rein-
 state the workers. The company then agreed to offer a relatively generous severance
 package to all workers to stimulate voluntary departures. More than 500 took the
 offer. However, six union leaders whom the company insisted on dismissing at year's
 end were still fighting in the labor court to keep their jobs.
 Although there is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were ex-
 ploited by the military, politicians, or empoyers for their own purposes, private
 unions generally operate independently of the Government and other outside organi-
 zations. The 1975 Act encourages this policy by exempting union officials from pros-
 ecution in pursuing the interest of their followers "provided that the activity does
 not involve politics." Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade
 union organzations and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized for Thai private sector workers under the 1975
 Act, which defined the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-as-
 sisted conciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. Despite the law, genuine
 collective bargaining probably occurs only in 10 to 20 percent of workplaces which
 are unionized. In practice, bargaining in most instances continues to be character-
 ized by traditional paternalistic attitudes on the part of employers and a lack of
 education on labor organization and/or willingness to be assertive on the part of
 workers. Under the SELRA, state enterprise employees may propose changes in
 working conditions, but not wages to a government-dominated labor relations com-
 mittee in each state enterprise. The ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association,
 however, questions whether true collective bargaining takes place within the labor
 relations committees established by SELRA, since their proposals require approval
 by the relevant ministry and enterprise.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labor law for the private sector. However, when courts determine that a
 worker has been unjustly dismissed, they usually order severance pay compensation
 rather than reinstatement. Workers may also seek redress for their grievances from
 a tripartite Labor Relations Committee.
 The SELRA has no explicit provision allowing state enterprise employees to ap-
 peal to the labor courts. Instead, they may apply to an overall State Enterprise
 Labor Relations Committee. Though no precise records are kept of the determina-
 tions of the State Enterprise Labor Relations Committee, it typically hears two or
 three cases a month and labor leaders have not indicated dissatisfaction with the
 treatment their concerns have received in this forum.
 There are several special export processing zones (EPZ's) in Thailand, with many
 more planned to stimulate the growth of export-oriented industry. No separate labor
 legislation a pplies to EPZ's, where wages and working conditions in fact usually ex-
 ceed national norms. There are some trade unions and a few collective bargaining
 agreements in EPZ's.
 In August 1993, the Government, for the first time intervened to force resolution
 of a case where a private company was refusing to bargain in good faith. Workers
 at the Thai Pattraporn Company had been legally on strike for 10 months when the
 Government called on both sides to reopen the factory, prompting an illega lockout.
 The Minister of Interior invoked Article 35 of the Labor Act of 1975, which forced
 the Thai Pattraporn Company to end the lockout. After reopening for a time in ac-
 cordance with the Government's order, the company chose to close permanently
 rather than submit to arbitration.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor except in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law.
 The ILO has criticized provisions of legislation which in theory could punish with
 imprisonment or forced labor acts of labor indiscipline, participation in illegal
 strikes, or propagation of Communist ideology. At the request of the Government,
 an ILO direct contacts mission went to Thailand in September to investigate.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for em-
 ployment is 13. The law permits the employment of children between the ages of
 13 and 15 only in "light work." The employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6
 a.m.) is prohibited. The Government has estimated that there are 100,000 children
 between the ages of 13 and 15 in the labor force, but the actual number is probably
 much greater. Stated government policy is to increase the minimum age to 14 by
 the end of the Seventh National Economic Plan in 1996, with an expectation to raise
 the minimum to 15, the ILO standard, by the end of the Eighth Plan in 2001. The
 Government has initiated a teacher training and school construction program, that
 
 
 when completed, will allow it to increase the number of years of compulsory edu-
 cation from 6 to 9.
 Child labor continued to cause considerable domestic and foreign criticism in
 1993. The Chuan Government has committed itself to enforce the existing child
 labor laws. In June 1993, the ILO, which in 1991 issued a "special paragraph"
 against Thailand welcomed the Government's commitment to eliminate exploitation
 and illegal use of existing child labor but stressed that much more needs to be done.
 In 1992 the Department of Labor more than doubled the number of inspectors
 specifically responsible for child labor issues. In addition, the number of general
 labor inspectors increased from 500 to 618 in 1993. Prosecutions against employers
 for illegal child labor rose from 7 in 1991 to 29 in 1992 to 34 in the first 8 months
 of 1993. As of December, 22 violators had been fined and two had been jailed. None-
 theless, police raids continued to find children under age 13 working illegally and
 others employed in dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise harmful circumstances. En-
 foreement of child labor laws remained inadequate. There are no export industries
 in which child labor is significant.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gov-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives in 1993 again increased the daily
 legal minimum wage. Minimum wage rates now vary between $4 and $5 per day
 (100 to 125 Baht) depending on the cost of living in different provinces. The wage
 is not adequate to support a worker and his family, but as the Thai often live in
 extended families with financial contributions from several members, often includ-
 ing single members working away from home and sending a portion of their wages
 back, the minimum wage provides the basis for a marginally adequate standard of
 living overall. Unskilled migrant workers who pour into Bangkok from the poorer
 countryside often work at less than the minimum wage, as do many in the agricul-
 tural sector. The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire
 labor force. Commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week, employ-
 ees in industry 48, and those in "dangerous" work such as in the chemical, petro-
 leum, mining or other industries involving heavy machinery 42. Transportation
 workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement of these stand-
 ards is spotty.
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. In medium and large-size factories,
 government health and safety standards are often maintained. However, in May
 1993 fire broke out at the Kader Toy Factory near Bangkok and nearly 200 workers
 lost their lives in the worst factory fire in Thai history. The majority of those who
 died were women, many of whom had brought with them their children who also
 perished. The tragedy was a vivid reminder of the lax enforcement of salety stand-
 ards that continues to be all too common even in large enterprises. As of December,
 the Government was pursuing actions against the company owners in the courts.
 Thailand's large informal sector is subject to even less effective inspection. Employ-
 ers are able to ignore safety regulations in part because workers do not have access
 to safety and health standards and are thus unable to report violations.
