Thailand
The end of a military-installed administration has not led to the restoration of
rights and democracy in Thailand. Within months of general elections in
December 2007 and formation of a new civilian government in January 2008,
political polarization between pro- and anti-government groups led to protracted
protests and occasional deadly clashes; media freedom and freedom of expression
were undermined by harassment and interference from both the government
and anti-government groups.
In the southern border provinces, Thai security forces continue to engage in extrajudicial
killings and torture. Insurgent groups continue their brutal and deadly
attacks on civilians.
New “War on Drugs”
During the inaugural presentation of government policy to the parliament on
February 20, 2008, then interior minister Chalerm Yubamrung announced that a
new “war on drugs”—similar to that carried out in 2003 by the government of
Thaksin Shinawatra—would be launched. Chalerm vowed that, “if this will lead to
3,000-4,000 deaths of those who break the law, then so be it.” Although the
campaign was scrapped due to strong domestic and international opposition, the
government showed no interest in reopening investigations into the 2,819 extrajudicial
killings that allegedly accompanied the 2003 campaign. On November 7,
2008, Prime Minister Somchai Wongsawat announced a new anti-drug campaign.
The government failed to end systematic police brutality and abuse of power in
drug suppression operations. For example, Police Captain Nat Chonnithiwanit and
seven other members of the 41st Border Patrol Police (BPP) unit allegedly abducted
and tortured more than 60 people over a three-year period in order to extort
money and force them to confess to drug offenses. Despite the much publicized
arrest of a BPP member on January 25, 2008, little progress has been made to
bring perpetrators to justice.
People’s Alliance for Democracy
Starting on May 25, 2008, the People’s Alliance for Democracy (PAD) staged protracted
protests in Bangkok and other cities to express opposition to the government.
Labeling Prime Minister Samak and his successor, Somchai Wongsawat
(former prime minister Thaksin’s brother-in-law), as surrogates for Thaksin, the
PAD accused the government of corruption, abuse of power, and being unpatriotic.
Protesters blocked roads and traffic in the capital, in some cases for months at
a time. Pro-government groups often violently attacked PAD rallies while police
stood by.
On August 26, PAD protesters besieged many government buildings in Bangkok,
including the National Broadcasting of Thailand (NBT) building and Government
House, where the prime minister and cabinet members have their offices. The
government obtained injunctions and arrest warrants from the courts against PAD
leaders, but could not end the siege of Government House. After clashes between
police and PAD protesters on August 29, the PAD closed international airports in
Thailand’s southern provinces and imposed worker strikes on train services
across the country.
Violence escalated when the pro-government Democratic Alliance against
Dictatorship (DAAD) engaged in street fighting with the PAD on September 2,
resulting in one death and more than 40 injuries. Prime Minister Samak declared
a state of emergency in Bangkok, but army chief General Anupong Paochinda
refused to use the emergency powers to crack down on the PAD and suppress
basic freedoms. After Samak was removed from office by the Constitutional
Court—the court ruled he had violated the constitution by accepting payment for
appearances on a cooking show—the new prime minister, Somchai Wongsawat,
approved General Anupong’s proposal to lift the state of emergency on
September 9.
On October 7, thousands of PAD protesters surrounded the parliament in an
attempt to block Prime Minister Somchai from delivering a policy statement. To
clear the area, police riot units and BPP units used tear gas and rubber bullets, in
some cases firing tear gas from close range directly at the protesters. PAD protesters
responded by firing guns, shooting slingshots, throwing bricks and metal pipes, trying to run over police officers with pickup trucks, and stabbing police
with flagpoles. According to the Public Health Ministry, two PAD supporters died
and 443 were injured, including four cases of amputation. About 20 police were
injured.
On October 13, Thailand’s National Human Rights Commission concluded that
Chinese-made tear gas canisters and grenades used by police on October 7 may
have caused many of the deaths and severe injuries.
To date, there has been no independent and impartial investigation into politically
motivated violence and human rights abuses committed by the PAD.
At this writing, the PAD was still occupying Government House. PAD leaders were
demanding that the military have the right to intervene in politics to check corruption
and to protect the monarchy and national sovereignty. They also were proposing
that the number of elected MPs be reduced to 50 percent of the total—
with the remainder filled through appointment.
Freedom of Expression and Media Freedom
The government has continued to interfere in the media. A news talk radio program
hosted by former senator Jermsak Pinthong was taken off the air on
February 13, 2008, after he claimed that Prime Minister Samak distorted the truth
about a massacre of students at Thammasat University on October 6, 1976. On
April 19, Jakrapob Penkair—who was then in charge of the government’s Public
Relations Department—ordered some 500 community radio operators to allocate
three hours a day to promote the government or risk closure.
Prime Minister Samak attempted to use the NBT broadcast to counter daily
attacks by PAD-controlled media outlets, ASTV, and Manager Radio. On July 21,
the time slot for the political talk show “Page Four News” on NBT TV Channel 11
was reassigned to commentators affiliated with the ruling People’s Power Party
(PPP) to host a pro-government program called “Truth Today.”
The PAD’s protests included criminal violence against the media. On August 26,
armed PAD protesters stormed into NBT headquarters and attempted to stop the
broadcast of NBT television and radio stations. On that day, PAD protesters harassed NBT reporters and staff at Government House and chased them out of
their mobile broadcast trucks.
Pro-government groups also have harassed the media. On November 3, about
200 red-clad members of the Love Chiang Mai 51 Group stormed into the regional
office of the Thai Public Broadcasting Service in Chiang Mai province. They cut
open the fence and blocked the building’s entrance with tents, threatening to cut
electricity and water supplies after TPBS reported that members of the Love
Chiang Mai 51 Group were paid 2,000 baht (about US$57) each to join the progovernment
rally in Bangkok organized by the pro-government DADD on
November 1.
The PAD, the opposition Democrat Party, and senior military officers have actively
advocated the arbitrary use of lese majeste (insulting the monarchy) charges
against supporters of the government. Jakrapob had to resign from office on May
30 after he was charged with lese majeste for a speech at the Foreign
Correspondent’s Club about the patronage system. On July 22, government supporter
Daranee Charnchoengsilpakul was arrested for allegedly insulting the
monarchy in her speech at a DAAD rally. In 2008 authorities also closed down
more than 400 websites after accusing them of promoting anti-monarchy sentiments.
Thai authorities have warned the vibrant international media in Thailand not to
comment on the role of the monarchy. Jonathan Head—a Bangkok-based reporter
for the BBC—faced a criminal investigation for allegedly making anti-monarchy
comments in his stories.
Violence and Abuses in the Southern Border Provinces
Attacks on civilians by both Thai security forces and armed separatist groups in
Thailand’s southern border provinces continued in 2008. Soldiers from the
Army’s 39th Taskforce in Rue Soh district of Narathiwat province were implicated
in the highly publicized torture and murder of imam Yapa Kaseng on March 21. On
June 21, armed insurgents stormed a passenger train in Ra Ngae district and executed
a Buddhist Thai train police officer and three Buddhist train workers. Car
bombs were used in a March 15 attack on CS Pattani Hotel in Pattani province and an August 21 attack in Su Ngai Kolok district of Narathiwat province. Some insurgents
aimed to spread terror among the Buddhist Thai population, most notably
by beheading victims or setting their bodies on fire. Insurgents burned down government
schools and continued to engage in roadside ambushes and targeted
assassinations of teachers and students.
Although the government and General Anupong vowed to deliver justice to the
ethnic Malay Muslim population, Thai security forces still faced little or no consequences
for extrajudicial killings, torture, and arbitrary arrests of suspected insurgents.
After a sharp decline in 2007, new cases of enforced disappearances
emerged again in 2008.
Refugees and Migrant Workers
The international law prohibition against refoulement—returning refugees to any
country where they are likely to be persecuted or their lives put at risk—continued
to be breached in 2008, as ethnic Karen refugees and asylum seekers were
deported to Burma. Similarly, Lao Hmong seeking asylum in Petchabun province
were rounded up from camps and sent back to Laos.
Thailand hosted the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Labor
Ministerial Meeting in May 2008, but migrant workers remain largely unprotected
by Thai labor laws. They continue to be vulnerable to arrest and extortion by corrupt
officials, and risk exploitation, abuse, and death. On April 10, 54 Burmese
migrants died of suffocation in an unventilated truck while being smuggled to
work in Ranong province. Decrees in Ranong, Rayong, and Phang Nga provinces
have made it unlawful for migrants to go out at night, carry mobile phones, and
ride motorcycles.
Human Rights Defenders
There has been little progress in official investigations into the cases of 20
human rights defenders killed during the Thaksin administration. This includes
the “disappearance” and presumed murder of well-known Muslim lawyer
Somchai Neelapaijit.
Thai authorities have threatened to revoke the registration of international NGOs
in order to deter them from speaking up about government abuses in southern
border provinces.
Key International Actors
Thailand assumed the rotating chairmanship of the ASEAN in 2008, but has yet to
ratify the ASEAN charter. Thailand’s efforts to set the terms of reference for the
ASEAN human rights mechanism have been discredited by its poor human rights
record and close alliance with military rulers in Burma. Prime Minister Somchai
used the October ASEAN-Europe Meeting in Beijing to launch a diplomatic campaign
to support the Burmese military government, asserting that lifting economic
sanctions and supporting government-led development is the best path to
democratization in Burma.
The United States and other western governments resumed normal relations with
Thailand after an elected government came to power in 2008. The US used its
strong bilateral relationship with Thailand to raise human rights concerns regarding
the political confrontation in Bangkok and violence in Thailand’s southern
border provinces.
Together with the United Kingdom, Australia, and the European Union, the US
sought to promote the restoration of democracy in Thailand and expressed strong
opposition to attempts by conflicting political factions to incite a military coup
and suppress civil liberties.