 THAILAND
 Thailand has a constitutional monarchy with a strong executive
 branch and a considerably weaker legislature composed of a
 324-member elected lower house and a 243-member appointed
 Senate. The Prime Minister and members of his cabinet are
 subject to parliamentary confirmation and votes of confidence,
 although they themselves need not be elected. The current
 Prime Minister, retired General Prem Tinsulanon, has held
 office since February 1980. Following national elections in
 April 1983, he formed a four-party coalition government
 supported by roughly two-thirds of the newly elected lower
 house. Historically, the military has played a strong role in
 Thai political life and continues to do so.
 Thailand is a middle-income developing country with a free
 enterprise economic system in which individual economic
 interests and the right to hold private property are strongly
 protected. The large agrarian sector of the economy has made
 it one of the world's few net food exporters. In recent years,
 however, the industrial sector has expanded rapidly.  Industry
 now rivals agriculture as the leading sector of the economy as
 measured in the gross domestic product. The country has
 maintained an annual real growth rate in the seven percent
 range for the past two decades, has cut its population growth
 rate to 1.9 percent, and continues to expand its economic
 infrastructure and social services. There are still problems,
 however, of income disparities between urban and rural areas
 and of chronic underemployment, particularly in the poorer
 rural areas.
 Thailand's security apparatus includes numerous police,
 civilian, and military agencies, often with overlapping
 jurisdictions and ill-defined powers, particularly in the rural
 areas. Human rights abuses attributable to the security
 services have been reduced in recent years, and human rights
 groups have noted improved government control over paramilitary
 forces used to fight communist insurgency, particularly in
 border areas.
 Communist insurgents, Muslim separatists, and criminal gangs in
 rural areas at times resort to terrorism. Communist insurgents
 mount occasional attacks on government installations and
 civilians. In the past four years communist strength has
 declined markedly, however, because of internal Communist Party
 strife, reduced support from abroad, and government programs,
 using persuasion more than force, which have included an
 amnesty for defectors and financial assistance to help them
 reintegrate into Thai society.
 Thailand continued throughout 1983 to offer sanctuary and
 assistance to Indochinese refugees. As of December 1983, there
 were approximately 140,000 refugees from Laos, Vietnam, and
 Kampuchea in camps in Thai territory, the lowest number since
 March of 1979. In addition, almost 230,000 displaced Khmer
 live in camps along the Kampuchean border. The Thai government
 provided temporary refuge when several of these border
 encampments were attacked by Vietnamese military forces in 1983.
 Muslim separatists in 1983 continued their violent activities
 in provinces along the Malaysian border. While language and
 cultural barriers disadvantage the ethnic Malay Muslim minority
 in South Thailand, there is no official policy of
 discrimination. Muslims living in the four southern provinces
 which have a majority Muslim population have the right to have
 civil law cases decided by Muslim judges under Koranic law.
 
 (fti)
 
 
 884
 The Government has reserved a certain number of university
 seats for Muslim students and has committed extensive personnel
 and financial resources to improve the education of Muslim
 youth to make them better able to compete in the economic life
 of the country. The Government is also helping to preserve
 Muslim traditions, for instance by assisting in the building of
 mosques. To coordinate efforts to assist Thailand's Muslim
 community, the Government established in 1983 a national
 foundation for Muslim affairs with representatives from various
 government agencies. There is freedom of religion in Thailand
 in both law and practice.
 Notwithstanding the security threat from Indochina, and
 insurgency within Thailand, the percentage of the government
 budget dedicated to development remains high. Of particular
 importance is the national drive to eliminate health
 disparities among regions and between the urban and rural
 sectors. Continued attention is being paid to family planning
 and to improving the lot of the urban poor and of women.
 During 1983 there were further improvements in human rights.
 The press is free, political gatherings and association are
 allowed, and freedom from arbitrary detention or search is
 generally safeguarded, notwithstanding some restrictive laws
 still on the books. Human rights activists in Thailand are
 able to bring issues to the attention of the public and lobby
 for corrective action. Thailand's parliamentary democracy is
 gradually evolving under the terms of the 1978 Constitution,
 which provided for an increase in the elected lower House's
 power at the expense of the upper House. The overall human
 rights climate was furthered by the free and genuinely
 competitive national elections in April 1983 after prolonged,
 open political discussion.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Arbitrary deprivation of life is not an instrument of
 government policy and there are no reports of arbitrary
 killings by members of the security forces. In rural areas,
 communist insurgents and ethnic separatists use violence,
 including murder, against low-level government officials,
 security officials, and businessmen.
 In past years the local press has noted the large number of
 journalists killed in rural areas. That issue subsequently
 caught the attention of both local human rights interest groups
 and Sigma Delta Chi, the US-based fraternity of journalists.
 There has not been any suggestion, however, that the murders
 were political in nature. In the past year violent attacks on
 journalists have become less frequent and local human rights
 activists regard the situation as improved. Nonetheless, they
 intend to nudge the Government to continue to examine further
 the circumstances surrounding the journalists' deaths in 1982
 and 1983. Accordingly, Thai human rights activists drew
 attention to the journalists' deaths by submitting a report on
 the attacks at the recent meeting of the Asian Confederation of
 Journalists. The human rights aspect of this problem is
 difficult to assess. Some Thai journalists have in fact only a
 nominal attachment to the journalistic profession, and have
 
 
 885
 become involved in extortion, blackmail, and similar activities
 which can lead their victims to use violence as a means of
 retaliation.
 b. Disappearance
 Local human rights groups have alleged the existence of police
 department "death squads" which are said to eliminate habitual
 criminals in the rural areas. They claimed that such squads
 may have been responsible for the disappearances of 43
 community leaders, politicians, and journalists in recent
 years. These allegations, however, remain unsubstantiated and
 have received little attention in the press which often plays
 up crime reports. The alleged incidents have been scattered,
 occurring mainly in rural areas where a high level of criminal
 violence exists. There is no evidence that the government
 sponsors or condones police department death squads, if such
 exist. In December, 1982 local human rights groups sent an
 open letter to Prime Minister Prem asking that he investigate
 these allegations. The Government has accepted responsibility
 for a reexamination of these cases by keeping open its files on
 these 43 cases, all of which remain unsolved. There is no
 evidence that these individuals are under detention, and they
 are presumed to be dead, although this has not been confirmed.
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists have also caused
 the disappearance of civilians and government officials, who
 presumably were murdered.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is not used as an instrument of government policy.
 Allegations of torture have been made in the past by the
 Coordinating Group for Religion in Society and by other Thai
 human rights groups, but there have been no new, substantiated
 allegations in the past two years.
 Although the Thai Government has stated its opposition to the
 use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment, the Group, in
 its periodic reports, has cited alleged cases of brutality and
 mistreatment by police and military personnel and asserted that
 those involved go unpunished. The majority of such cases is
 reported to occur in rural areas. According to human rights
 activists in Thailand, cruel and inhuman punishment or
 treatment and arbitrary arrest and imprisonment have declined
 steadily in recent years.
 Prison conditions in Thailand are poor as a consequence of
 serious overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and the use of harmful drugs by prisoners.
 Prisoners are subject to strict regulations including corporal
 punishment for infractions.
 A general amnesty in 1982 reduced the nation's prison
 population considerably, but the number of of prisoners has
 subsequently risen to the pre-amnesty level. Over 70,000
 remain in jail, occupying cells designed to hold about half
 that number. Prison conditions vary with the prisoner's social
 status and affluence and with the nature of his offense. In
 rural areas there are allegations that detainees, who have not
 been formally charged, are used as unpaid or underpaid labor.
 Westerners generally receive preferential treatment.
 
 
 886
 Civil rights groups continue to draw attention to the plight of
 30-40 illegal aliens who have been detained for periods of up
 to 20 years. These inmates are the last of some 213 persons
 who entered Thailand illegally, subsequently were convicted of
 crimes, and were ordered deported. Since their respective
 countries of origin refused to accept them back, they have
 remained in detention. In December 1980, most of them were
 released. Those few still detained lack documentation and
 sponsors, and the Thai authorities have not processed their
 cases further.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Warrants are required for most arrests, and specific charges
 must be brought within a limited time period against those who
 are detained.
 An unknown number of Communist insurgents and Muslim
 separatists have been detained without trial under martial law
 provisions. Otherwise, the only legal basis for arrest and
 imprisonment without specific charges is the Anti-Communist
 Act. The Government is considering repealing this, however,
 since it is rarely used now that the communist insurgency has
 declined. Amnesty International, in its 1983 report, commented
 that in 1982 it had urged the Government to review the act
 under which persons accused of Communist activities could be
 detained for up to 480 days and could be denied access to
 lawyers and relatives. The number of persons held under this
 act is small and concentrated in southern Thailand where
 insurgents are most numerous. According to local human rights
 groups, these detainees have not been mistreated. Summary
 exile is not practiced. There have been allegations that
 communists have been clandestinely imprisoned in rural areas in
 years past, but no new cases have been reported.
 e. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees Thai citizens the presumption of
 innocence and access to courts or administrative bodies.
 Suspects, however, can be denied the right to legal counsel
 during the pretrial or investigative period but have access to
 a lawyer of their choosing once a trial is scheduled. There is
 a functioning bail system.
 A criminal code amendment, which was passed by the lower House
 but not by the Senate, would significantly advance the rights
 of defendants. It would provide for confidential legal counsel
 for suspects during the investigative phase, permission for
 visitors during this period, and the right to contest
 extensions of the pre-trial period of detention.
 The Thai have an evidentiary legal system although not a jury
 system. Cases are heard on the basis of specific--usually well
 documented--charges. Military courts have jurisdiction over
 cases involving national security, Thai relations with other
 nations, and offenses against the Royal Family.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights including the right to counsel. A
 military court verdict cannot be appealed, although a civilian
 court decision can be. Both systems allow for a royal pardon.
 The courts are independent from external pressures. There have
 been, however, allegations of both governmental and
 non-governmental influence being brought to bear on some cases,
 usually those involving narcotics offenses.
 
 
 887
 There are no reports of persons imprisoned during 1983 for
 political beliefs.
 Thai human rights activists have expressed concern for
 approximately 100 prisoners who were sentenced to jail without
 trial or access to counsel under the laws in force during the
 period from 1975 to 1978. Thailand's justice minister reported
 in October 1982 that a special committee under his chairmanship
 was continuing its case-by-case review of those cases.
 A pilot government program to provide free legal advice to the
 poor is now in operation. Most free legal aid, however, comes
 from private organizations including the Lawyers' Association
 and the Women's Lawyers' Association.
 The court and investigatory apparatus in the Bangkok area has
 been overburdened in recent years. As a consequence, the time
 required for criminal trials has at times exceeded three years
 in the courts of first instance. Defendants acquitted after
 such lengthy trials receive no compensation for time spent in
 pre-trial detention.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is an open one where membership in political
 organizations is voluntary, where the police do not intrude
 into persons' privacy for security purposes, and where the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas is permitted. Thai law requires
 that police possess a search warrant prior to entering an
 owner's home without his consent. There have been allegations
 that judicial or administrative officers endorse warrants in
 advance and then allow their subordinates, non-commissioned
 officials, to apply them as needed. Sections of the
 Anti-Communist Act allow officals involved in specific
 Communist suppression operations to conduct searches without
 warrants, but these powers appear to have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution affirms the right to free speech and a free
 press. The only restrictions on these freedoms are statutory
 prohibitions against insulting the monarchy or advocating a
 Communist system of government. In practice, Thai citizens
 enjoy substantial freedom of speech, and there is frequent
 criticism of government policies. International publications
 circulate freely in Thailand, as does a wide range of political
 and social commentary in the privately owned Thai press.
 Technical publications, and pamphlets, including those of
 academics, circulate freely, and present viewpoints ranging
 from the non-Communist left to ultra right wing. Foreign and
 domestic books are not censored except in rare instances where
 publications are critical of the Royal Family or Thailand's
 monarchy as an institution.
 Television stations are owned by various Government agencies
 but present a range of viewpoints. The Government, however,
 regulates television coverage of international news, requiring
 that news received via satellite be prescreened. Radio
 stations, both private and Government operated, present a
 variety of viewpoints including political criticism. The press
 continues to operate under the restrictions imposed by the
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 57
 
 
 888
 Press Law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law orders which
 permit the Government to close newspapers and revoke the
 licenses of editors of newspapers which publish stories deemed
 to be libelous or contrary to national security interests.
 Alternative statutes have been proposed and are now under
 parliamentary and ministerial study. The Government now rarely
 uses its statutory power over the press, although awareness of
 this power apparently restrains the press to a limited extent.
 Continuing a favorable trend, in 1983 only one national
 publication, a small circulation weekly called Thailand, was
 closed. The authorities judged a number of its articles to be
 inaccurate and detrimental to public order and hence contrary
 to national security interests. The journal's close
 association with members of a military faction which attempted
 a coup against the Government in 1981 and its criticism of
 certain Thai military figures probably led to the Government's
 decision to close the magazine. The magazine is expected to
 reopen under a different name. Thailand's journalistic
 community does not view the closure as an attack on press
 freedoms.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A martial law order, which has been intermittently enforced
 since the 1950's, prohibits political gatherings of five or
 more persons, and requires prior police permission for use of
 sound amplification devices at rallies. Since 1979, however,
 organized labor, politicians, and special interest groups
 including those critical of the Government have held large
 rallies without interference from the authorities. During the
 1983 national elections, politicans routinely attracted tens of
 thousands to campaign rallies.
 Private associations must register with the Ministry of
 Interior. The Ministry has in some instances not registered a
 group but has nevertheless permitted it to function.
 Less than ten percent of the labor force in is non-agrarian
 occupations. The Government has generally not restricted the
 development of the labor movement or labor's participation in
 political activities. Thailand's largest labor congress now
 plays an active role in Thai politics and its leaders helped
 found a political party to promote labor interests. Unions in
 the private sector and in some state enterprises have the right
 to strike if negotiations in accordance with Thai labor laws
 fail to resolve the dispute. The Government has rarely acted
 against strikers even when they ignored the cumbersome
 negotiating procedures required under labor law. Workers are
 represented on the Government wage committee, the national
 labor advisory board, and on the labor courts which arbitrate
 labor disputes and grievances. Unions maintain relations with
 international organizations that promote the interests of labor.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand, and is
 protected by law and longstanding custom. Theravada Buddhism
 is the de facto State religion, and the great majority of Thai
 practice Buddhism. The King is required to profess the
 Buddhist faith and practice Buddhism. Nonetheless, Thailand is
 a secular society. State and church are separate. There are
 no restrictions on religious ceremonies, the teaching of
 religion, or conversion from one religion to another. There is
 no persecution of those affiliated with minority religions such
 
 
 889
 as Christianity or Islam. Missionaries are permitted to live
 and proselytize in Thailand and have done so unhindered for
 more than a century. There are no restrictions on religious
 publishing, regardless of faith.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from longstanding restrictions on the travel of
 Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, including those who have
 lived in Thailand for a generation, the only limitations on
 travel are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas where
 insurgents are active. There are no government restrictions on
 foreign travel or emigration, but Thai women and also children
 under 14 must have their passport applications approved by the
 Department of Public Welfare to prevent the export of children
 for sale and women for prostitution.
 The Government has revoked citizenship only in a handful of
 cases in recent years.
 Since 1975, almost 600,000 persons from Vietnam, Laos, and
 Kampuchea have fled to Thailand for refuge. Thai policy has
 been to provide assistance to them until they can be
 repatriated or resettled in third countries. The current
 refugee population on Thai territory is about 140,000. In
 addition, about 50,000 Vietnamese who arrived in Thailand
 before 1954 remain there. The Thai Government has not given
 asylum to new arrivals from Kampuchea since early 1980, but it
 permits about 230,000 Kampucheans to live in camps along the
 border, an increase of almost 20,000 since early 1983. Most of
 this increase appears to be a result of Khmer fleeing more
 repressive Vietnamese security measures imposed in the spring
 of 1983. Thailand has assisted international voluntary
 agencies to provide food and medical care to Khmer in the
 border camps. The Thai Government permitted more than 65,000
 of these people to move temporarily into Thailand in the wake
 of attacks by Vietnamese and People's Republic of Kampuchea
 forces in 1983 but they were required to return to the border
 after the danger had passed. Similarly, Vietnamese coming
 overland via Kampuchea after April 1981 have to remain on the
 border until they are accepted for resettlement abroad, when
 they are allowed to transit Thailand to their new homes.
 Since early 1980, small groups of Khmer caught trying to move
 illegally from border camps into refugee camps inside Thailand
 have been returned by Thai authorities to the border region.
 Some Khmer have volunteered to leave the refugee camps for the
 border, but such movements ended in 1983 following Vietnamese
 destruction of six border encampments. Thai policy on refugees
 has been to promote voluntary repatriation, particulary for the
 Khmer and Lao, who comprise 93 percent of Thailand's refugee
 population. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and the major resettlement countries have supported
 this Thai policy. About 2,260 Lao have returned to their
 homeland under UNHCR supervision following bilateral Thai-Lao
 repatriation negotiations in September 1980. However, the Lao
 authorities suspended this repatriation program in May 1983
 without providing a reason or an expected date of resumption.
 UNHCR negotiations with the Heng Samrin regime in Phnom Penh
 concerning the repatriation of Khmer refugees remain stalled.
 The Government of Vietnam has been unwilling to discuss
 repatriation of Vietnamese refugees in Thailand. Few of the
 Indochinese refugees are presently willing to return home
 because of fear of persecution.
 
 
 890
 To reduce the flow of refugees into Thailand, the Thai
 Government instituted a policy in 1981 under which new arrivals
 are indefinitely detained in austere camps where they are
 provided only essential services and not immediately allowed to
 apply for resettlement abroad. As of September 30, about
 28,000 refugees, were living in such austere camps. The
 Government decided to permit limited resettlement from these
 camps in 1983.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Thai Government traditionally has had a stable civilian
 bureaucracy heavily influenced by the military with a military
 man as prime minister. The usual method of changing
 governments was by nearly bloodless military coups d'etat, and
 holding a key military command in Bangkok was for a long time
 the normal path to national leadership. The governmental
 changes of 1973 and 1976 which occassioned violence in Bangkok,
 were exceptions to this pattern. Since 1978, there has been
 some gradual evolution away from this tradition of heavy
 military influence, with democratic processes, including free
 elections, assuming a larger role in the political life of the
 country. However, the military remains heavily represented in
 the appointed Senate, and the Government generally does not
 take actions opposed by the military. Civilians hold a
 majority of posts in the current Government, and Prime Minister
 Prem is supported by parties holding two thirds of the seats in
 the National Assembly following the 1983 national elections.
 The election itself, which was free and fair, saw four major
 and a dozen minor parties field candidates.
 As provided in the 1978 Constitution, the largest party not
 represented in the Government became the formal opposition.
 Both it and the smaller opposition parties regularly present
 opposing views within the National Legislative Assembly and
 through the mass media. Votes in the National Assembly are
 almost invariably divided. Special interest groups, including
 the Confederation for Democracy, a loose coalition of
 progressives including human rights activists, have lobbied for
 changes in the constitution to increase public participation in
 the governing process.
 All adult Thai men and women, have the right to vote except for
 children of alien fathers who have to pass certain residency
 and education requirements. The national government encourages
 but does not pressure voters to cast their ballots. Over 50
 percent of the electorate usually votes in both national and
 local elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1983 the Thai Government answered specific inquiries from
 Amnesty International and the International Commission of
 Jurists. It has also discussed human rights problems with
 domestic as well as international human rights organizations,
 which have visited Thailand. Local civil rights groups have
 devoted most of their efforts to identifying and correcting
 human rights violations. Individual, prominent members of
 these human rights groups have also lobbied for constitutional
 changes to further popular participation in politics. The
 Lawyer's Association of Thailand has played a leading role in
 
 
 891
 opposing those martial law restrictions on civil liberties
 which remain in effect. Both the Coordinating Group for
 Religion in Society and the Union for Civil Liberties have been
 particularly active in drawing attention to abuses of authority
 by officials in rural areas. The Federation of Journalists of
 Thailand has sought to have the remaining legal restrictions on
 the press lifted. The Justice and Peace Commission seeks to
 make the rural population aware of its legal rights.
 Domestic groups interested in human rights in 1983 have
 examined areas of abuse, published periodic reports on their
 findings, and taken their cases to the press or the courts.
 Neither the national police system, operating under the
 Ministry of Interior, nor the Internal Security Operations
 Command which directs anti-insurgency operations in rural
 areas, interferes with human rights efforts to any significant
 degree except in rare instances. Neither human rights groups
 nor individual activists have been harassed by the government.
 In August 1982, the Thai government, finally registered the
 Union for Civil Liberties, after previously refusing to do so.
 Other Thai groups active in human rights, including the
 Coordinating Group for Religion in Society, whose registration
 was turned down two years ago, viewed the Union for Civil
 Liberties registration as evidence of improved official
 tolerance of groups concerned with human rights.
 Thai human rights organizations have encouraged the Government
 to tighten discipline and further reduce human rights
 violations by police and paramilitary forces fighting communist
 insurgency. Thailand has involved itself directly in
 international human rights efforts but generally not taken
 initiatives on that subject in the United Nations. It has,
 however, taken a leading role in preparing an Association of
 Southeast Asian Nations resolution on the Kampuchean situation,
 including reference to human rights violations, now being
 considered by the U.N.
 Thai representatives were among the founding members of the
 Asian Council on Fundamental Human Rights, a forum for the
 exchange of information established in February 1982. At
 present, Thai members of the Council are helping draft a
 declaration on human rights to serve as the organization's
 statement of policy and goals.
 Amnesty International in its 1983 report expressed concern that
 in 1982 what is believed to be a small number of persons were
 detained without trial under the Anti-Communist Act. Freedom
 House in its 1983 reports described Thailand as "partly free".
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Real economic growth was estimated to have topped 4.2 percent
 in 1982 and may have increased to 6 percent in 1983. The
 inflation rate was held below 5 percent throughout 1983. Per
 capita income in 1981 was $758. In response to low commodity
 prices and drought-reduced output, agriculture shrank to 20.6
 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1982 but continued
 to account for almost 75 percent of total employment. The
 industrial sector, on the other hand, maintained its rapid
 growth rate and in 1982 accounted for 20.6 percent of GDP,
 rivaling agriculture for the first time as the leading sector
 of the economy. Industry, however, remains concentrated in the
 Bangkok area, and efforts to induce industrial growth in the
 countryside have so far been largely unsuccessful.
 
 
 892
 There is little overt sexual or racial discrimination. Women
 vote as regularly as men. Hill tribes and other minority
 ethnic groups are not legally excluded from any of the benefits
 of society, but their isolation and poor land have kept their
 living standards low.
 The status and role of women has continued to progress at a
 moderate pace over the past several years. Women are equal
 before the law in Thailand, with specific guarantees of
 property and divorce rights. They are well represented in the
 labor force and participate fully in the political process.
 Women often reach senior levels in both business and the civil
 service, although relatively less so than men.
 The level of health has improved steadily. Life expectancy at
 birth increased to 62.5 years in 1980. Birth control services
 are now widespread and well-accepted; the population growth
 rate for Thailand's 50.7 million inhabitants declined to 1.9
 percent in 1983. As a result of government efforts, the
 general health of women and young children, especially in rural
 areas, has improved significantly.
 According to the latest available statistics, Bangkok in 1975
 had one doctor per 1,549 residents while the ratio nationwide
 was one to 8,366. The Government has encouraged doctors to
 work in rural areas by requiring new medical school graduates
 to practice in Government provincial hospitals for two to three
 years before entering private practice.
 Caloric intake is generally adequate, although poor nutritional
 habits, often the result of ignorance, affect the poor.
 The Government's goal is universal education through the fourth
 grade, but the adjusted primary school enrollment ratio was
 only 82 percent in 1979. Education is available to all Thai
 citizens, but Vietnamese aliens in rural Thailand are not
 permitted to move freely and thus generally have no access to
 higher educational facilities.
 
 
 893
 U.S.OvERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        30.8     36.4     28.7
 LOANS .............. .....  12.2   17.7      7.0
 GRANTS .............       18.6     18.7     21.7
 A.AID  ....  ............. ..... 26.2   31.2     22.6
 LOANS .............. .....  12.2   17.7      7.0
 GRANTS ................   14.0     13.5     15.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         2.0      5.0      5.8
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 T!TLEi  -OT       ',,          010      Q,g      98O
 ftEPAY  iN $-L6ANS .....0.0             0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY  ... 0.0              0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         4.6      5.2      6.1
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        4.6      5.2      6.1
 PEACE  CORPS ......       2.1      2.3      2.7
 NARCOTICS ........        2.5      2.9      3.4
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      Q.0
 I'I.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       54.6     80.7     96.2
 LOANS ................... 53.4     74.7     76.0
 GRANTS ................    1.2      6.0     20.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.4      4.5     18.5
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       53.4     74.7     76.0
 C.!NTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.8      1.5      1.7
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ....0.0             0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        85.4    117.1    124.9
 LOANS ................... 65.6     92.4     83.0
 GRANTS ................   19.8     24.7     41.9
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        4.3     24.4      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        4.3     24.4      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1944-83
 TOTAL.........   525.5    874.1    666.5   5007.2
 IBRO             325.9    634.1    393.1   331619
 IFC               27.6      0.0     62.8    174.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    125.1
 108                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS              170.0    222.4    210.6   1280.7
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0 0
 UNDP               2.0      2.9      0.0     64.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0     14.7      0.0     45.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
