 THAILAND
 The present Thai Government assumed control in October
 1977, one year after the October 1976 coup. The govern-
 ment, headed by Prime Minister (and General) Kriangsak
 Chamanan, has civilian and military ministers, and is
 responsible to a group of senior military officers.
 It operates under authority of an interim constitution,
 signed by the King of Thailand, which establishes an
 appointed national assembly to write a permanent consti-
 tution and which calls for national elections no later
 than April 1979.
 While the government's long-term performance is not
 proven, its initial months have been marked by emphasis
 on national reconciliation and improvement of the human
 rights problems which existed between October 1976 and
 October 1977. There is greater civil liberty, including
 a partial renewal of trade union activity , greater free-
 dom of the press, and increased respect for judicial due
 process. There has been an acceleration of the schedule
 for an elected government from 1988 to late 1978 or
 early 1979. Nevertheless, certain authoritarian practices
 remain, including temporary detention without trial,
 which the government claims is justified by the political
 turmoil of recent years and the continuing communist
 insurgency.
 Thailand has a relatively open social and economic
 system, with full respect for religion and considerable
 freedom of the individual. It also has a history of
 tolerance and hospitality for scores of thousands of
 refugees from the neighboring communist countries of
 Indochina.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 We are unaware of any reports of torture in Thailand.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Recent Thai governments, including the Thanin Government
 (October 1976-October 1977), have not followed policies
 which permitted cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment.
 
 (273)
 
 
 274
 Several of the students and activists who were arrested
 and subsequently released following the student-police
 confrontation at Thammasat University on October 6,
 1976 have claimed they were subjected to harsh treat-
 ment (e.g. beatings) in the period immediately following
 their arrest. These charges have not been substantiated
 by the Department of State or, to our knowledge, by
 other sources including human rights organizations.
 The 18 students and activists who have had charges
 filed against them for their role in the Thammasat
 affair have been visited by representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross and the Inter-
 national Commission of Jurists.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 On October 6, 1976 Prime Minister Seni Pramot, head
 of the last democratically-elected government, ordered
 the arrest of a group of students at Thammasat Univer-
 sity. The resulting police-student confrontation left
 40 dead and approximately 3,000 persons, mostly students,
 arrested. All but 19 have now been released. A mili-
 tary court is hearing charges against 18 of the Thamma-
 sat group. The nineteenth is being tried for lese
 majeste by a civilian court.
 One of the early decrees issued by the military leader-
 ship that seized control of the government after the
 October 6 violence was martial law Order Number 22.
 This decree allows for :.detention  without trial for
 30 days and further "vocational training" indefinitely.
 Order Number 22 specifies nine categories of offenders,
 six of which involve criminal activity (e.g. intimida-
 tion, vagrancy, illegal possession of weapons, illegal
 gambling, prostitution, hoarding, usury) and three
 categories potentially involving political conduct
 (instigating confusion, advocating political systems
 other than those headed by the King and labor strikes).
 Of the several thousand who have been detained under
 Order Number 22, most are held for short periods of
 time before release, and all cases are reviewed regu-
 larly. Apparently some of those released have been
 subsequently rearrested. Approximately 800 remain
 in detention. Fewer than 100 of the detainees are
 being held under the political provision of Order
 Number 22. No members of the previous democratically-
 elected government or the Thanin Government have been
 
 
 275
 
 arrested or detained. The new leadership has indicated
 that Order Number 22 still remains in force.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Except for the provisions of Order Number 22, Thai
 citizens continue to enjoy presumption of innocence
 and have access to courts or administrative bodies in
 order to redress perceived violations of their rights
 under law. Thai citizens receive fair public trials.
 Under the provisions of martial law, however, those
 accused of certain categories of crimes related to
 national security must be tried by a military court.
 Certain procedures under military court regulations
 are not in accord with commonly accepted judicial
 guarantees. The International Commission of Jurists
 has stated that the Thammasat 18 should receive minimum
 judicial guarantees including the right to a defense
 lawyer and the right to appeal which they did not have
 under military court procedures. The new government
 on November 9 amended the Military Court Act to permit
 defendants the right to legal counsel.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 To our knowledge, the privacy of the home is generally
 respected by the Thai Government. Search warrants
 are required under Thai law. There may be occasions
 when legal procedures are nct properly followed.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food,Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 There have been effective public education, agricultural
 development, low income housing and health care programs.
 The new leadership has stated that it intends to make
 efforts to upgrade the standard of living of Thai
 farmers. The Government is committed to decreasing
 the disparity between urban and rural income, partly
 through low interest agricultural loans.
 Corruption is an endemic problem in Thailand as in
 many countries. The extent to which corruption in
 Thailand may divert resources from the poor is unclear.
 
 
 276
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The broad provisons of Order Number 22 which contain
 general prohibitions against "instigating confusion",
 advocating political systems other than those headed by
 the King, and striking by organized labor entail restric-
 tions on freedom of thought and speech. Most Thai are
 cautious lest they violate Order 22. Nevertheless,
 private discussions of a political nature remain generally
 uninhibited. The Kriangsak Government has dissolved
 the formal mechanism used by the Thanin Government to
 restrict the Thai press, but has indicated that there
 should be "constructive cooperation" between the press
 and Government. Some self censorship exists. Freedom
 of religion is practiced throughout Thailand. Meetings
 of over five persons were barred by the previous Thanin
 Government. An important effect of this regulation,
 as well as a legal ruling which declared state enter-
 prise unions to be illegal, resulted in a severe
 restriction on organized labor activity. These
 restrictions remain in effect at the moment. However,
 the new prime minister has expressed his intention to
 listen seriously to organized labor. For example,
 Prime Minister Kriangsak has met labor leaders and
 expressed support for inclusion of state enterprise
 unions under the Labor Relations Act of 1975 and for
 registration of the Labor Congress of Thailand as a
 legally recognized labor council.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Restrictions on entry into rural base areas used by
 Communist insurgents are the only limitations on travel
 in Thailand. There are no restrictions on foreign
 travel or emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Kriangsak Government was appointed following a coup
 d'etat by senior Thai military commanders on October 20,
 -M. Political parties remain illegal, although most
 former political party leaders retain their former
 
 
 277
 party contacts and are identified in the public mind
 as leaders of political groupings. The government
 tacitly recognized this when it named seven leaders
 of former major parties to serve on the Constitutional
 Drafting Committee. The new leadership has declared
 its intention to hold general elections no later than
 April 1979. The form of these elections has not yet
 been specified.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 We are not aware of any requests by outside organi-
 zations to investigate human rights conditions in
 Thailand. Specific requests to visit individual
 prisoners have been granted by the Thai Government.
 
 
 
