Thailand
Political instability and polarization continued in 2010, and occasionally resulted
in violence. There were at least 90 deaths and 2,000 injuries of civilians and
security personnel during politically motivated street battles between March and
May. Public pledges by the Thai government to prioritize human rights, political
reconciliation, and accountability for abuses have largely been unfulfilled.
Political Violence
After a month of largely peaceful rallies, on April 7, anti-government protesters
from the United Front for Democracy against Dictatorship (UDD)–backed by former
prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra–stormed Parliament, forcing cabinet ministers
and parliamentarians to flee the building. In response, Prime Minister
Abhisit Vejjajiva declared a state of emergency and created the Center for the
Resolution of Emergency Situations (CRES), an ad hoc body made up of civilians
and military officers, to handle the crisis and enforce emergency powers.
On April 10 the CRES deployed thousands of soldiers in an attempt to reclaim
public space occupied by the red-shirted UDD, sparking violent clashes around
Phan Fa Bridge. At nightfall the soldiers were ambushed by the heavily armed
“Black Shirt” militants, apparently connected to the UDD and operating in tandem
with it. At the same time some UDD security guards and protesters used
weapons such as pistols, homemade explosives, petrol bombs, and slingshots to
attack the soldiers. The panicked soldiers withdrew, firing live ammunition at the
protesters. The government reported that 26 people (including five soldiers) were
killed, and at least 860 wounded (including 350 soldiers).
Between April 23 and 29, groups of armed UDD security guards searched King
Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital every night, claiming hospital officials had sheltered
soldiers and pro-government groups. The hospital relocated patients and
temporarily shut down most services.
Negotiations in early May, based on Prime Minister Abhisit’s five-point proposal,
ultimately foundered when Maj.-Gen. Khattiya Sawasdipol, who claimed to represent
Thaksin’s interests, and other hardliners attempted to seize control of the UDD from more moderate leaders. On May 12 the prime minister warned that the
government planned to disperse UDD protesters at Ratchaprasong junction.
As government troops moved to encircle UDD-controlled areas on May 13, an
unknown sniper shot Major-General Khattiya, who died four days later. Violence
escalated as UDD protesters and the Black Shirts began to openly fight the security
forces surrounding their camps. The CRES set out rules of engagement, permitting
security forces to use live ammunition as warning shots to deter protesters
from moving closer; for self-defense; and when troops had clear visuals of “terrorists,”
a term the government failed to define. In reality, the military deployed
snipers to shoot anyone who breached “no-go” zones between the UDD and army
barricades, or who threw projectiles towards soldiers. Sometimes soldiers also
shot into crowds of protesters.
On May 19 the government launched a military operation to reclaim areas around
Ratchaprasong junction, sparking another round of street battles, in which soldiers
used live ammunition, and some UDD protesters and the Black Shirts fought
back. Around midday key UDD leaders surrendered and thousands of protesters
sought sanctuary in the Wat Pathum Wanaram temple, which had been declared
a safe zone by agreement with the government. A Human Rights Watch investigation,
based on eyewitness accounts and forensic evidence, found that soldiers
later opened fire on persons sheltering in the temple. Many were wounded, and
six people, including a volunteer medic, were killed.
After the surrender of UDD leaders, groups of UDD protesters and the Black Shirts
launched a coordinated campaign of looting and arson attacks on the Central
World shopping complex and other locations across Bangkok for two days, starting
on May 19. Previously key UDD leaders had urged their supporters to loot and
burn should the government forcibly disperse the UDD protests.
Street battles injured at least nine reporters and photographers and led to the
deaths of two foreign journalists. On May 19, UDD protesters burned the headquarters
of Bangkok’s TV Channel 3 and provincial branches of NBT TV, accusing
both stations of bias.
That same day UDD supporters outside Bangkok rioted and burned government
buildings in reaction to events in the capital, inflicting damage in Khon Kaen, Ubon Ratchathani, Udorn Thani, and Mukdahan provinces. The security forces
opened fire on the protesters, killing at least three, and wounding dozens more.
Throughout the year bomb attacks in Bangkok and other provinces targeted government
and military locations, as well as political groups, companies, and properties
associated with anti-UDD elements. For example, on April 22, M79
grenades fired at pro-government groups near Saladaeng junction killed one person
and wounded 85.
As a means to reconciliation, Prime Minister Abhisit endorsed an impartial investigation
into the violence committed by all sides. However, the UDD said the
inquiry was not fully independent or impartial, and in any case, the military was
not fully cooperative. Separate inquiries by the National Human Rights
Commission and the specifically appointed Independent Fact-Finding
Commission for Reconciliation made little progress.
Emergency Decree Detention
On April 7 the government proclaimed the Emergency Decree on Public
Administration in Emergency Situation in Bangkok and other provinces.
The decree allows the CRES to hold suspects without charge for up to 30 days in
unofficial places of detention, and gives officials effective immunity from prosecution
for most acts committed while implementing the decree.
The CRES questioned, arrested, and detained UDD leaders and members who
took part in the protests, as well as accused sympathizers. The CRES summoned
hundreds of politicians, former officials, businessmen, activists, academics, and
radio operators for interrogation; froze individual and corporate bank accounts;
and detained some people in military-controlled facilities. The CRES ordered foreign
and Thai journalists and volunteer medics to report to the CRES headquarters
and substantiate their public statements that they witnessed abuses committed
by the security forces.
At this writing the government has failed to provide the exact number and whereabouts
of those detained without charge by the CRES.
Repressions of Media Freedom and Freedom of Expression
The CRES used the emergency decree to shut down more than 1,000 websites, a
satellite television station, online television channels, publications, and more
than 40 community radio stations, most of which are considered to be closely
aligned with the UDD.
In addition, the government continued to use the Computer Crimes Act and the
charge of lese majeste (insulting the monarchy) to enforce online censorship and
persecute dissidents, particularly those connected with the UDD, by accusing
them of promoting anti-monarchy sentiments and posing threats to national
security. Chiranuch Premchiaporn, webmaster of online news portal Prachatai,
was arrested on September 24 and charged with violating the act because of
reader comments on the site deemed offensive to the monarchy in 2008.
Abusive Anti-Narcotics Policy
The government supported reopening investigations into the 2,819 extrajudicial
killings that allegedly accompanied the 2003 “war on drugs.” However, little
progress was made to bring perpetrators to justice, or end systematic police brutality
and abuse of power in drug suppression operations. In June Ratchaburi
province police officers shot and killed Manit Toommuang, a suspected drug trafficker,
while he was handcuffed and in their custody.
Concerns remained about the detention of drug users in compulsory drug “rehabilitation”
centers, mostly run by the military and the Interior Ministry.
“Treatment” is based on military-style physical exercise, with little medical assistance
for drug withdrawal symptoms.
Violence and Abuses in the Southern Border Provinces
Human Rights Watch expressed concern about the alleged mistreatment of insurgent
suspects in custody after Sulaiman Naesa was found dead at the
Inkhayuthboriharn army camp in Pattani on May 30. Muslim people and human
rights groups also made a growing number of complaints about the unlawful use
of force by Thai security personnel, including assassinations of religious teachers and community leaders suspected of involvement in the insurgency. There have
been no successful criminal prosecutions in these cases. On September 1, police
dropped criminal charges against army-trained militiaman Suthirak Kongsuwan,
who had been accused of leading an attack on Muslim worshippers at Al Furqan
Mosque in June 2009, killing 10 people and wounding 12 others.
Separatist groups continued to attack and kill civilians, including teachers from
government-run schools, and threaten teachers and principals, forcing them to
close schools temporarily. Government security forces frequently occupied
schools, impairing education by turning schools into armed camps. Insurgents
recruited children from private Islamic schools to participate in armed hostilities,
serve as spies, and carry out arson. Thai security forces raided private Islamic
schools, and detained teachers and students for questioning.
Refugees, Asylum Seekers, and Migrant Workers
Thai authorities violated the international principle against refoulement by returning
refugees and asylum seekers to countries where they were likely to face persecution.
Despite international outcry, including strong protests by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the UN secretary-general,
the Thai army on December 28, 2009, forcibly returned 4,689 Lao Hmong, including
158 UNHCR-designated “persons of concern,” to Laos. In November Thai
authorities sent back to Burma thousands of Burmese fleeing armed conflicts in
border areas before UNHCR could assess whether they were returning voluntarily.
In October the Immigration Police arrested 128 Tamils for illegal entry, including
many registered with UNHCR, and threatened to send them back to Sri Lanka.
The Thai government failed to fulfill its promise to conduct an independent investigation
into allegations in 2008 and 2009 that the Thai navy pushed boats laden
with Rohingyas from Burma and Bangladesh back to international waters, which
allegedly resulted in hundreds of deaths. A group of 54 Rohingyas have been held
at the Immigration Detention Center since January 2009, without access to any
mechanism for refugee determination or sufficient medical care. Two of them died
in detention in 2009.
Migrant workers from Burma, Cambodia, and Laos continue to be abused with
impunity by local police, civil servants, employers, and thugs; with little enforcement
of Thai labor laws. A poorly designed and implemented “nationality verification”
registration scheme caused hundreds of thousands of migrant workers to
lose their legal status, deepening their vulnerability to exploitation. Female
migrant workers are also vulnerable to sexual violence and trafficking.
Human Rights Defenders
The government made little progress in official investigations into the cases of 20
human rights defenders killed, including the 2004 “disappearance” and presumed
murder of Muslim lawyer Somchai Neelapaijit.
International Actors
The UN, the United States, Australia, and the European Union expressed strong
support for political reconciliation and the restoration of human rights and
democracy in Thailand, including by urging the government and the UDD to
engage in dialogue and refrain from using violence. The UN provided training and
technical assistance to the inquiry process, which aims to bring to justice those
responsible for politically motivated violence and abuses.
The UDD, through an international law firm hired by Thaksin, submitted a report
to the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in October, calling for an
investigation into the alleged crimes against humanity committed by Thai authorities
during the dispersal of the UDD protests.
Thailand made a significant number of human rights pledges in its successful
campaign to join the UN Human Rights Council, and expectations for progress
were further raised when Sihasak Phuangketkeow, Thailand’s ambassador to the
UN in Geneva, was selected as the president of the Council in June, but little has
been implemented at this writing.