Thailand
Human rights protections in Thailand, which had been seriously eroded by the
administration of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, took another serious
blow after a military coup on September 19, 2006, ousted Thaksin from power.
The coup leaders repealed the constitution and disbanded the national assembly,
the Senate, and the Constitutional Court. They also imposed martial law throughout
the country, allowing authorities to ban political gatherings, censor the
media, and detain people for up to seven days without charge.
Impunity for human rights violations continued in 2006. Even where there is clear
evidence of official involvement, as in the “disappearance” and apparent murder
of lawyer Somchai Neelpaijit, no one has been brought to justice. Similarly, no
one has been held accountable for any of the approximately 2,500 extrajudicial
killings that took place as part of Thaksin’s “war on drugs.”
Violence and the culture of impunity also continue unabated in the southern border
provinces with killings and serious abuses by security forces and separatist
insurgents. Reconciliation attempts proposed by the government-appointed
National Reconciliation Commission in early 2006 were largely ignored by the
Thaksin administration, while security forces continued to be responsible for
many “disappearances” and extrajudicial killings. Militants repeatedly set off
bombs in civilian areas, often targeting teachers, civil servants, and Buddhist
monks. Hundreds of civilians have died in such attacks since 2004.
The September 19 Coup
On September 19, 2006, the military overthrew the Thaksin government in a
bloodless coup, pledging to end political tensions, reform government, and fight
corruption. Within hours the constitution was repealed and key institutions that
serve as a check on the executive—including the Parliament, the Senate, and
Constitutional Court—were disbanded. The coup leaders announced on October
20 that they would uphold the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter,
but fundamental rights were nevertheless restricted.
Political gatherings of more than five people were banned, with a penalty of six
months of imprisonment. Existing political parties were ordered not to conduct
any political activities or hold assemblies. Four senior members of the Thaksin
administration as well as a parliamentarian and a pro-Thaksin activist were taken
into military custody for periods ranging from one to ten days.
The media was intimidated, with armed soldiers deployed in newsrooms and
direct censorship employed. Shortly after the coup, Mingkwan Saengsuwan,
director-general of the Mass Communications Organization of Thailand and TV
Channel 9, was briefly detained and pressured to quit his position for allowing
the airing of a last ditch state of emergency declaration by Thaksin. The coup
leaders called on all journalists to “cover news truthfully and constructively in
order to promote unity and reconciliation in the country” and requested that the
Ministry of Information and Communication Technology control or block the distribution
of information through the internet that could affect the new regime’s
work. More than 300 community radios stations in Thailand’s northern
provinces—Thaksin’s stronghold—were closed down, and 10 anti-coup websites
were been taken off the internet.
On October 8 Pongthep Thetpratheep, secretary-general to the interim prime minister,
General Surayud Chulanont, told activist groups and journalists to stop voicing
opposition to the new cabinet line-up, saying that it could be viewed as interfering
with the King’s decision. “Lese majeste” is a serious criminal offense in
Thailand, punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
Violence in the Southern Border Provinces
Insurgent violence in the southern border provinces of Pattani, Yala, and
Narathiwat continued in 2006 with no end in sight. According to a study released
by the Thai Journalist Association and Prince of Songkhla University, there were
5,460 violent incidents—some at the hands of insurgent groups and others by
security forces—resulting in 1,730 deaths and 2,513 injuries to civilians and government
officials between January 2004 and August 2006. Failures of justice—
particularly for large-scale killings of civilians in 2004 at Krue Se and Tak Bai—
have helped fuel the insurgency and made it more difficult for authorities to reach
out to the Malayu-Muslim population.
Thousands of Muslim men are suspected by authorities of involvement with
insurgent groups. Some have been pressured to join reeducation programs or put
in custody for interrogation under emergency regulations, which allow suspects to
be detained for an initial 30-day period. There is no limit to the number of times
such detention can be extended, creating a risk of arbitrary and indefinite detention.
Most such detainees have not had access to lawyers and families during the
first 48 hours.
“Blacklists” containing the names of Muslim men suspected by Thai authorities
of involvement in insurgent activity have created a climate of fear amidst allegations
of extrajudicial killings and “disappearances” by the police and army. For
example, on June 19, 2006, Sulkifi Maeroh went to the Bajoh District Police
Station in Narathiwat after learning that it had issued an arrest warrant for him.
Sulkifi and his four-year-old son were shot dead on their way home. Wae-halem
Kuwae-kama, a 40-year-old former deputy village chief, went missing on the
evening of May 29 in Joh Airong district, Narathiwat after his name was put on a
blacklist. Wae-halem was last seen being stopped and questioned at a checkpoint
manned by soldiers from the Army’s Special Warfare unit. In cases like this
the police typically explain that the deaths or “disappearances” are due to separatist
insurgents trying to prevent the individuals in question from leaking information
to authorities—an explanation strikingly similar to the one offered by the
Thaksin administration in 2003 for more than 2,500 unexplained killings that
accompanied its anti-drug campaign.
On an almost daily basis, separatist insurgents in 2006 attacked government officials
and Buddhist civilians, as well as local Muslims suspected of collaborating
with Thai authorities. Insurgent violence took the form of shootings, bomb
attacks, arson, beheadings, and machete attacks. Thai authorities believe the
National Revolution Front-Coordinate, particularly its youth wing and guerrilla
units, is behind the new wave of violence.
The use of improvised explosive devices became one of the main insurgent tactics
in 2006, with statistics showing clearly the intensity and lethality of these
weapons, which were often used indiscriminately. Of the 5,460 violent incidents
described above, 967 were bomb attacks. On June 15 and 16 separatist insurgents
launched a series of bombs attacks in 31 of 33 districts in the southern border provinces. The coordinated explosions on August 31—targeting commercial
banks in Yala—and on September 16—targeting department stores and related
locations in Hat Yai district of Songkhla—were further evidence of a disturbing
trend toward more frequent attacks on civilian targets.
Human Rights Defenders
The 2004 “disappearance” and presumed murder of Somchai Neelpaijit—chair of
Thailand’s Muslim Lawyers Association and vice-chair of the Human Rights
Committee of the Law Society of Thailand—remained a test case for official commitment
to the recognition and protection of human rights defenders. On January
13, 2006, then Prime Minister Thaksin publicly acknowledged for the first time
that government officials were involved in Somchai’s abduction and killing. Still,
there has been no progress in the investigation led by the Department of Special
Investigation.
At this writing, the interim government of General Surayud had said nothing
about how and when it would pursue justice for the 20 cases of murder of human
rights defenders that took place during the Thaksin administration.
Refugee Protection
Former Prime Minister Thaksin pursued a harsh policy towards Burmese refugees.
General Surayud told diplomats in October 2006 that the welfare of Burmese
refugees was a top priority. The interim government also indicated to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) that the 140,000 refugees from
Burma living in Thailand may soon be issued identity cards by Thai authorities
that would permit them to move freely outside their camps to work legally. This
potentially significant change in Thai policy would improve the lives of refugees,
many of whom have lived in camps along the long Thai-Burma border for up to 20
years, with few prospects of returning home anytime soon.
Nevertheless, at this writing, it remained unclear whether Thailand’s interim government
would relax its border control policy to prepare for a new influx of
refugees from Burma, particularly those from the estimated 500,000 internally displaced civilians along the frontier who have escaped from the Burmese government’s
brutal counter-insurgency operations in Karen and Shan states.
HIV/AIDS
Government HIV prevention programs have been credited with preventing more
than 200,000 HIV infections, and its antiretroviral therapy program has been
hailed as a model for developing countries. More than 80,000 people (an
increase from approximately 3,000 in 2002) receive antiretroviral therapy through
the public health system.
Despite these advances, many people at highest risk of HIV/AIDS—including drug
users, prisoners, and migrants—face significant barriers in obtaining HIV prevention,
care, and treatment services.
Key International Actors
Until former Prime Minister Thaksin was ousted from power, his government
remained defiant to international concerns over the erosion of human rights standards
in Thailand. Thaksin’s poor human rights record, however, did not make the
September 19 coup a welcome development internationally.
The US State Department said it was uneasy about the military takeover and said
in a statement it hopes “the Thai people will resolve their political differences in
accord with democratic principles and the rule of law.” Military aid and negotiations
on a free trade agreement were also suspended. UN Secretary-General Kofi
Annan said the coup was “not a practice to be encouraged,” while UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour called on coup leaders to restore
basic freedoms. The European Union, Australia, and New Zealand used stronger
language, condemning the coup.
China was the only major power which brushed off the coup as an internal affair.
Elsewhere in the region, members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) expressed concerns following the coup, saying they hoped democratic
principles would soon be restored.