 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy with a history of
 military coups and powerful bureaucratic-military influence over political life. The
 King exerts strong informal influence on carefully selected issues and has the con-
 stitutionally mandated power, to date never used, to veto legislation (requiring two-
 thirds of Parliament to override) or dissolve the elected house of representatives.
 The coalition government of Prime Minister Banharn Silpa-Archa, elected in July
 1995, was dissolved in the wake of a no-confidence vote in September. In general
 elections held on November 17, General Chavalit Yongchaiyudh's New Aspiration
 Party narrowly won the most number of seats and formed a coalition government
 with five other parties. The judiciary is independent but subject to corruption.
 The security apparatus has wide-ranging legal powers, derived primarily from
 past militarily controlled administrations. Military leaders still have an informal
 but influential role in internal politics. Since 1992 military influence in politics has
 been substantially reduced, however, and progress has been made toward establish-
 ing civilian control over the armed forces, which are becoming increasingly profes-
 sional. The police have primary responsibility for internal security and law enforce-
 ment. Elements of both the armed forces and the Royal Thai Police have a reputa-
 tion for corruption. Some members of the security forces continue to commit serious
 human rights abuses.
 Thailand, a newly industrializing country with a flourishing free enterprise sys-
 tem, continues to enjoy a high rate of economic growth. Per capita income is esti-
 mated at $3,000 per year. The political system generally provides protection for indi-
 vidual economic interests, including property rights. A lack of transparency in many
 government processes threatens some economic interests. Although the industrial
 and services sectors are expanding rapidly-contributing over half the gross na-
 tional product-about 60 percent of the population is rural and agrarian. Govern-
 ment efforts to close the economic gap between urban and rural areas have been
 ineffective. Thailand's regional income disparities have grown, and income distribu-
 tion has become wider, the income gap between segments within urban areas is also
 growing. Government land appropriation by eminent domain in large development
 projects and unresolved grievances by farmers, workers, and slum dwellers led to
 a demonstration in April by more than 10,000 protesters-mostly from rural areas--
 who set up a 'Village of the Poor" in Bangkok.
 The Government generally respects the human rights of its citizens, but some sig-
 nificant problems remain. Some police officers committed extrajudicial killings, and
 the incidence of political and other extrajudicial killings increased. Police occasion-
 ally tortured and beat suspects. Members of the armed forces were responsible for
 sporadic brutality against the lower ranks and aliens under their control in border
 areas. The Government investigated and prosecuted few police or military officers
 accused of abuse or extrajudicial killings. Conditions in immigration detention facili-
 ties are poor, and the prolonged detention of aliens is a problem. An ingrained cul-
 ture of corruption in the bureaucracy, police, and military services plagues society.
 Some members of both police and military services used their positions to facilitate
 the trade in prostitution.
 Bribes or "tea money," demanded on a regular basis, undermine the rule of law,
 permitting a climate of im punity for illegal practices such as income tax evasion,
 gambling, imiriant trafficking, goods smugng, and prostitution. Enforcement of
 a broad range oflaws and regulations by police continues to be noticeably lax.
 There were isolated attempts by some officials to limit press freedom through po-
 lice "warnings," to restrict some activities of human rights nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's), and to harass an academic researcher. Legal and societal discrimi-
 nation against women, violence against women and children, and illegal child labor
 persist. Societal discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities is a problem.
 The Government imposes restrictions on the movement of tribal people.
 At year's end, the Government had not yet established institutions-government
 ombudsmen and an independent election commission-almost 2 years after their
 formal adoption in the Constitution. An earlier government's commitment in 1992
 to establish a human rights commission has not been pursued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial K'ing.-There were two reported political
 killings in 1996. In January Thong-in Kaew-Wattha, a leader of protests against a
 toxic waste treatment plant in an agricultural community, was shot and killed by
 a gunman and his accomplice. Two suspects, identified by eyewitnesses, are in cus-
 
 
 779
 tody and awaiting trial. NGO's, academic researchers, and other professional groups
 believe that the suspects were hired by a local businessman whose interests were
 adversely affected by Thong-in's environmental activism. The police abandoned fur-
 ther investigatin, despite self-incriminating statements by the main suspect.
 In July Joon Bhoonkhuntod, a farmer activist in Chaiyaphum, was shot and killed
 by a police private. Police stated that the victim was resisting arrest on charges of
 cultivating marijuana, later adding that the shooting was accidental. NGO's claimed
 that Joon was targeted based on his political activities. Some allege that the use
 of force was not only excessive but may have been part of a carefully planned am-
 bush. The accused policeman was arrested and released on bail pending further in-
 vestigation.
 Legal organizations, reputable NGO's, and the press continued to provide credible
 reports that some police officers summarily executed criminal suspects, particularly
 in areas outside the capital. The police information center reported a total of 23 sus-
 pects killed during attempted arrest in 1995, with 16 such killings in the first half
 of 1996. It appears that a number of the deaths during arrests occurred when police
 returned fire by armed suspects. In November news media documented the arrest
 of six suspects in Suphan Buri who were led away handcuffed by police; the six were
 found dead minutes later. Police claim that they acted in self-defense since one of
 the suspects attempted to seize a weapon, but responsible sources questioned the
 credibility of the official explanation. According to data from the Attorney General's
 office released in Seprember, 90 cases of killings by all civil officials (including police
 and other agency officials such as forestry and district officials) during 1995 re-
 suited in 89 cases being dismissed by the courts and one case continuing. During
 the first half of 1996, all 21 cses of killings by officials were dismissed by the courts.
 The Attorney General's office reported that a total of 324 suspects and detainees
 died while in the "custody of government officials" in 1995, with another 205 dying
 in the first 9 months of 1996. According to police, there were 98 deaths in custody
 after initial detention during 1995 and the first 6 months of 1996. Of these, 63 were
 reported as apparent suicides. However, specific case reports from regional authori-
 ties indicated that the figure may be as high as 140 deaths in custody.
 Political activists allege that the October 1995 killing of conservationist Winai
 Chantamano in Satun province was the result of his opposition to encroachment on
 national forest lands by an influential group of investors. Two of four alleged assail-
 ants have been detained, and the case remains under investigation.
 The Government prosecutes few police or military officers accused of extrajudicial
 killings. Courts rarely convict police officers involved in summary executions, in part
 because witnesses are often intimidated or bribed to withhold evidence. The result-
 ing climate of impunity is the single largest factor preventing any significant change
 in poie behavior, None was convicted in 1996. The law allows personal suits
 against police officers for criminal actions taken while making an arrest. However,
 due to flaws in the legal process and ingrained cultural attitudes, victims or their
 families rarely file suits against the police. During the initial police inquiry, most
 police investigations routinely determine that no wrongful action was taen on the
 part of the plice; judges generally follow the prosecutor's recommendations. If pur-
 sued by the family, the case is handled by the same offie, in some instances by
 the same prosecutor, who has already ruledthat no criminal action occurred. There
 is no information to determine how many cases are settled out of court, but in cases
 in which suits are filed, the official charged often compensates the family of the de-
 ceased, and the suit is dropped.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were no developments in the 1994 disappearance of environmental activist
 Suchada Khamfubutra or the 1991 disappearance of Labor Congress of Thailand
 President Thanong Po-an.
 There were no developments in investigations into the whereabouts of the remain-
 ing 39 prodemocracy protesters listed as missing following the military's suppres-
 sion of demonstrations in May 1992. Most, if not all, are presumed by family mem-
 bers and NGO's to be dead. A civil case brought by family members remains before
 the courts.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
 However, there continued to be credible reports that police sometimes tortured and
 beat prisoners and detainees. Credible reports from nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) academic institutions, and professional groups indicate that some police oc-
 casionally tortured and beat suspects and obtained coerced confessions through the
 use of physical abuse. Criminal suspects occasionally complained of police attempts
 to secure confessions or evidence through the use oftrture such as electric shock.
 Similar, isolated complaints have beenheard about treatment by the military per-
 
 
 sonnel in armed forces detention centers or in border areas under martial law. Po-
 lice and military personnel officially deny these allegations, but some police officials
 acknowledged that torture is occasionally carried out in police custody, with the im-
 plicit backing of some senior police officers. The Government made no visible efforts
 to prosecute, convict, and appropriately punish those who committed these abuses.
 Aron conditions are Spartan but do not in general threaten the life or health
 of inmates. Sleeping accommodations and access to medical care are areas of con-
 cern that require continued attention to meet minimum international standards.
 Some prison guards resort to physical abuse of both Thai and foreign prisoners
 in.response to disciplinary problems. A number of credible sources reported that
 prisoners caught in escape attempts are often beaten and sometimes beaten to
 death. Solitary confinement and heavy leg irons are sometimes used to punish dif-
 ficult prisoners. Medical care in prisons is inadequate. To care for a total prison pop-
 ulation of 100,000, the Corrections Department employs only 12 full-time and 2
 part-time doctors and 4 dentists.
 Access to prisoners is not restricted, and the Government permits visits by human
 rights monitors.
 Conditions at the Suan Phlu Immigration Detention Center (IDC), were poor, al-
 though an increased budget resulted in some modest improvements. There were pe-
 Gods during which as many as 200 IDC detainees were kept in holding areas of
 about 1,200 square feet, allowing only about 6 square feet for each prisoner to sleep
 in packed, wall-to-wal formation. Overcrowding, poor sanitation and ventilation,
 and inability to exercise are recurring problems. Additional detention centers were
 under construction. Except for medic  care rovided under the auspices of the U.N.
 and private institutions, there is no governmental medical care avalable in the IDC.
 Consistent with nationwide treatment of illegal immigrants, children are detained
 with their parents, and a food ration is provided only for parents, not the accom-
 panying children.
 Immigration detention facilities are not administered by the Department of Cor-
 rections and are not subject to many of the regulations found in the regular prison
 system. Citizens of countries that will not accept deportees because of uncertainties
 over citizenship face an extended stay in the IDO. While the law requires that pros-
 ecutrs formally charge criminal suspects in court within 91 days of their detention,
 some IDC detainees have been held for upto 2 years. In June a royal pardon re-
 suked in the release and repatriation of about 1,300 11)0 detainees.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Except in cases of crimes in progress, the
 law generally requires arrest warrants, and authorities respect this provision in
 practice. Arrested persns must be informed of the likely charges against them im-
 mediately after arrest. Police have the authorit to extend the detention period to
 7 days in order to complete an investigation. After 7 days, the police must present
 the case to the public prosecutor to determine if the case should be pursued. While
 detainees have a right to have a lawyer present during questioning, they are often
 not informed of this right. Foreign prisoners are often forced to sign confessions and
 stand trial without benefit of a translator, although the Government is studying pro-
 vision of translation services for court bearings.
 There is a functioning bail system, but judges have considerable discretion in de-
 termining eligibility for bail, with no means of appeal. The only legal basis for de-
 tention by the police without specific charges for long periods (up to 480 days) is
 the Anti-Communist Activities Act, which was not invoked in 1996 (see Section i.e.).
 As of October, there were 103,202 prison inmates in Thailand. Of that number,
 about 9,500 were persons appealing their sentences, and approximately 25,000 were
 pretrial detainees. These two groups are not usually segregated from the general
 prison population, although sometimes an effort is made to confine those facing nar-
 cotics charges in a separate facility. The June a royal pardon resulted in the release
 of about 24,000 prisoners.
 In March two Amnesty International (Al) representatives were detained at Bang-
 kok's Bang Rak police station for 90 minutes while police inspected their passports
 and trave documents. The detention, which the police later labled an "invitation"
 to the police station, coincided with the time during which Ay had planned to release
 publicly a report highly critical of human rights practices in China.
 A group of 12 Burmese student political activists of concern to the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees remained in the Special Detention Center (SDC).
 In addition, four of these Burmese refugees, originally detained in the safe area
 camp, have been held in the SDC from periods ranging from 22 to 30 months for
 staging protests at a Burmese refugee cam p or for minor infractions of the camp
 rules. None of the four was formally chargedor sentenced. At year's end, they were
 still being held without charges in Bangkok's special detention center, after initially
 being apprehended for their political activities.
 
 
 781
 
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and, although generally regarded as independent, the judiciary has a reputa-
 tion for venality.
 The civilian judicial system has three levels of courts: courts of first instance,
 courts of appeal, and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal
 and civil cases pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during peri-
 ods of martial law. A serious flaw in providing due process rights is the lack of ap-
 peal from decisions of a military court. Islamic (Shari'a) courts provide due process
 and hear only civil cases concerning members of the Muslim minority.
 The Constitution provides for presumption of innocence. Access to courts or ad-
 ministrative bodies to seek redress is provided for and practiced.
 There is no trial by jury. Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a single judge,
 and more serious cases require two or more judges. While most trials are public,
 the court may order a trial closed. This is done most often in cases touching on na-
 tional security or the royal family. Career civil service judges preside over the
 courts. Judicial appointments and structures are not subject to parliamentary re-
 view.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including access to a lawyer of their choosing. A government program provides free
 legal advice to the poor, but indigent defendants are not automatically provided
 with counsel at public expense. Most free legal aid comes from private groups, in-
 cluding the Thai Lawyers' Association and the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 Credible legal sources say that, aside from nine Muslim activists, there were no
 political prisoners at year's end, the last few prisoners serving prison sentences
 under the Anti-Communist Activities Act having been released under a general par-
 don granted by the King in June. Muslim groups claimed that nine prisoners are
 jailed on criminal convictions because of their political views. Some have been im-
 prisoned since 1990 their unduly harsh sentences were imposed for participating
 in a protest rally in Pattani.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 in most instances requires police to obtain a warrant prior to a search. Warrants
 are issued by the police with prior Ministry of Interior or provincial governor ap-
 proval and are not subject to judicial review. There were some credible reports that
 officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance, then allow their noncommissioned
 subordinates to apply them as needed. According to human rights lawyers, search
 warrants were sometimes abused by police to engage in ill-defined and intrusive
 searches outside the stated evidentiary domain, aimed at uncovering any incrimi-
 nating item, even if unrelated to the crime originally alleged in the warrant. The
 Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged in "Communist suppression
 operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these powers have rarely
 been invoked in recent years and were not invoked during the year.
 Security services monitor persons espousing leftist or controversial views, includ-
 ing some foreign visitors (see Sections 2.d. and 4).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and citizens gen-
 erally enjoy, a large measure of freedom of speech. However, the law prohibits criti-
 cism of he royal family (lese majeste), threats to national security, or speaking in
 a manner likely to incite disturbances or insult Buddhism.
 Newspapers and periodicals practice some self-censorship, especially with regard
 to the monarchy and national security issues. However, strong media criticism of
 political parties, public figures, and the Government is common and vigorous. Jour-
 nalists are generally free to comment on government activities without fear of re-
 prisal, although there were credible reports of occasional harassment of journalists
 by individual politicians and military personnel. Also, journalists are reluctant to
 criticize the judiciary out of fear that they would not be treated fairly by judges dur-
 in libel proceedings.
 Under the Printing and Advertisement Act of 1941, the Royal Thai Police Special
 Branch issues warnings to publications for various violations such as disturbing the
 peace, interfering with pubic safety, or offending public morals. In 1995 police is-
 sued 13 such warnings. In 1996 the total reached 22, including 6 warnings issued
 to newspapers and weeklies for reports on the May censure debate in Parliament
 against the Government. Punishments were restricted to small frnes, but could have
 included imprisonment of the owner, publisher, editor, and journalist for ux to 3
 months. Police closure of newspapers or printing presses is also permitted under the
 1941 act but only in time of war or national emergency.
 
 
 Radio and television stations are licensed by the Government and operated under
 the direct or indirect oversight of the Government and the military forces. Radio sta-
 tions must renew their licenses each year and their signals are broadcast via gov-
 ernment transmitters. They are required by law to broadcast government-produced
 newscasts twice daily, 30 minutes each in the morning and evening.
 Although programmers are generally free to determine the content and nature of
 television broadcasts, a government internal censorship board commonly edits or
 "blacks out" portions of programming deemed politically sensitive or pornographic.
 Self-censorshp this year tended to be more prevalent in television stations directly
 controlled by the Government, although subcontracted stations remained mindful
 that they operate under 30-year government concessions.
 There are also three cable televion networks, which enjoy almost complete au-
 tonomy under the indirect oversight of the Mass Communications Authority of Thai-
 land. The first ultra high frequeny station, managed by a private consortium in-
 cluding the outspoken Nation Publishing Group, was launched in July under a 30-
 year concession from the Office of the Prime Minister. Touted as the country's first
 independent television station, its status is similar to that of other subcontracted
 stations, with free, daily, direct broadcasting.
 Domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and social
 commentary. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and domes-
 tic books normally are not censored and circulate freely. Police had the power to ban
 the import of publications until late 1990; the list of publications previously banned,
 mainly pornographic material but also including books written by Communists, re-
 mains in effect.
 An antipornography law allows police to restrict or confiscate publications and
 other materials deemed obscene; the interpretation given usually covers hard-core
 pornographic materials.
 Although academic and technical research is generally conducted freely, the Gov-
 ernment in August used unusually strong measures to rebut a university research-
 er's academic paper on alleged police bribe-taking in connection with illegal gam-
 bling. Unsolicited, police-ordered security for the researcher induced the researcher
 and his family to go into hiding due to fear of the police, and led Political activists
 and labor leaders to charge the police with harassment and intimidation. With the
 Prime Minister's approval, the police lodged a defamation complaint against the re-
 searcher, who had cited poice sources in his study. The poice later withdrew the
 lawsuit, but only after the Prime Minister brokered a meeting between the re-
 searcher and his university superiors in which they apparently negotiated alter-
 ations to the papr
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The legal system recognizes
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 Private associations must register with the Government, but permits are not re-
 quired for private meetings or gatherings unless held on public property; these are
 routinely granted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is protected by law, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice. The de facto state religion is
 Theravada Buddhism, but other religions are not restricted.
 Members of minority religious movements are occasionally subjected to legal ac-
 tion. Dissident Buddhist leader Phra Potirak and 79 followers, convicted and sen-
 tenced to 2 years' probation for violating the civil law governing the Buddhist hier-
 archy and impersonating Buddhist monks or nuns, appealed their convictions. At
 years end, all remained free and continued their official religious activities.
 Dissemination by the Government of school textbooks containing religious infor-
 mation, but only on Buddhism, was reportedly a source of annoyance among reli-
 gious minorities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right, provided for by the Constitution of citizens to change their
 residence or workplace was unabridged. Travel was restricted in certain border
 areas where foreign or vestigial domestic insurgent groups remain active. Long-
 standing restrictions on the travel and place of residence of certain Vietnamese
 aliens who immigrated to Thailand in 1945-46 and Chinese who immigrated be-
 tween 1953 and 1961 remained in place. In addition, some long-term noncitizen resi-
 dents of Thailand, including several hundred thousand tribal people, are required
 to seek permission from local authorities or the army for foreign or domestic travel.
 In practice, authorities rarely enforced these restrictive measures, and registered
 resident aliens were able to move freely within the country (see Section 5).
 Under a new regulation operative in September, illegal alien workers already in
 the country and working in specified manual labor jobs were allowed to register and
 work in 43 of the 76 provinces. These illegal aliens are allowed to work for up to
 
 
 2 years while awaiting formal deportation. The new measure had the effect of regu-
 larizing many illegal aliens, allowed them to move freely so long as their employer
 registered them with local authorities, and generally enhanced their prospects to
 seek redress for human rights abuses (see Section 6.e.).
 Several regulations intended and used to help reduce trafficking in women and
 children for purposes of prostitution could also be used to infringe on the right of
 women and children to travel freely. One rarely used statute, dating to the last cen-
 tury, requires a woman to obtain her husbands permission before traveling outside
 Thailand. Also, female passport applicants under the age of 36 must sit through a
 series of interviews regarding their employment records and finances. Passport ap-
 plications by single women and children under the age of 14 must also be approved
 by the Department of Public Welfare.
 Thailand continued to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and Lao asylum seek-
 ers. It did not officially recognize the refugee status of some Vietnamese mandated
 by the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), but neither did it compel
 them to leave Thailand. Host government screening for Vietnamese and Lao contin-
 ued, as set out under the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) agreed to in Geneva
 in 1989, until the CPA's termination on June 30. After that time, extensions of CPA
 policies or ad hoc measures consistent with the spirit of the CPA were employed.
 There were no credible reports of forced repatriation of Lao asylum seekers. Nor
 were there reports that Lao asylum seekers were denied entry at the border. There
 was an unconfirmed but credible report in May that provincial Thai authorities in
 Nan arrested and turned over to the Lao Government 13 Hmong men on December
 26, 1995. These Hmong had removed themselves from UNHCR protection and had
 been living illegally in Thailand.
 Repatriation of screened-out (i.e. nonrefugee) Vietnamese both voluntarily and in-
 voluntarily through the CPA-mandated orderly return program, continued through-
 out the year. From late June to mid-November, nearly 1,900 screened-out Vietnam-
 ese at Sikhiu camp were repatriated involuntarily in 13 movements. About 265 Viet-
 namese, including those on repatriation manifests as well as sympathizers in the
 camp, sustained self-inflicted injuries, chiefly superficial skin lacerations. These acts
 in protest of involuntary return were an attempt to postpone repatriation.
 Some Vietnamese complained that Thai authorities handled them roughly during
 their involuntary repatriation by airplane. One Vietnamese man climbed up on a
 roof to avoid repatriation, and later jumped off; his injuries from the fall proved
 fatal.
 The Government cooperated with the UNHCR in administering the sole camp for
 Lao refugees at Ban Napho, Nakhon Phanom, in assisting with voluntary repatri-
 ation, and in expediting the resettlement of about 3,000 highland and lowland Lao
 refugees to the United States. Under the law, most Burmese (and other, non-Indo-
 chinese) asylum seekers are considered illegal immigrants subject to deportation,
 but the Government continued to permit Burmese asylum seekers to remain in
 camps along the Thai-Burma border and near Bangkok. While Burmese outside of
 camps were arrested periodically as illegal aliens, the Government did not deport
 any Burmese recogized by the UNHCR as a "person of concern." There was a con-
 firmed report that Thai authorities ordered the refoulement of at least 100 members
 of minority hill tribes on October 11. The Shan members appeared to have been flee-
 ing re  ssion, including forced porterage, by the Government of Burma. Unlike
 other Bu   se minority groups seeking refuge in Thailand, Shan asylum seekers
 have no access to recognized temporary camps at which they could seek assistance
 or protection.
 At year's end, a number of Burmese dissidents, detained as illegal im'grants,
 remained in immigration detention centers in central Thailand (see Section 1.d.).
 Residents of the Safe Area first asylum camp for Burmese dissidents in
 Ratchaburi province had regular access to the UNHCR, which concluded that condi-
 tions at the safe area meet broadly accepted international standards for the protec-
 tion and welfare of asylum seekers. As a general rule, the Government restricts
 entry to the Safe Area to asylum seekers from Burma whom the UNHCR had found
 to be "persns of concern" prior to mid-1996. By year's end, about 800 Burmese per-
 sons of concern resided there.
 More than 100,000 ethnic minority Burmese and almost 2,000 Burmese students
 and dissidents continued to reside in some 34 camps along the Burma border. Sev-
 eral camps were evacuated temporarily or relocated because of cross-border attacks
 from Burma. The Government continued to permit voluntary agencies to provide
 food, medical, and sanitation assistance along the border. Adequate access to the
 camps by NGO's, to ensure adequate provision of health care and sanitation, re-
 mama a concern.
 
 
 784
 Beginning in May, the Government allowed more than 4,000 Karenni asylum
 seekers remge following widespread Burmese government forced relocations of a
 number of Karenni villages throughout Kayah state in Burma. During the year, a
 Burmese government-supported Karen faction, the Democratic Karen Buddhist
 Army, conducted isolated attacks on Karen refugee camps within Thailand, as well
 as on Thai villages, killing and abducting several persons, including members of the
 Thai security forces. The number of security incidents decreased during the rainy
 season beginning in June but increased again late in the year. Reports from NGO s
 and other credible sources strongly suggested that government-provided security of
 refugee camps along the Burma border was not sufficient to protect against raids
 into the country by Burmese armed forces or their armed supporters; however, the
 government increased the number of regular and paramilitary forces stationed in
 the border regions later in the year. In an attempt to provide better security, the
 Government has proposed to consolidate refugee camps and move them further from
 the border.
 In the east, at various times during the year, the Government accepted small
 numbers of Cambodian civilians seeking temporary refuge from low-scale conflicts
 between the Khmer Rouge and Cambodian government forces in Cambodia. These
 temporary asylum seekers were allowed to choose the time and place of their repa-
 triation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose or change their gov-
 ernment through free and fair elections based on universal suffrage, and citizens ex-
 ercised this right in November 1996. In that election, one elected government re-
 placed another through a free election, and served to strengthen democratic institu-
 tions. The military services generally showed further evidence of acceptance of civil-
 ian control. In April the Prime Minister a ppointed 260 members to the Senate, the
 first Senators appointed by an elected official in the 1990's. The new Senate re-
 placed a body that had been appointed by a military government and reflects a sub-
 stantial decline in the number of seats held by active duty or retired military offi-
 cers.
 The widespread practice of vote-buying was again present during 1996 parliamen-
 tary by-elections and general elections, supporting critics' contentions that some
 elections, although free, were fraudulent. At year's end, the Government had not yet
 established the Election Commission called for in constitutional amendments of Feb-
 ruary 1995. A draft bill submitted by the new Chavalit Government in December
 passed the first of three readings in Parliament. Under this bill, the Interior Min-
 istry would continue to handle most of the important election supervision functions.
 While there are no legal restrictions on their political participation, women are
 generally underrpresented in national politics, especially at the senior levels. Al-
 though the number of women in national politics continued to increase, only 22 of
 the 393 Members of Parliament are women. In April Prime Minister Banharn ap-
 pointed 21 women to the 260-member Senate. Two women held cabinet portfolios
 until their party withdrew from the coalition government: a Deputy Minister of the
 Interior and a Deputy Minister of Transport and Communications. There were no
 women a ppointed to the first Cabinet of Prime Minister Chavalit which took office
 in Deceer.
 In the civil service, 46 women were reported to hold a rank at or above Director
 General. In April the military services for the first time appointed six women to the
 rank of General, although women are still not allowed to attend military academies
 or the army, navy, or air force staff colleges. An additional five women were ap-
 pointed to  a rainOctober.
 No laws prohibit the participation of ethnic minorities, but few hold positions of
 authority in national politics or the civil service. Ethnic minorities in the north often
 lack documentation of citizenship, effectively barring their participation in the polit-
 ical process (see Section 5). Muslims from the south hld significant psts in the
 Government, although they continue to be underrepresented in local and provincial
 government positions (which are appointed by the central Government).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations operate without government restriction. Inter-
 national human rights NOO's generally work freely on controversial issues, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings without hindrance. The Government some-
 times criticized these groups for being politically motivated and biased, but in most
 cases it did not penalize or hinder human rights observers.
 
 
 785
 Before and during the 25-nation Asia-Europe Meeting in February, the Govern-
 ment imposed entry visa bans on some political activists and NGO leaders whom
 the Government believed would stage protests.
 The brief detention of Amnesty International (AI) human rights monitors in
 March, immediately prior to a planned AI press conference on human rights in
 China, was openly described by local authorities as an attempt to prevent the press
 conference from taking place (see Sections 1.d. and 2.a.). However, other AI mem-
 bers who remained at liberty held a press conference at a previously publicized loca-
 tion without hindrance from the police.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal treatment under the law without respect to
 race, sex, religion disability, language, or social status. In practice, some discrimi-
 nation exists, and government enforcement of equal protection statutes is uneven.
 Women.-Domestic abuse continues to be a serious problem affecting the welfare
 of many women; reliable reports indicate that domestic abuse crosses all social
 classes. One NGO estimates that as many as 50 percent of women in Bangkok's
 slum areas are victims of abuse. Police do not enforce laws against such violence
 vigorously, and domestic violence often goes unreported. Under the Criminal Code,
 spousal and child abuse is covered under assault provisions, but rules of evidence
 often make prosecuting such cases difficult. Since 1994 a pilot project in three Bang-
 kok police stations, whch has yet to be expanded, included female team to handle
 rape and abuse cases in order to encourage mre victims to report these abuses.
 Prostitution, although llegal, flourishes and is deeply ingrained. Estimates of the
 numbers of women and children engaged in prostitution vary widely because of ter-
 poray sex workers and the migratoiy nature of prostitution. Reliable NGO's esti-
 mate the number of adult female prostitutes at around 250,000.
 Prostitution exposes women to a number of human rights abuses, as well as a
 much higher risk of contracting AIDS. Some women are forced into prostitution, al-
 though the number of such cases is difficult to determine. Incidents of coerced pros-
 titution moat commonly involve women who are not ethnic Thai from hill tribes or
 are from neighboring countries; the number of such women entering the country to
 work as prostitutes continued to rise. Because they cannot speak Thai, and are con-
 siderd illegal immigrants, these women are particularly vulnerable to physical
 abuse, confinement, and exploitation. Some women are lured with promises of jobs
 as waitresses or domestic helpers, but are then forced to work as prostitutes. As ille-
 gal immigrants, these women have no right to legal counsel or health care if ar-
 rested, and this group is not protected under new regulations concerning illegal
 alien workers.
 Human rights monitors believe that the majority of those who engage in prostitu-
 tion are not kept under physical constraint, but that a large number labor in debt
 bondage. Brothel procurers often advance parents a substantial sum against their
 daughter's future earnings, often without the consent of the young woman involved.
 The women are then obligated to work in a brothel in order to pay back the loan.
 On the border with Cambodia, procurers provide women and girls as young as the
 age of 14 who were trafficked from Vietnam or China and live under slave-like cir-
 cumstances in Cambodia. Observers believe that their illegal border crossing for the
 purposes of prostitution is accomplished with the complicity of local officials.
 During the year, the Government stepped up efforts against prostitution. In Au-
 gust the Government endorsed an operational plan against commercial sex services,
 calling for such measures as further compulsory education, more vocational edu-
 cation, an enhanced public information campaign, and professional training, espe-
 cially of teachers and health care workers. In addition, under the Chavalit Govern-
 ment, the Labor Permanant Secretary chairs a Committee for Protection and Voca-
 tional Development aimed a combating prostitution.
 The Government and NGO's have already established vocational training and
 education programs to combat the lure of prostitution for young Thai women and
 their families. As a result of the strengthened national antiprostitution policy, the
 Government is expanding these programs, which are part of a 5-year program that
 started in October. Despite occasional highly publicized raids on brothels, however,
 the Government has failed to enforce effectively laws against prostitution, and, in
 many cases, brothel operators bribe local government representatives and police.
 There continue to be credible reports of involvement by some corrupt police, mili-
 tary, and other officials in trafficking schemes.
 Until recently, prostitutes were considered criminals, whereas brothel owners,
 procurers, and clients were not subject to criminal statutes. A new law passed in
 
 
 786
 September further criminalizes those involved in the trafficking of women and chil-
 dren for the purpose of prostitution or slave labor.
 Women generally have eual legal rights but inequalities remain in domestic law.
 Whereas a man may sue for divorce on the guns that his wife has committed
 adultery, a woman faces the additional legal~rden of proving that her husband
 has maintained or honored another woman in a manner equal to his wife. Women
 face more stringent requirements to obtain passos than do men (see Section 2.d.).
 Statistics compiled by the Government and N 's oncerned with women's issues
 note that women represent 47 percent of the economically active population and
 that their numbers have increased in professional positions. Government regula-
 tions require employers to pay the same wages and benefits for similar work regard-
 less of sex. However, there is a significant gap between average salaries earned by
 men and women as a result of the concentration of women in traditionally lower
 paying jobs. In addition, women tend to receive lower pay for equal work in virtually
 all sectors of the economy, a fact already documented in studies of manufacturing,
 services, and agriculture.
 Women generally have access to higher education; more than half the university
 graduates are women.
 Despite improvements in the Government's performance regarding women's
 rights, including well-received propsed amendments to the Family Act, many wom-
 ens rights N  's remain skeptical that women will soon be able to enjoy equal in-
 come opportunities or obtain opportunities equal to men to enter decisionmaking po-
 sitions in high-ranking government appointments, the civil service, or in the private
 sector.
 Children.-The Government is committed to the rights and welfare of children,
 although child labor, a relatively short compulsory education system, and child pres-
 titution remain areas of concern. "Human Development" was a major theme of the
 Eighth National Economic and Social Development Plan, released n midyear. Key
 among the human development proposals is an increased emphasis on extending
 compulsory education from grade 6 to grade 9 and to alleviating poverty. There are
 no reliable statistics on the number of children involved in the sex industry, but offi-
 cial estimates by the Government's National Commission on Women's Affairs indi-
 cate that 15 to 20 percent of prostitutes are children under the age of 18. Applying
 this official estimate to the NGO's count, there are probably from 20,000 to 40,000
 child prostitutes.
 While the Government did take several significant steps to combat child prostitu-
 tion, it is unclear how effectively new laws will be enforced and new policies imple-
 mented. Clients of child prostitutes are now subject to criminal prosecution and
 strong penalties, including up to 6 years' imprisonment. Credible NGO's reported at
 years end that efforts by police to enforce the new antiprostitution law were only
 moderately successful in curbing the trade in children for commercial sex.
 In August the Banharn Government's Cabinet approved draft legislation that
 would revise the Criminal Code to toughen the laws regarding abuse of children
 under 18 years of age; the draft includes especially severe penalties for violations
 perpetrated against children under the age of 15. The bill, under consideration by
 the Chavalit Cabinet since December, would provide a fund to assist such children
 and initiate a parenting education program.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 As in the case of domestic violence against women; however, police are often reluc-
 tant to pursue abuse cases, and rules of evidence make prosecution of child abuse
 cases difficult.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government again took few steps to implement
 provisions in the Disabled Rehabilitation Law that established a quota system and
 employer incentives for hiring the disabled. Another regulation requiring factories
 to hire one disabled person for every 200 nondisabled employees was also not en-
 forced. There are no laws mandating access to public facilities for disabled persons.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent a significant minority within the coun-
 try as a whole and constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces that
 border Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integrate the Muslim
 community into society through developmental efforts and expanded educational op-
 portunities, societal discrimination remains widespread.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Progress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into society is limited. Only half the estimated 500,000 to 600,000 members of hill
 tribes reportedly possess documentation that either lists them as citizens or places
 them on the record as being eligible for future citizenship. The rest lack documenta-
 tion, and thus access to adequate education and health care. Noncitizens are also
 barred from participating in the political process. Undocumented hill tribe people
 
 
 cannot own land and are not subject to labor laws, including minimum wage re-
 quirements. In August the Government ran a pilot test of new criteria to establish
 alien resident status for highlanders, but the lack of legal status for this group per-
 sists. Under the 1992 Thai Nationality Law, children born in Thailand to two per-
 manent residents have the right to citizenship.
 Approximately 45,000 Vietnamese who fledIndochina in the 1940's and 1950's re-
 side in northeastern Thailand and live under a set of laws and regulations restrict-
 ing their movements, residences, education, and occupations. The Government has
 slowly pursued a more lenient policy toward longtime Vietnamese residents in re-
 cent years and in August announced that it is reviewing a process for granting citi-
 zenship to all members of this group. There are also approximately 40,000 nonciti-
 zen Chinese and their descendants who live in border areas. Very few of these peo-
 ple have citizenship, and the vast majority must seek permission from local authori-
 ties in order to travel outside their districts (see Section 2).
 Under a quota system, only 100 persons per nationality per year may be natural-
 ized as citizens. However, in addition to the review of citizenship for Vietnamese
 in the northeast, the Interior Ministry is considering a measure to speed up natu-
 ralization of the 10,000 Chinese and 8,000 Vietnamese that it reports are currently
 seeking citizen status.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law grants freedom of association to private sec-
 tor workers. Workers have the right to form and join unions of their choosing with-
 out prior authorization; to decide on the constitutions and rules of these associations
 and unions; to express their views without government or employer interference; to
 confederate with other unions; to receive protection from discrimination, dissolution,
 suspension, or termination by any outside authority because of union activities; and
 to have employee representation in direct negotiations with employers. However, no
 law explicitly protects workers from discrimination due to their participation in or-
 ganizing new unions that have not yet been officially registered. Union leaders re-
 port that employers often discriminate against workers seeking to organize unions.
 Workers in the public sector do not have the right to form unions. In state enter-
 prises, the law allows workers in each state enterprise to form a single "association"
 after at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees submit a petition to the Min-
 istry of Labor to register such an association. These associations submit employee
 grievances to management and propose changes in benefits and working conditions
 but may not negotiate wages. Associations do not have the right to confederate or
 to join private sector federations. Unofficial contacts between public and private sec-
 tor unions continue, however, and the Government has not interfered with these re-
 lationships.
 The law denies all state enterprise workers the right to strike. In the private sec-
 tor, to be considered legal a proposed strike must be approved by a majority of the
 union members in a secret ballot and be registered beforehand with the Ministry
 of Labor.
 In 1991 the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized labor law amend-
 ments adopted by a military-appointed legislature in March 1991 that dissolved
 state enterprise unions, transferred their assets, limited the number of associations
 that may be formed in each state enterprise, set relatively high minimum member-
 ship requirements for associations, denied associations the right to affiliate with pri-
 vate sector unions, and completely forbade strikes in state enterprises. Although the
 Government has not vigorously enforced these restrictions, it pledged to pass a new
 version of the law that would restore for the most part the rights enjoyed by state
 enterprise workers prior to the 1991 changes. A draft bill which failed to become
 law during the 1995-96 Banharn Government was resubmitted to Parliament by
 the Chavalit Government in December and passed the first of three readings needed
 to move the bill out of the House of Representatives.
 The Government has the authority to restrict private sector strikes that would
 "affect national security or cause severe negative repercussions for the population
 at large." The Government seldom invokes this provision and did not do so in 1996.
 Labor law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more broadly
 than the ILO criteria for such services. No strikes were disapproved on those
 grounds in 1996. The number of legal strikes has averaged fewer than 10 annually
 for the past 10 years.
 Over~half of the work force is employed in the unorganized agricultural sector.
 Less than 2 percent of the total work force, though nearly 11 percent of industrial
 workers, is unionized. Cultural traditions and unfamiliarity with the concept of in-
 dustrial relations are often cited as the reasons for low rates of labor organization.
 
 
 788
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 mysterious disappearance
 of outspoken labor leader Thanong Po-an remains unsolved (see Section 1.b.).
 There is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were exploited by the
 military forces, politicians, or employers for their own purposes, but private unions
 generally operate independently of the Government and other outside organizations.
 Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade union organizations,
 and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 recognizes the right of private sector workers to organize and bargain collectively
 and defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-assisted con-
 ciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. In practice, genuine collective bar-
 gaining occurs only in a small fraction of workplaces and in most instances contin-
 ues to be characterized by a lack of sophistication on the part of employee groups
 and autocratic attitudes on the part of employers. Wage increases for most workers
 come as a result of increases in the minimum wage, rather than as a result of collec-
 tive bargaining.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labor law for the private sector. Workers may also seek redress for their
 grievances from the Tripartite Labor Relations Committee. Redress of grievances for
 state enterprise workers is handled by the State Enterprise Labor Relations Com-
 mittee. Labor leaders did not indicate dissatisfaction with the treatment that their
 concerns received in these forums, except that union leaders dismissed unjustly usu-
 ally are awarded only monetary compensation.
 No separate labor legislation applies to export processing zones, where wages and
 workingconditions often are better than national norms because of the preponder-
 ance of Western and Japan-based multinational firms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law.
 However, there are reports of sweatshops in the informal sector that physically re-
 strain workers from leaving the premises. There are no estimates of how many such
 workshops exist, but the growing number of illegal aliens from Burma, Cambodia,
 and Laos increases the opportunities for such abuse. In one notable case, a Bangkok
 industrial glove making factory employed six girls 13 to 14 years of age working 15-
 hour days. The owner allegediy used a hot iron to inflict burns on three girls-two
 of whom were from Laos-as punishment for falling asleep on the job. In July au-
 thorities raided the shop and arrested the owner.
 For several years, the ILO has cited Thailand for violations of Convention 29 on
 forced labor. In 1995 Thailand was the subject of a country "observation," but the
 ILO declined to make Thailand the subject of a special paragraph. The primary
 focus of ILO criticism is forced child labor, especially child prostitution. Since the
 ILO raised these concerns, the Government has cooperated in settingup important
 institutional links, particularly with the International Program on the Elimination
 of Child Labor, to help address the problem (see Section 5).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for em-
 ployment is 13 years. Nearly 90 percent of children complete six grades of compul-
 sory education at age 12; only 60 percent of 13-year-olds are enrolled in seventh
 grade, but this percentage is increasing. The law permits the employment of chil-
 dren between the ages of 13 and 15 only in "light work," where the lifting of heavy
 loads and exposure to toxic materials or dangerous equipment or situations is re-
 stricted. The employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6 a.m.), or in venues where
 alcohol is served, is prohibited by law. An analysis based on population and school
 enrollment data shows that between 850,000 and 1,480,000 children work in Thai-
 land, mostly on family farms. Between 240,000 and 410,000 (2 to 4 percent of the
 6 to 14 age group) are estimated to be in urban employment at particular risk of
 labor abuse.
 The Ministry of Labor has increased the number of inspectors specifically respon-
 sible for child labor issues, although not all these officers are engaged in full-time
 inspection work. Enforcement of child labor laws is not rigorous. The inclination
 when dealing with violators is to negotiate promises of better future behavior, rath-
 er than to seek prosecution and punishment.
 The Government is also addressing the problem of child labor by proposing to ex-
 tend compulsory education from 6 to 9 years.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gov-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives increased the daily legal minimum
 wage by 7.6 percent in September. Minimum wage rates now range between $5.05
 (128 baht) and $6.20 (157 baht) per day depending upon the cost of living in various
 provinces. This wage is not adequate to provide a decent standard of living for an
 
 
 789
 urban worker and family. With extended family members' financial contributions
 the minimum wage provides the basis for a marginally adequate overall standard
 of living. However, more than half of workers countrywide receive less than the
 minimum wage, especially in rural provinces. Unskilled migrant workers, as well
 as illegal aliens, often work for wages significantly less than the minimum wage.
 The minimum wage does not apply to undocumented hill tribe people. The Ministry
 of Labor is responsible for ensuring that employers meet minimum wage require-
 ments. Despite encouragement of employees to report violations to labor inspectors,
 enforcement of minimum wage laws is mixed.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire labor force.
 By regulation, commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week, em-
 ployees in industry work 48, and those in "dangerus" work such as in the chemical,
 petroleum, mining, or other industries involving heavy machinery, 42. Transpor-
 tation workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement of these
 standards is weak. There is no 24-hour rest period mandated by law.
 Working conditions vary widely. In medium-sized and large factories, government
 health and safety standards are often maintained, but lax enforcement of safety
 standards is common. In the large informal sector, the health and safety environ-
 ment is substandard. Employers are able to ignore safety regulations in part be-
 cause nonunionized workers often do not understand safety and health standards
 and do not report violations. When 188 workers died in the May 1993 Kader Toy
 Factory fire near Bangkok, the Government brought suit against eight persons, in-
 cluding the managing director. The case commenced in June 1994 and continued
 throughout 1996 in once-weekly sessions without conclusion. There is no law afford-
 ingjob protection to employees who remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions. The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare promulgates health and safety regu-
 lations regarding conditions of work. Labor inspectors are responsible for enforce-
 ment of health and safety regulations; the strictest penalty is 6 months in jail.
