Thailand
The steady erosion of respect for human rights in Thailand that has
characterized Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra’s rule accelerated
sharply in 2004. Thai security forces, increasingly able to act with
impunity, engaged in brutal crackdowns against insurgents in the south
and against alleged drug dealers and users.
The military crackdown against a steadily escalating insurgency in the
country’s predominantly Muslim southern provinces, site of long-simmering
resentments due to economic and political marginalization, culminated
in the death of eighty-six protesters at the hands of security
forces in October 2004 and a retaliatory spate of bombings and beheadings
of locally prominent Buddhists, apparently by Muslim insurgent
groups.
The government’s war on drugs resulted in some 2,500 extrajudicial
killings, and seriously hampered efforts to provide HIV/AIDS treatment
to injection drug users. The Prime Minister tried to restrict criticism
by purging dissenting voices in the government bureaucracy and
using government and private means to tighten control of the media.
Violence in the South
2004 witnessed some of the worst violence in the recent history of
Thailand’s southern provinces. The area’s residents, who are predominantly
Muslim and ethnically distinct from the mostly Buddhist Thai,
have long complained about being marginalized economically and politically
from the rest of the country. Since the area was placed under martial
law in January, at least 550 people have been killed, some apparently
by insurgent groups, some at the hands of military and paramilitary
forces.
Nearly two hundred people were killed by military forces during two
particularly violent incidents. On October 25, 2004, during the Muslim
holy month of Ramadan, security forces killed at least eighty-six
demonstrators in the Tak Bai district of Narathiwat province; six were
shot by security forces and some eighty detainees died of suffocation
during transit. The detainees’ hands had been tied behind their backs
and, still breathing, they were laid on top of one another in military
trucks, in some cases stacked four deep.
In apparent retaliation for this incident, there have been several small
bomb attacks and some thirty murders of Buddhists in the south, with
at least three victims beheaded.
Prime Minister Thaksin, who had championed a tougher response to
the insurgency in the south, appointed a special committee to investigate
the events. At this writing, no prosecutions of security forces
involved in the incident had been announced.
On April 28, 2004, lightly armed Islamic groups launched simultaneous
pre-dawn attacks on police bases and checkpoints in several districts of
Yala, Pattani, and Songkhla provinces in southern Thailand. Thai officials
reported that 107 suspected assailants, most between fifteen and
twenty years of age, and five security officers were killed after nine
hours of violent clashes. Army and police sources unofficially put the
number of dead assailants at more than 120. Approximately fifteen people
were arrested.
At least thirty militants who had sheltered in the Kruesie Mosque were
killed when military forces rushed them using grenades. A governmentappointed
commission concluded that the level of force and type of
weapons used in the attack on the mosque was “disproportionate to the
threat posed by the militants.” Despite the commission’s recommendations,
there has been no accountability for any of the security forces
involved in the attack.
The Brutal War on Drugs
The lack of accountability for the counter-insurgency campaign in the
south reflects the growing impunity of Thai security forces. On
February 1, 2003, Thaksin launched a national campaign that treated
drug offenders as threats to social and national security. Within three
months, 2,275 alleged drug offenders had been shot dead in apparent
extrajudicial executions. At this writing, no serious government investigation
had been conducted into the deaths. On October 3, 2004,
Thaksin announced a new phase of the anti-drug campaign, promising
“brutal measures” against drug traffickers.
The HIV/AIDS Epidemic
In the past, health experts praised Thailand’s response to the AIDS epidemic;
government programs providing condoms and HIV/AIDS information
in health clinics and brothels have prevented an estimated
200,000 HIV infections. The war on drugs has reversed some of those
gains. Numerous drug users have reported arbitrary arrest, beatings,
and detention by police officers. International experience shows that
such mistreatment undermines HIV/AIDS programs by driving vulnerable
populations into hiding.
Many drug users are coerced by the government to enroll in government-
subsidized drug treatment programs. Many do so only after being
arbitrarily arrested or threatened with arrest if they do not enroll. And
many enroll even though they have never used illicit drugs or have quit
using drugs before enrolling in treatment. In some cases, drug users
choose not to seek treatment or discontinued it out of fear that identification
as a drug user would result in arrest or murder.
Human Rights Defenders
Thailand’s once-thriving human rights community has also faced government
pressure and intimidation. In one of the most notable and
alarming incidents, in March 2004 Somchai Neelapaijit, a prominent
Muslim leader and human rights lawyer, was abducted in Bangkok and
is presumed dead. Somchai had been repeatedly threatened after alleging
police torture of separatist suspects in southern provinces where
martial law was enforced and defending two alleged Thai members of
the Jemaah Islamiyah, an Islamist group with alleged links to Al-Qaeda.
Restriction on Freedom of Press and Freedom of Assembly
Prime Minister Thaksin, who owes his own standing as one of
Thailand’s wealthiest citizens to his control of the Shin Corporation (a
telecommunications empire now controlled by members of his family),
has used government and private channels to mute Thailand’s oncevibrant
media.
Over the past three years the Thai Journalists Association and the Thai
Broadcasters Association have documented more than twenty cases in
which news editors and journalists were dismissed or transferred, or
their work tampered with, to appease the government. The authorities
have arbitrarily used work permits and visa renewals as effective tools
for pressuring foreign journalists.
Most television and radio stations in Thailand are owned in full or in
part by government agencies. The government also uses disbursement
of corporate and government advertising to reward media outlets, both
Thai and international, that follow the government line and to punish
those that do not. It uses the withdrawal or termination of operating
licenses, or threats of such, to rein in critical private broadcasters.
Media freedom in Thailand has been further undermined by large libel
actions against prominent advocates and independent journalists. Shin
Corp., for example, is suing editors of the Thai Post newspaper and
media freedom activist Supinya Klangnarong over a story which
charged the government with pursuing policies aimed at boosting interests
of the prime minister’s business empire.
The government also has clamped down on freedom of assembly, with
regular reports of excessive use of force by police against critics of
Thaksin’s policies. On October 16, 2004, a 1,500-strong combined force
of police and volunteer militias violently dispersed about one thousand
protesting landless farmers rallying peacefully in Karbi province. The
government dismissed findings of the National Human Rights
Commission that the level of force and type of tactics used in the crackdown
were disproportionate.
Before and during the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
meeting in Bangkok last October, the government also banned some
five hundred human rights and social activists from entering the country
and threatened potential organizers of protests that security forces
would have to take the “utmost decisive action.”
Refugee Protection
In an apparent effort to forge friendship with Burma’s military government,
Thaksin has abandoned Thailand’s longstanding humanitarian
stance toward Burmese refugees, threatening the security of hundreds
of thousands of such refugees. Under intense pressure from the Thai
government, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) has agreed to move Burmese refugees living in
Bangkok and other urban areas to camps along the Thai-Burma border,
and has stated that it will terminate financial assistance and cease the
renewal of protection certificates for those who do not comply.
On January 1, 2004, UNHCR suspended its screening of new asylum
seekers from Burma and the Thai government assumed responsibility
for such screening. Because Thailand narrowly restricts its protection
and assistance to “people fleeing fighting,” the government is likely to
reject the applications of Burmese exiles and asylum seekers who are
fleeing persecution for their pro-democracy activities in Burma. Those
who are rejected would be classified as illegal immigrants and face the
risk of being deported to Burma. A June 21, 2003 memorandum of
understanding between Burma and Thailand gives the Burmese military
junta a greater role in the deportation process, increasing the likelihood
that deportees will be persecuted upon their return.
Burmese pro-democracy activists and asylum seekers, many of them
holding the UNHCR person of concern status, have been arrested during
peaceful demonstrations in Bangkok. In May 2004 more than forty
demonstrators at the Burmese Embassy in Bangkok were arrested and
threatened with deportation back to Burma, where they could face persecution.
Key International Actors
During Prime Minister Thaksin’s tenure, Thailand has lost some of its
standing as a regional hub for human rights protection because of
increasing restrictions on press freedom and the activity of environmental
and human rights activists.
Thailand has increased its already close cooperation with the U.S. as
part of the “war on terror,” leading President Bush to designate
Thailand a Major non-NATO ally in October 2003. U.S. military and
police officials cooperate with their Thai counterparts in counter-narcotics
operations and border control operations, although both countries
deny that the U.S. has any operational role in the increasingly
bloody counterinsurgency campaign in southern Thailand. Thailand has
enthusiastically pushed for greater counterterrorism cooperation among member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
as well as in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
In August 2003, Thailand captured Riduan Isamuddin, better known as
Hambali, suspected of leading Jemaah Islamiyah and helping to plan the
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States and a series
of bombings targeting civilians in Indonesia. The United States took
custody of Hambali and has kept him in an undisclosed location. The
United States has not allowed Indonesian authorities investigating the
terrorist attacks there to interview Hambali.
Thailand provided small but symbolically important assistance to the
United States campaigns in Afghanistan and in Iraq, where a 450-strong
Thai contingent suffered two casualties in December 2003. Thai troops
withdrew from Iraq as part of their planned one-year commitment, at
least partly in response to strong domestic criticism.
The U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial and summary executions
has requested a visit to Thailand to complete an investigation into the
October 25, 2004 killings of demonstrators in Narathiwat province.
Thailand has developed strong economic and diplomatic links with the
brutal military government ruling Burma. Thailand has become a major
investor in Burma and has cooperated with the Burmese government in
curbing the political activity of Burmese refugees living in Thailand.
Thailand has also defended Burma’s dismal human rights record in
important regional fora such as ASEAN, the Asia-Europe Meeting, and
meetings of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.