 THAILAND
 Thailand is a constitutional monarchy. National elections
 -were last held in April 1979. Under the constitution promul-
 gated on December 2, 1978, there is a strong executive led by
 a prime minister, and a bicameral legislature composed of a
 301-member elected lower house and a 225-member senate
 appointed by the prime minister and approved by the king.
 Neither the prime minister nor members of his cabinet need
 to be elected members of parliament.
 tThe current prime minister, Prem Tinsulanon, came to
 power in February l-980"through.constitutional procedures.
 His cabinet is dominated by civilians and has carried for-
 ward elements of-its predecessor's policies which emphasize
 national reconciliation and reinstitution of democratic pro-
 cesses. In April 1981, the Prem government was threatened
 by a coup attempt staged by a group of young army officers.
 The coup was suppressed peacefully by loyal officers and
 the constitutional government remained in power.
 As in 1980,, the focus of human rights activism in Thailand
 over the past year has continued to shift away from the
 aftermath of the 1976 disturbances toward concern over more
 recent alleged abuses of authority by paramilitary forces
 in rural areas. The present government has promised to
 bring these units under stricter control, and local civil
 rights groups and legislators continue to press--for investi-
 gations and corrective action. Restrictions on media content,
 political gatherings and .association, and an anti-communist law
 with arbitrary detention and search provisions remain on the
 books and at times generate local attention, but these laws
 are reported to be rarely and lightly enforced.
 In 1981 Thailand continued its policy of offering refuge and
 assistance to Indochinese refugees in close cooperation with
 international relief agencies and foreign countries. Near
 year's end,.over 220,000 refugees were in camps on Thai soil
 and thousands more remained in groups on the border with
 Kampuchea. The Thai government, with assistance from the
 United States, implemented a sea and air surveillance program
 to suppress pirates in the Gulf of Thailand who have been
 preying on Vietnamese boat refugees. The-government pro-
 secuted accused pirates and several were convicted and
 received lengthy sentences. The piracy persists, however.
 Terrorist and insurgent incidents continued in 1981 and
 called attention to separatist activities within the Muslim
 minority in the far south of Thailand. While language and
 cultural barriers disadvantage the Muslims, there is no
 overt policy of discrimination and the government has given
 priority attention to improvement of administration and
 development in the south. Income levels in the south are
 generally higher than in either the north or northeast, but
 the southern region faces similar rural development problems
 and a comparatively higher incidence of crime and insurgency.
 Venal and insensitive local officials contribute to the
 problem, and while the-government has taken measures to
 improve the performance of its officers, progress has been
 slow.
 
 (688)
 
 
 689
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is not used as an instrument of government policy.
 Allegations of maltreatment have been made in the past by
 the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society (CGRS), a
 Thai human rights group, as well as other activists, but
 there were no new, substantiated allegations in 1981.
 There are recurring reports of persons arrested on criminal
 charges who are allegedly being mistreated by police.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Thai government has stated its opposition to the
 use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment, the CGRS, in
 its periodic reports, has cited alleged cases of brutality
 and mistreatment by police and military personnel and asserted
 that most of these offenders go unpunished. The majority of
 cases are reported to occur in rural areas where communist
 insurgency is a problem and clear evidence remains difficult
 to obtain.
 According to human rights activists in Thailand, abuses of
 authority relating to torture, disappearances, cruel and
 inhuman punishment or treatment, and arbitrary arrest and
 imprisonment have declined somewhat over the last several
 years, due in part to unfavorable publicity which focused on
 incidents of this type. This publicity has led to a tighten-
 ing of discipline and efforts to exert better control over
 police and paramilitary forces.
 Prison conditions in Thailand are poor as a consequence of
 serious overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and the high incidence of drug use among
 prisoners. Prisoners are subject to strict regulations which
 include corporal punishment for infractions. Under a new
 program instituted in October 1980, prisoners with less than
 two years remaining on their sentences are allowed to work
 outside their prison as a form of rehabilitation.
 In 1980, newspapers and civil rights groups drew attention
 to the plight of 213 illegal aliens who had been detained
 for periods of up to nineteen years. These inmates were
 persons who entered Thailand illegally, subsequently were
 convicted of crimes, and were ordered deported. Their
 respective countries of origin, however, refused to accept
 them back and they remained in detention. In response to
 the public attention drawn to their plight, the government
 on December 1, 1980, announced the release of 186 of the
 detainees into the custody of interested private organiza-
 tions, allowing them to live in Thailand although officially
 still classed as illegal aliens. A handful of these persons
 was not in fact freed, due to legal problems. Consequently,
 at this time, between 30-40 aliens remain in custody until
 legal obstacles can be resolved. Civil rights groups continue
 to press for their release and the government is again review-
 ing their cases. However, the lack of documentation and
 sponsors complicates the matter.
 
 
 690
 C.   Disappearances
 Local human rights groups have alleged that there continue
 to be cases of persons suspected-of-communist or criminal
 activity disappearing as a result of; actions by government
 officials, such as police officers or rural-paramilitary
 .units. The alleged incidents have been scattered, occurring
 mainly in rural areas experiencing problems with communist
 or separatist insurgency, where confirmation-is difficult to
 obtain. Reported incidents are few in-number. Communist
 insurgents nationwide and separatists in the south have used
 terrorism as a political weapon resulting in the deaths of
 civilians and government officials. The Communist Party of
 Thailand continues to use assassination as a tool to intimi-
 date villagers and low-level government officials.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Martial law powers allowing arbitrary arrest and imprisbn-
 .ment were significantly. reduced by the repeal of martial
 law order no.:22 in 1979. By mid-1980, most prisoners held
 under its provisions- had been released, though some were
 charged with riminal offenses and subsequently tried in
 court. In order to prevent abuses of their powers of
 arrest, in all but "urgent cases" police officers must s
 ,first obtain permission from authorized civilian officials
 in the ministry bf interior before making any arrest.
 At present, the only remaining legal basis for imprisonment
 without trial, other than severely limited provisions of
 martial law remaining in effect, is a provision of the Anti-
 Communist Act which provides that persons accused of communist
 activities can be detained for up to 210 days with the
 approval of the police director-general and up to 480 days
 with the permission of a military or criminal court. Accu-
 -rate figures on persons held under this provision are not
 available, but the number appears to be rather small and
 concentrated in southern Thailand. The Anti-Communist Act
 also provides that armed communist insurgents who surrender
 to the government must undergo compulsory political training
 before returning to their homes. Several suspected communist
 insurgents who-had been held since 1976 were tried and acquitted
 during 1980.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The. constitution of 1978 (chapter 3, section 27) guarantees
 Thai citizens the presumption of innocence and access to
 courts or administrative bodies to seek redress. They have
 the right to legal-counsel in all cases before a court but
 can be denied that right during the pre-trial, or investi-
 gative,' period.' After this initial stage, however, defendants
 have the-right to counsel throughout the trial and appeal
 stages.- The cabinet, in May 1981, approved a pilot program to
 provide free legal advice to citizens too poor to pay for legal
 counsel. If successful, the government intends to implement
 the program throughout.the country.
 In May 1981, human rights activists drew attention to
 approximately 200 prisoners who, during-the period 1976-78,
 had been sentenced to jail on criminal charges. Under con-
 stitutional provisions in force at the time, they received
 
 
 691
 summary justice without a trial or counsel. The Prem
 government, in mid-1981, appointed a committee to review
 each case. So far no decisions have been announced.
 There is no evidence of clandestine imprisonment. The Thais
 have an evidentiary legal system, although not a jury system;
 cases are heard on the basis of specific -- usually well
 documented -- charges which must be brought within a limited
 time period.
 In 1980, the Thai national legislative assembly passed a
 law shifting certain categories of offenses from the military
 back to the civilian courts. Cases which involve sexual
 offenses, offenses constituting public danger or threats
 to life, limb or property will now go before civilian courts.
 Military courts will retain jurisdiction over cases which
 involve internal and external national security, Thai rela-
 tions with other nations, and offenses against the royal
 family and public peace. Persons tried in either military
 or civilian courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including the right to counsel, but a decision by the mili-
 tary court cannot be appealed whereas a decision by a civi-
 lian court can be appealed to a higher court.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Thai law requires that police have a search warrant before
 entering the owner's home without his consent. There are,
 however, sections of the Anti-Communist Act which allow a
 search without a warrant when officials are involved in
 specifically designated "communist suppression operations."
 These powers appear to have been used sparingly, however.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Basic freedoms and rights are affirmed, in principle, in
 the constitution of 1978. In practice, Thai citizens enjoy
 substantial freedom of speech, with criticism of government
 policies permitted. There are, nevertheless, restrictions
 against insulting the monarchy or advocating a communist
 system of government. The Thai press is privately owned,
 open, and often critical of the government, but continues
 to operate under the restrictions imposed by the press
 law of 1941 and martial law order 42. These laws allow
 the government to close newspapers and revoke the licenses
 of editors of newspapers which publish stories deemed to
 be libelous or contrary to national security interests.
 Continuing a favorable trend, in 1981 there were very few
 cases of newspapers or magazines being ordered closed for
 violating provisions of the above mentioned laws. Early
 in the year the mass circulation dailies "DAO Siam" and
 "Thai Rath" were closed temporarily for publishing allegedly
 pornographic photos. In August, "DAO Siam" was again ordered
 closed when it printed a story on alleged misconduct by
 paramilitary soldiers which the government declared was mis-
 leading and disrupted public peace and order.
 The press in Thailand continues to be quite open and candid
 and the government's relations with the media are on the
 whole good. The government occasionally does use its
 
 
 692
 power over the press, and awareness of this power is a re-
 straint on local press activity and various groups lobbying
 for a lifting of order 42. The government has indicated
 that changes to the press laws must be considered very
 carefully before any action is taken. A proposed law
 which would allow publishers to appeal closure orders in
 court was passed by the national assembly lower house in
 September 1981. The government regulates televison cover-
 age.of international news, requiring that satellite news
 ,broadcasts be prescreened.
 In October 1980, the government upheld the banning of 15
 books because-they were found to advocate violent social
 change. In September, the ministry of interior had banned
 the sale or possession of 96 books on more general national
 security grounds, bringing to 300 the-number of books banned
 since 1977. In the face of strong protests, the minister
 reviewed the listing, reducing the.number of books banned
 from 96 to 15. No books were banned during 1981.
 Martial law order 4 remains nominally in effect, prohibiting
 political gatherings of five or more persons. During 1981,
 however, students, organized labor, politicians and other
 political groups held large rallies without significant
 interference from the authorities.
 The Prem government has maintained a moderate policy toward
 organized labor and generally has not restricted the develop-
 ment of the labor movement or labor participation in political
 activities. The governmenti in early 1981, lifted the five
 year old ban on labor strikes. "Unions are now legally allowed
 to strike if negotiations in accordance with the labor law
 fail to resolve the conflict.
 Workers are represented on the government wage committee, the
 national labor advisory board and on the labor courts, which
 arbitrate labor disputes and grievances. Government and
 management combined hold the majority in-each of these bodies.
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand, and is
 .protected by law and custom.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Aside from long-standing restrictions on the travel of Viet-
 � namese nationals in Thailand, the only limitations on travel
 are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas believed
 ,to be'usedas.bases by communist insurgents. There are no
 restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 Thailand is-the first asylum country most affected by the
 refugee exodus from Indochina. Since 1975, more than half a
 .million people'frQm Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia have fled to
 Thailand. They include 85,000 Vietnamese, 210,000 Khmer and
 270,000.Lao. About a quarter million have been resettled in
 third countries. Thai policy has not permitted permanent
 resettlement of these people in Thailand, although about
 50,000 Vietnamese with alien status from the French Indochina
 period remain living in Thai villages and towns, primarily in
 the northeast.
 
 
 693
 In late 1981, some 220,000 refugees were in camps in Thailand.
 Khmer refugees are classed as illegal aliens and have not been
 permitted to enter resettlement programs except for small
 numbers with close connections abroad. The United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) generally endorses limiting
 Khmer resettlement programs in order to encourage maximum
 voluntary repatriation to Cambodia.
 Since mid-1974, Thailand has permitted a number of Cambodian
 population concentrations to exist along the border, some
 entirely or partially in Thailand. The Khmer border population
 has fallen from about one half million in mid-1980 to about
 200,000 in late 1981. Thailand has facilitated provision of
 food and medical care by international and voluntary agencies
 in the border concentrations.
 During 1980-81, Thai policy has encouraged voluntary repatri-
 ation of Cambodian and Lao refugees. In coordination with the
 UNHCR, Thailand assisted about 250 ethnic Lao to return home
 during 1981. Since mid-1980, about 18,000 Khmer in holding
 centers have returned voluntarily to the border, including
 9,000 Khmer who returned from holding centers under UNHCR
 supervision in June 1980. No forcible repatriation has taken
 place since June 1979.
 Once in camps or holding centers refugees are generally well-
 treated.
 During 1981, the Thai government imposed strict new measures
 on lowland Lao and Vietnamese refugee arrivals in hopes of
 deterring potential refugees from seeking asylum in Thailand.
 Lowland Lao refugees arriving after January 1, 1981, and post-
 August 15, 1981, Vietnamese boat arrivals are housed in com-
 paratively austere camps and prohibited from applying for
 third-country resettlement.
 Since February 1980, the Thai government has refused to
 allow any new Khmer arrivals to enter Thailand. In May 1981,
 this policy was extended to also bar admittance of small numbers
 of Vietnamese who cross Cambodia overland to seek refuge in
 Thailand. This move has stranded hundreds of Vietnamese refugees
 in a tense and potentially dangerous environment along the
 Thai-Cambodian border. Prospects are improving for the
 removal and eventual resettlement of these people. A US
 supported Thai Navy program designed to prevent pirates from
 preying on Vietnamese boat refugees came to end in September
 1981. The Thai government has indicated that it will resume
 patrolling in international waters if the US and other donors
 are able to commit sufficient funds to support the program.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The most recent national elections were held in April 1979,
 to elect the members of the lower house of the national
 legislative assembly. All political parties were allowed
 to participate except for the outlawed Communist Party of
 Thailand. The elections were considered generally fair and
 open. The great majority of Thais, both men and women,
 have the right to vote; but there are constitutional require-
 ments which, in some cases, prevent the Thai children of
 alien parents from voting.
 
 
 694
 The Thai political system is relatively open, with citizens
 able to participate meaningfully. In February 1980, the
 leadership of the government was changed through constitu-
 tional means when General Kriangsak resigned and General Prem
 was selected by the national legislative assembly to be the
 new prime minister. The Prem cabinet is dominated by civilians.
 Opposition exists openly and opposing views are heard both
 within the national legislative assembly and through the mass
 media. The Communist Party of Thailand is the only political
 party which is outlawed.
 Women have equal rights under the law in Thailand and are
 well represented in the labor force. Women fully participate
 in the political process, but are underrepresented at the
 political leadership level, as well as in some professional
 fields, top management and some high government positions.
 3;   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the past, the Thai government has permitted several inter-
 national groups to investigate prison conditions and the
 government has responded to specific inquiries from Amnesty
 International, the International Commission of Jurists, and
 the International Committee of the Red Cross. The ICRC has
 requested RTG permission to visit certain detainees being
 held on political charges. The small group at issue consists
 primarily of alleged members of the Communist Party of Thai-
 land and Vietnamese refugees from the 1954-55 era. The ICRC
 request is still under consideration by the RTG.
 During the past year, domestic groups interested in human
 rights have not been obstructed by the government in their
 investigations.
 The Lawyer's Association of Thailand has played a leading
 and effective role in opposing the many martial law restric-
 tions on civil.liberties which remain in effect. Another lead-
 ing group, the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society, has
 been particularly active in drawing attention to abuses of
 authority by rural authorities. The.Union for Civil Liberty
 has also been active in bringing to public view alleged human
 rights violations. The Federation of Journalists of Thailand
 has sought to have the legal restrictions on the press lifted.
 4.   Economic and Social Circumstances
 Access to.adequate food, shelter and primary education is
 almost universal, although the record in the delivery of
 health care is less consistent. During the 1970's, Thailand
 enjoyed a compounded real annual GNP growth rate of 7 percent
 and a GNP per capita growth rate of 4.2 percent. Despite
 strong pressures on the balance of payments and a 1980 infla-
 tion rate of 19.7 percent (due largelyto costs of foreign
 petreleum), the real annual GNP growth in 1980 was still a
 healthy 6.3 .percent.
 In recent years the Thai Government has emphasized economic
 development to improve the standard of living of all its
 
 
 695
 citizens with particular attention paid to lessening rural/
 urban and regional income disparities. In each of the last
 five years, the government has devoted more than half of its
 budget.to meeting basic economic needs.
 Thailand has made steady progress in alleviating the poverty
 of its population. From 1960 to 1979, GNP per capita increased
 from $100 to $590. Success, however, has been markedly uneven,
 with income distribution skewed heavily in favor of central
 Thailand, particularly Bangkok and environs, and, to a lesser
 extent, other urban areas in Thailand. Rural Thais suffer rela-
 tive disadvantages. For example, in 1979 only 15 percent of
 urban Thais had incomes below the absolute poverty level, while
 34 percent of rural Thais lived below the poverty level.
 As Southeast Asia's only major food exporting nation, Thailand
 produces more than enough food for domestic consumption. De-
 spite uneven distribution and poor nutritional practices in
 some areas, the percentage of calorie supply available for
 consumption relative to nutritional requirements has steadily
 risen from 96 percent in 1970 to 105 percent in 1979.
 Health care in Thailand is largely the responsibility of the
 private sector, with about 20 percent of the health services
 delivered by the government and the remaining 80 percent by
 private sources. Availability of health care is heavily
 tilted in favor of the capital, Bangkok. A 1975 survey dis-
 closed that Nakhonluang Province, which encompasses Bangkok,
 had a population of 5,307,000 with 3,425 doctors, or 64.5
 doctors per 100,000 people. This same survey showed that
 344 of Thailand's 659 administrative districts had no full-time
 doctors. The government recognizes this problem and now requires
 newly-licensed doctors to spend two to three years in the pro-
 vinces.
 People who live in rural areas enjoy fewer benefits from
 basic public health and sanitation facilities than their urban
 cousins, e.g., in 1979, only 12 percent of the rural population
 had access to safe water, compared to 49 percent of the urban
 population.
 Statistics for life expectancy and infant mortality also favor
 Bangkok and central Thailand, while indicating lower health
 levels for the rural north and northeast. Bangkok, however,
 is unfavorably affected by a population growth rate twice
 that of Thailand as a whole. Countrywide life expectancy at
 birth has increased steadily from 50.8 years in 1960 to 57.1
 years in 1970 and 62 years in 1979. The increase in life
 expectancy is due in part to a substantial reduction in the
 infant mortality rate from 86 per thousand live births in 1970
 to 68 per thousand live births in 1979. Overall, the rate of
 population growth dropped from 2.9 percent in 1976 to 2.4 per-
 cent in 1979. In 1979, 84 percent of the adult Thai population
 was literate. This figure approximates the 80 percent of the
 adult population which has completed at least four years of
 education. A significant percentage of rural adults with only
 a fourth grade education, however, is probably now functionally
 illiterate. Furthermore, only 17.5 percent of the adult popu-
 lation have formal education beyond the fourth grade. There
 has actually been some deterioration since 1960 in the adjusted
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 45
 
 
 696
 primary school enrollment percentage. This figure slipped
 slightly from 83 percent in 1960 to 82 percent in 1979. A
 significantly higher percentage of male children than female
 children attend primary school, e.g., in 1979, 85 percent of
 male children were enrolled in primary school, compared with
 78 percent of female children.
 There are 23.75 million people in the work force, 84 percent
 of whom are in non-urban areas. About 6 percent are unemployed,
 but the government estimates that another 22 percent are
 underemployed.
 Thai workers have the right to organize, and both the number
 of trade unions and the number of organized workers are
 increasing. In June 1981, there were 233 recognized labor
 unions in Thailand with 150,000 trade union members, 77 per-
 cent of whom were in the greater Bangkok area. In January
 1981, the interior ministry lifted a ban on labor union
 strikes and factory shutdowns by management that had been
 in effect since 1976. Since then, there has been no marked
 deterioration in labor/management relations, as some had pre-
 dicted. The hand-to-mouth existence of most union members
 continues to place them at a disadvantage in bargaining with
 management.
 Because a large percentage of union members earn either the
 minimum wage or a small amount above it, the trade union
 movement is active in seeing that the government keeps the
 minimum wage up with the inflation rate. Although it will
 provide an adequate minimum standard of living, enforcement
 of the minimum wage among small employers is poor. Agricul-
 tural laborers are not covered under minimum wage legislation.
 Thai women actively participate in most professions and in
 all sectors of the economy. For example, women play an impor-
 tant role in both the educational and medical professions and
 are well represented in the civil service. In rural households,
 women often hold the household funds and usually play key roles
 in economic decision-making. Their participation in the labor
 force is very high. Women in Thailand, however, face disadvan-
 tages in advancement and training opportunities in the labor
 force, especially rural women. Outnumbered by men in sub-
 professional occupations, women are also underrepresented
 in most higher income jobs. Despite the guarantee of equal
 legal status which was provided to women by the Civil and
 Commercial Code Amendment Act of October 5, 1976, their role
 in formal decision-making beyond the family unit remains
 limited except in some business enterprises and in the
 government sector, notably in the economic ministries.
 
 
 697
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND (RANTS- UOLIUATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIUN:I
 IU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLAKS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 197.9    1980     1981
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.AID..................
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS...............
 ISEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FO00 FOR PEACE.......
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........
 REPAY. IN.S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....
 TIILE 1I-TOTAL .........
 E.REL1IF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....
 C. OTHER ECON. ASSISI...
 LOANS.............
 GRANTS...............
 PEACE CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER .............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ...............
 GRANTS .............
 A.MAP GRANTS..........
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL MIL.ED.7KNG....
 O.TRAN-EXCESS -STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS.......
 Ill.TOTAL ECON. L NIL...
 LOANS ..............
 GkANTS.............
 OTHER US LOANS..........
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .....
 ALL OTI*R..............
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL Al
 1979     1980
 
 TOTAL........
 IOR 0
 I F-C
 IDA
 IOB
 ADB
 AFO B
 UNOP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 383.3
 170.2
 45.2
 60.0
 0.0
 91.9
 0.0
 6.2
 9.8
 0.0
 
 729.7
 555.0
 0.5
 0.0
 0.0
 164.8
 O.
 9.4
 0.0
 0.0
 
 25..     29.6
 b.0      !.'a
 17.4     2:3.8
 21.b     26.0
 8.0      5.8
 13.6     20.2
 0.0      2.0
 44.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 U.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 3.b      3.6
 0.0      0.0
 3.8      3.6
 1.9      1.7
 1.9      1.9
 0.0      0.0
 32.1     37.*
 30.0     36.0
 2.1      1.4
 1.2      0.6
 30.0     36.0
 0.9      0.8
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 57.5     67.0
 38.0     41.8
 19.5     25.2
 102.9     23.4
 86.7     21.7
 16.2      1.7
 
 30. b
 12.2
 18.6
 26.2
 12.2
 14.0
 2.0
 c. 0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 4.6
 0.0
 ,to 6
 2.1
 2.5
 0.0
 54.6
 53.'
 " 1.2
 0.4
 53.4
 0.8
 0.0
 0.0
 85.4
 65.6
 19.8
 4.3
 4.3
 0.0
 
 GENC IE 1
 198 1  1946'-81
 
 507.5
 307.9
 27.b
 0.0
 0.0
 170.0
 0.0
 2.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 3442.7
 2265.9
 111.2
 125.1
 0.0
 847.7
 0.0
 61.8
 31.0
 0.0
 
 
