Thailand
The military-installed government of General Surayud Chulanont has taken few
steps to promote human rights. Martial law is still enforced in many parts of the
country, and the government actively censors the internet, cracking down on dissidents.
A proposed new internal security law would, if enacted, extend broad
and unchecked powers to the prime minister to suppress fundamental rights and
legalize government impunity, a major setback to efforts to restore democratic
freedoms.
A military-sponsored referendum for a new constitution passed in August 2007,
and general elections are at this writing scheduled for December 23, but
prospects for a return to democracy remain uncertain.
The armed conflict in southern border provinces escalated in 2007 with brutal violence
much of it targeting civiliansby separatists and continuing counterinsurgency
abuses by government forces. Since taking office in October 2006, the government
repeatedly has announced an end to state-sponsored abuses and
impunity, but with little visible success.
Refugee protection in Thailand is in crisis after the government pressured the
office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to stop
conducting refugee status determinations in May 2007.
Media and Internet Censorship
Soldiers still patrol the T-iTV station, a station owned until 2006 by the family of
the ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra. Scripts of T-iTVs famous political
talk programs often require pre-broadcast approval by the Public Relations
Department of the Prime Ministers Office. Many community radio stationsinitially
blocked after the couphave since returned to the airwaves but with considerable
pressure to be less critical of the military.
Political websites established in opposition to the coup have faced harassment
and blocking. The authorities also monitor critical opinions and debates on popular
opinion boards of Prachatai (www.prachatai.com) and Pantip.com (www.pantip.com) and have threatened both websites with closure if they fail to remove
opinions critical of the military authorities. The Computer-Related Offences Act
seriously threatens freedom of expression by giving authorities expanded powers
to police online content. Two famous cyber dissidents, known as Praya Pichai and
Thon Chan, were arrested in August 2007.
Martial Law
During the lead-up to the constitutional referendum in August, authorities used
martial law to justify the stifling of Thaksins political allies and those opposed to
the coup. Authorities raided their houses, confiscated political campaign materials,
and detained some of them in military facilities. The crackdown continued in
the run-up to general elections. The Council for National Security announced on
September 17 that martial law would remain in effect in 27 provinces. Most of
those areas are Thaksin strongholds in the north and northeast, where people
voted against the military-sponsored constitution. Under martial law, the military
can ban political gatherings, censor the media, and detain people without charge.
Internal Security Law
On October 31 the government submitted the Draft Act on the Maintenance of
National Security in the Kingdom to the National Legislative Assembly for debate.
The draft passed its first parliamentary reading on November 11, and at this writing
was being reviewed for the second and third readings. If enacted, this law
would give the Internal Security Operations Commandunder the control of the
Prime Ministeremergency-style powers to restrict fundamental rights, override
the civilian administration, and suspend basic due process rights at any time. No
declaration of a state of emergency, or accountability to the parliament and the
courts, would be required. This law would also shield from prosecution those
who violate human rights under its provisions.
Violence in the Southern Border Provinces
Village-based militants called the Patani Freedom Fighters (Pejuang Kemerdekaan
Patani) in the loose network of the National Revolution Front-Coordinate (BRN Coordinate) have been responsible for more than 2,000 civilian deathsboth
Buddhists and ethnic Malay Muslimsfrom January 2004 to November 2007.
They have also carried out summary executions of civilians based on ethnicity.
For example, on March 14, militants ambushed a passenger van in Yaha district of
Yala province and shot all Buddhist passengers one by one. Some attackers aim
to spread terror among the civilian population, most notably by beheading victims
or setting their bodies on fire.
Militants have targeted the Thai education system. The Education Ministry reported
in October that militants have killed more than 80 teachers and injured 70
more since January 2004. Militants have burned down some 200 schools during
the same period. At least 1,600 teachers have requested transfers from the region
due to security concerns. General Surayud acknowledged on June 18 that the government
could not guarantee school safety everywhere and that some schools
might have to be closed indefinitely.
Some parts of the southern border provinces lack access to public health services
after separatist militants burned down community hospitals and murdered medical
personnel.
In October 2006 the government announced a new counterinsurgency strategy,
seeking to balance military operations with political reconciliation, justice, and
human rights principles. At this writing, however, Thai security forcesboth regular
and volunteer unitscontinue to face little or no consequences for extrajudicial
killings, torture, arbitrary arrests, and use of excessive violence against suspected
militants.
There is no functioning mechanism for systematically and effectively monitoring
the conditions of suspects locked up without charge in military camps across the
southern border provinces. This is of major concern, especially since the June
2007 launch of security force sweep operations under the code name, Battle
Plan for the Protection of the Southern land. These sweeps resulted in nearly
2,000 arrests of ethnic Malay Muslim men, women, and children during the first
two months alone. Among them, 384 men were further transferred to four-month
vocational trainings in army-run camps until a court ruled on October 18 that the
army has no legal power to keep anyone in such trainings against their will. 
Security forces responsible for the large-scale killings of ethnic Malay Muslims in
2004 at Krue Se and Tak Bai had yet to be brought to justice at this writing.
Ongoing Impunity from Thaksins War on Drugs
In August 2007 the government appointed a special committee chaired by former
Attorney General Khanit na Nakhon, to investigate approximately 2,500 extrajudicial
killings that took place in 2003 as part of Thaksins war on drugs.
Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether the new investigations will lead to effective
criminal prosecution of the perpetrators, who are believed to include senior
police officers and members of the former Thaksin administration.
Refugee Protection
General Surayuds government pressured the UNHCR office in Thailand to stop
the refugee status determination process in May 2007. Thousands of asylum
seekers particularly Rohingyas from Burma and Hmong from Laoshave been
left with limited access to international protection. Without a determination of
their status, asylum seekers can be summarily classified as illegal migrants and
arrested, detained, and deported.
In June Thai authorities deported a group 163 Lao Hmong to Laos and since have
held more than 7,000 Lao Hmong at a barbed-wire-enclosed camp in Petchabun
province without access to UNHCR screening and protection mechanisms. The
Thai-Lao Border Security Committee decided at a joint meeting in October to complete
the repatriation of this group of in 2008.
The ongoing mistreatment of 149 UNHCR-recognized Lao Hmong refugees, including
77 children and nine infants, has sparked an international outcry. After a
failed attempt to forcibly return them to Laos on January 30, Thai authorities
refused international offers to resettle them in third countries. At this writing,
refugees continued to be locked up in the Immigration Detention Center in Nong
Khai province and faced harsh conditions, apparently to discourage other Lao
Hmongs from trying to enter into Thailand illegally.
HIV/AIDS
About 180,000 people living with HIV/AIDS (more than 80 percent of those in
need) received antiretroviral therapy (ART) by late 2007, making Thailand one of
three developing countries worldwideand the only one in Asiato achieve this
level of coverage. Yet many people in Thailand, particularly drug users, prisoners,
and migrant workers, still face significant barriers in obtaining ART and other
essential services, marring Thailands reputation as a success story in the global
fight against AIDS.
Human Rights Defenders
The government continues to have a poor record in protecting human rights
defenders. On October 10 unidentified gunmen shot dead Ma-usoh Malong in
Narathiwat provinces Tak Bai district. It was the second deadly attack on individuals
known to be closely involved in the campaign for justice for the Tak Bai victims.
Ma-usohs colleague, Muhammad Dunai Tanyino, was murdered in a nearby
area on October 20, 2006.
There was little progress in official investigations into the cases of 20 human
rights defenders killed during the Thaksin administration. This includes the disappearance
and presumed murder of famous Muslim lawyer Somchai Neelapaijit.
Key International Actors
The United States has used its strong bilateral relationship with Thailand to raise
human rights concerns and, on occasion, has intervened to protect refugees. In
2007, however, a joint effort with Australia, Canada, and the Netherlands failed to
secure the release and resettlement of the 149 Lao Hmong refugees detained in
Nong Khai province (see above).
The Election Commission of Thailand has refused to sign a memorandum of
understanding with the European Union on election monitoring, saying that the
request was an interference in its domestic affairs.
Despite unprecedented and strong condemnation of the violent crackdowns on
protesters and Buddhist monks by Burmese authorities in September, Thailand
remains the biggest trading partner of Burma.
Former Foreign Minister Surin Pitsuwan will begin a five-year term as secretarygeneral
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on January 1,
2008.