 THAILAND
 Thailand's government is a constitutional monarchy with a
 strong executive branch and a considerably weaker legislature
 composed of a 324-member elected Lower House and a 243-member
 appointed Senate. The elected house wields considerably less
 power than the government administrative organization and the
 military, which plays a strong and often dominant role in Thai
 political life. The monarchy exerts strong informal
 influence. The Prime Minister and his Cabinet are subject to
 votes of confidence, although they need not be popularly
 elected themselves. Free national elections for the Lower
 House were held in 1983, and the current Prime Minister,
 General (retired) Prem Tinsulanon, who has held office since
 February 1980, formed a four-party coalition government
 supported by roughly two-thirds of the Lower House. One of
 the parties was replaced when its leader was charged with
 participating in the failed military coup of September 9,
 1985. Never colonized, Thailand traditionally has had
 self-government through an established administrative
 organization and laws based on majority consent.
 Thailand's security apparatus operates within a
 constitutionally-mandated framework, but numerous police,
 civilian, and military agencies share responsibility, often
 with overlapping jurisdictions and ill-defined mandates.
 Reflecting the strong executive orientation of the Government,
 the security services have formidable powers. Although these
 powers are sometimes utilized in a heavy-handed or uneven way,
 human rights abuses attributable to the security services are
 not believed to be systematic and have been infrequent in
 recent years.
 Communist insurgents, Muslim separatists, and mafia-type
 criminal gangs operate in rural areas and use terrorism to
 advance their respective aims. Communist strength has
 declined markedly in recent years due to several factors,
 including an amnesty program for defectors and financial
 assistance to help them reintegrate into society. The
 Government is also continuing efforts to integrate Thailand's
 Muslim community into the mainstream of national life.
 Sporadic low-level violence in southern Thailand in 1985
 continued to call attention both to Communist and Muslim
 separatist activities in provinces along the Malaysian border.
 Thailand is an emerging middle-income developing country with
 a free enterprise economic system in which individual
 interests and the right to hold private property are strongly
 protected. Thailand is one of the developing world's few net
 food exporters, and its industrial sector, after rapid
 expansion in recent years, now rivals agriculture in
 contributing to the gross domestic product.
 During 1985 the human rights record remained consistent,
 without serious violations. Autonomous political parties,
 gatherings, and associations are allowed, and freedom from
 arbitrary detention or search is generally safeguarded,
 notwithstanding some infrequently enforced restrictive laws
 still on the books. Although it practices some
 self-censorship, the press is among the freest in Asia. Human
 rights activists in Thailand are able to bring issues to the
 attention of the Government and public and to lobby for
 corrective action.
 
 
 879
 THAILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no 1985 reports of killings, including of summary
 executions in which official government involvement was
 alleged. Allegations of involvement by individual government
 officials were investigated. In rural areas, Communist
 insurgents and ethnic separatists have continued to use
 violence, including murder, to pursue their respective
 objectives. Their targets have included low-level Government
 officials, local entrepreneurs, and security officials.
 In this and past years, the local press has noted the deaths
 of a number of journalists in rural areas. Such killings have
 diminished sharply in recent years, and local human rights
 activists regard the situation as distinctly improved. The
 human rights aspect of this problem is difficult to assess.
 Some of the murdered journalists had published articles on
 corruption or illegal activity, and very likely suffered for
 it. At the same time, however, some Thai journalists have
 only a nominal attachment to the profession, often becoming
 involved in extortion, blackmail, and similar activities which
 can lead to murder as a means of retaliation. Such murder is
 clearly criminal but it does not appear to represent political
 repression.
 b. Disappearance
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists have used
 terrorism as a political weapon, resulting in the
 disappearance of civilians and government officials. There
 have been allegations by human rights groups of cases of
 individual policemen in rural areas having killed habitual
 criminals, but no evidence to substantiate these allegations
 has been presented.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Allegations of torture by police have been made in the past by
 the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society (CGRS), a Thai
 human rights group, and by others. However, torture is not
 used as an instrument of government policy.
 The Government has stated its opposition to the use of cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading punishment. The CGRS, in its periodic
 reports, cites alleged cases of brutality and mistreatment by
 police and military personnel, but with less frequency than in
 the past. According to human rights activists in Thailand,
 alleged abuses of authority relating to cruel and inhuman
 punishment or treatment and arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 have declined steadily over the last several years.
 Prison conditions in Thailand remain poor because of serious
 overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited staff,
 corruption, and use of harmful drugs by prisoners. Prisoners
 are subject to strict regulations including corporal
 punishment for infractions. Prison conditions vary with the
 prisoner's social status as well as with the nature of the
 offense. However, there is no systematic discrimination save
 
 
 880
 THAILAND
 that Westerners generally receive preferential treatment. The
 United States-Thailand prisoner exchange agreement negotiated
 in 1982 has not yet entered into force.
 On August 4 and 5, 1985, violent demonstrations erupted at the
 Bang Kwang maximum security prison in Bangkok, as Thai
 prisoners protested failure of the Government to announce an
 allegedly promised amnesty. Overcrowding was also cited as a
 factor in the revolt. Security forces employed maximum force
 to restore order, resulting in seven Thai prisoners killed and
 an undetermined number wounded. None of the 140 foreign
 prisoners in Bang Kwang prison was involved in the
 demonstrations and none was killed or injured in the
 suppression operation. Security restrictions and discipline
 in all prisons have been increased as a result of the riots.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Arrest warrants are generally required, and
 specific charges must be brought within a limited time period
 against those detained.
 A small number of Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 have been detained without trial under martial law provisions
 previously in force, but martial law powers allowing arbitrary
 arrest and imprisonment were significantly reduced in 1984.
 Otherwise, the only legal basis for arrest and detention
 without specific charges for long periods (up to 480 days) is
 the Anti-Communist Activities Act. According to local human
 rights groups, persons detained pursuant to this act have not
 been mistreated.
 Summary exile is not practiced. A few Thai have elected to go
 abroad and remain there for political reasons. This includes
 one of the leaders of the failed September 1985 coup attempt
 which was responsible for several deaths.
 No cases of the practice of compulsory or forced labor have
 been reported. Such labor is prohibited under Section 31 of
 the Constitution except in time of war, during a state of
 emergency or martial law, or to avert "imminent public
 calamity."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees criminal defendants the
 presumption of innocence as well as access to courts or
 administrative bodies to seek redress. Suspects can be denied
 the right to legal counsel during the pretrial or
 investigative period of their cases but have access to a
 lawyer of their own choosing before trial. In recent cases
 with political overtones, such as the arrests in 1984 of
 persons suspected of violating the Anti-Communist Activities
 Act, the Government moved quickly to allow rapid access by
 legal counsel and visitors during the pretrial period of the
 case. There is a functioning bail system. The leaders of the
 September 1985 coup attempt thus far have been treated
 according to prescribed statutes and due process. There have
 been no summary punishments.
 The Thai legal system reaches decisions on the basis of
 evidence presented by the parties to a judge rather than a
 
 
 881
 THAILAND
 jury. Criminal cases are heard on the basis of specific
 charges by a panel of judges. During the martial law period
 (October 1976 - August 1984) military courts had jurisdiction
 over cases involving internal and external national security,
 Thai relations with other nations, and offenses against the
 royal family and public peace. Military courts are now used
 solely in cases involving military personnel. All other
 cases, including those having mixed military and civilian
 participants, come under the jurisdiction of civilian courts.
 The alleged plotters of the 1985 coup attempt will be tried in
 civilian courts.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights, including the right to counsel
 both in the trial and appellate stages. Although a civilian
 court decision can be appealed to a higher court, no such
 appeal process exists in the case of a military court
 verdict. Both court systems, however, allow for a royal
 pardon. Moreover, prisoners sometimes benefit from periodic
 royal amnesties, which take the form of commutation or
 abrogation of sentences. The courts are relatively
 independent of external pressures. There have been
 allegations, however, of both government and private influence
 being brought to bear on the courts and prosecutors in certain
 cases, often those involving narcotics.
 There is no evidence of persons having been imprisoned solely
 for political beliefs in 1985.
 A pilot government program to provide free legal advice to the
 poor continues in operation. Most free legal aid, however,
 comes from private organizations including the Lawyers'
 Association and the Women's Lawyers' Association.
 The court and investigatory apparatus in the Bangkok area have
 been overtaxed in recent years. As a consequence, the time
 required for criminal trials has at times exceeded 3 years in
 the court of first instance. Defendants acquitted after such
 lengthy proceedings receive no compensation.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is generally an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, the police function is
 not abused for security or political purposes, and the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas is generally permitted, although
 those espousing leftist or Communist views would probably be
 subject to surveillance by the security forces. Thai law
 requires that'police possess a search warrant prior to
 entering a home without the owner's consent. Depending on the
 nature of the offense, these warrants are issued either by the
 public prosecutor, the courts, commissioned police officers,
 district and military officers, or governors. There have been
 allegations that officers endorse warrants in advance and then
 allow their subordinate non-commissioned officials to apply
 them as needed. Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act
 allow officials involved in specifically designated "Communist
 suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants,
 but these powers have been used sparingly.
 
 
 882
 THAILAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution generally affirms the citizens' right to free
 speech aqd a free press, but there are laws which impose
 restrictions on those rights. The principal legal
 restrictions on these freedoms are statutory prohibitions
 against insulting or defaming the King, Queen, Heir Apparent
 or Regent (the offense of lese majeste), advocating a
 Communist system of government, or publishing materials which
 threaten national security. Publications deemed to violate
 Thailand's lese majeste laws are confiscated, while
 individuals thought to have violated these laws are subject to
 prosecution. No one was charged with lese majeste in Thailand
 during 1985. In addition, there are less formal prohibitions
 against criticism of religious institutions, ethnic groups, or
 the military.
 Thai citizens enjoy substantial freedom of speech, and the
 Government permits criticism of its policies. International
 publications circulate freely in Thailand, as does a wide
 range of political and social commentary presented by the
 privately-owned Thai press. Technical publications and
 pamphlets, including those of academics, circulate freely, and
 present viewpoints ranging from the non-Communist left to the
 ultra-right. Foreign and domestic books are not censored,
 except in rare instances where publications are critical of
 the Royal Family or Thailand's monarchical institution.
 Television and radio stations are licensed by the Government
 and operated by both government and private entities as
 commercial enterprises. Although in theory all television
 programs are subject to prior review by the Government's
 broadcast directing board, but this power is exercised rarely
 and in practice stations present a range of viewpoints. Radio
 stations are required to carry the government-produced
 newscast four times daily but are free to originate other news
 and commentary. Opinions critical of government positions
 have been broadcast but, in general, controversial issues are
 treated very cautiously if at all.
 The press continues to operate under the restrictions imposed
 by the Press Law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law
 orders. These laws permit the Government to close newspapers
 and revoke the licenses of editors of newspapers which publish
 stories deemed to be libelous or contrary to national security
 interests. In 1985 a new press law remained under discussion
 in the Parliament. If finally approved, certain restrictions
 it allows would have uncertain repercussions for press freedom.
 The Government's relations with the domestic media remain
 generally good. The Government infrequently uses its
 statutory power over the press, although awareness of this
 power contributes to self-censorship, which is a restraint on
 local press activities. In 1985, one national publication was
 closed but was allowed to publish under a different masthead
 for a few months and then reappear in its original form. As
 in similar cases which occurred in 1983 and 1984, the
 authorities judged a number of its articles to be inaccurate
 and detrimental to the public order, and hence contrary to
 national security interests. The journalistic community
 advocates full press freedom but has not regarded these
 closures as a threat to existing levels of press freedom.
 
 
 883
 THAILAND
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Organized labor, politicians, and various special interest
 groups hold meetings, seminars, and rallies without
 interference from the Government. In several provinces the
 last vestiges of martial law which could have been used to
 restrict assembly have been repealed. Private associations
 are supposed to register with the Ministry of Interior. In
 practice, however, withholding of registration has not been
 used to inhibit freedom of association.
 Although organized labor was suppressed during the period
 1977-79, the right of labor to organize has been unrestricted
 since then. A minimum of only ten persons can form a labor
 union. Labor unions exist in both the private and state
 enterprise sectors. Only about 10 percent of the labor force
 in non-agrarian occupations is unionized, but this low
 percentage stems from the newness and fragmentation of the
 labor movement in Thailand, and from the economic slowdown of
 the past few years. Labor unions in Thailand maintain
 unrestricted relations with recognized international labor
 bodies and with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
 (ASEAN) Trade Union Congress. The same is true for relations
 with other national labor bodies, notably those from the
 United States, West Germany, Japan, and Israel.
 The right to strike is recognized and unrestricted in private
 sector enterprises. State enterprise workers, however, do not
 have the right to strike. Many of them have struck on
 occasion anyway, often without penalty to the strikers. On
 the other hand, the Government has attempted to discourage
 labor demonstrations which have political connotations. A
 system of labor courts, to which unions elect one-third of the
 judges, serves as a frequently-used medium for dispute
 settlement.
 Trade unions in the private sector have the right to bargain
 about working conditions and wages. In the state enterprise
 public sector, however, collective bargaining is restricted to
 bargaining about working conditions. In this sector, the
 right of the unions to bargain about wages was curtailed a few
 years ago by a Cabinet decision withdrawing the authority of
 state enterprite managers to agree to wage increases. This
 decision was made because of a perception that state
 enterprise wage levels were becoming higher than those of the
 civil service and higher than in many private sector
 enterprises.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand and is
 protected by law and custom of long standing. Theravada
 Buddhism, the de facto state religion, has had an abiding and
 profound influence on Thai culture and history, and the
 majority of Thai practice it. The King is required by the
 Constitution to profess the Buddhist faith and practice
 Buddhism. Nonetheless, Thailand is a secular society. State
 and church are clearly separate. There are no restrictions on
 religious ceremonies, the teaching of religion, or conversion
 from one religion to another. Missionaries, under government
 regulation, have been permitted to live and proselytize in
 Thailand for more than a century. Foreigi clergy may preach
 freely. There is no legal or organized discrimination against
 or persecution of those affiliated with minority religions,
 
 
 884
 THAILAND
 such as Christianity or Islam. Religious publishing,
 regardless of faith, is freely allowed. Like private
 associations, religious institutions are registered by the
 Government. There is no decisive advantage to being Buddhist
 in Thailand, though most senior Thai officials and political
 leaders are at least nominally Buddhist. Muslims living in
 the four southern provinces, which have majority Muslim
 populations, have the right to have civil law cases decided by
 Muslim judges under Koranic law. Efforts are being made to
 preserve Muslim cultural and religious traditions, including
 the building of mosques with government funds.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from long-standing restrictions on the travel of Chinese
 and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, including those who
 have lived in Thailand for a generation, the only limitations
 on travel are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas
 believed by the Government to be used as bases by Communist
 insurgents. The right of citizens to change their residence
 or workplace is unabridged. There are no government
 restrictions on foreign travel or emigration, except for
 government officials, but Thai women and children under age 14
 must have their passport applications approved by the
 Department of Public Welfare. In addition, a recent 1985
 statute requires that in connection with passport applications
 all women under age 36 sit through a series of interviews
 regarding their employment records and finances. This has
 been protested by some women's rights advocates according to
 the press. These provisions of law, designed to prevent the
 export of children for sale and women for purposes of
 prostitution, have proved difficult to enforce. The
 Government has rarely revoked citizenship.
 Since 1975, almost 650,000 persons from Vietnam, Laos and
 Cambodia have fled to Thailand. Thai policy has generally
 been to allow U.N. assistance to them until such time as they
 can be repatriated or resettled in third countries. The Thai
 afford first asylum to bona fide Lao refugees arriving by land
 and to Vietnamese boat refugees and promote voluntary
 repatriation along with third country resettlement,
 particularly of the Khmer and Lao, who comprise 95 percent of
 Thailand's refugee population. In 1985 the refugee population
 on Thai territory was about 130,000. In addition, about
 50,000 Vietnamese who arrived before 1954 remain in Thailand
 with limited rights, along with about 10,000 Chinese who were
 Kuomintang supporters and about 17,000 Karen hill tribe
 refugees from Burma.
 With few exceptions, the Government has not granted long-term
 asylum to-new arrivals from Cambodia since early 1980, but it
 has provided temporary safe haven to about 245,000 Cambodians
 at evacuation sites on the Thai side of the border. Thailand
 has assisted international voluntary agencies to provide food
 and medical care to Khmer in camps along the border. The Thai
 Government permitted these displaced Khmer to move temporarily
 into Thailand in the wake of attacks by forces of Vietnam and
 the Heng Samrin regime in Cambodia in 1984 and early 1985.
 Since early 1980, small groups of Khmer caught trying to move
 illegally from border camps into refugee camps inside Thailand
 have generally been returned by Thai authorities to the border
 region, though several thousand have managed to remain in the
 camps. There have been reports that would-be Lao refugees
 
 
 885
 THAILAND
 have been turned back to Laos by Thai officials. The
 Government has instituted a system of screening of Lao with
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as
 observer and this has improved the fair treatment of these
 displaced persons. To date none of those screened out have
 been returned to Laos.
 Vietnamese coming overland via Cambodia after April 1981 have
 had to remain at the border for lengthy periods until they
 were allowed to be considered for third country resettlement.
 About 4,000 overland Vietnamese refugees were on the border at
 the end of 1985.
 The UNHCR and the major resettlement countries have supported
 the Thai policy of promoting voluntary repatriation. About
 2,800 Lao have returned to their homeland under UNHCR
 supervision following successful bilateral Thai/Lao
 negotiations in September 1980. UNHCR negotiations with the
 Heng Samrin regime concerning the repatriation of Khmer
 refugees remain stalled. The Government of Vietnam has been
 unwilling to discuss repatriation of Vietnamese refugees in
 Thailand. Most Indochinese refugees are not willing to return
 to their home country.
 Since 1979, nearly 67,500 Vietnamese refugees have arrived in
 Thailand after perilous journeys, often in small, unseaworthy
 boats, across international waters. Although less than in the
 peak years of 1979-81, the number of arrivals in 1985 showed
 no significant decrease from the previous two years.
 As its contribution to alleviate the problem of criminal
 attacks by some fishermen against Vietnamese boat people, the
 Thai Government, with financial and technical assistance from
 the UNHCR and twelve donor nations, conducts sea, air, and
 land patrols, and law-enforcement activities designed to
 detect, deter, and punish crimes against these refugees. Up
 to now, such efforts have met with limited success. The Thai
 authorities apply the same asylum, relief, and resettlement
 policies to boat refugees as to all others.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since the absolute monarchy ended in 1932, the Thai.government
 traditionally has been a stable civilian administrative
 organization heavily influenced by the military, and often
 with a military officer as Prime Minister. Holding key
 military positions in important units in the immediate Bangkok
 area has been the most common avenue to the highest national
 leadership. Governments have often been extra-
 constitutionally changed by generally bloodless military coups
 d'etat. The government changes of 1973 and 1976, which
 occasioned violence in Bangkok, were exceptions.
 Since 1978, as Thailand has become a more developed, complex
 society there has been an evolution toward more democratic
 changes, including free elections. A coup attempt by a small
 military group in 1985 which failed due to lack of public or
 general military support was a reminder, however, that
 constitutional processes are still shallowly rooted.
 Government decisions of which the military strongly disapprove
 are generally not taken. However, civilians hold all Cabinet
 posts in the Government, and Prime Minister Prem is supported
 by parties holding somewhat more than half the elected seats
 
 
 886
 THAILAND
 in the National'Assembly. The 1983 national elections for the
 Lower House were open and free with four major and a dozen
 minor parties fielding candidates. As provided in the current
 (1978) Constitution, the largest non-government party became
 the formal opposition. Both it and the smaller opposition
 parties have regularly presented opposing views both within
 the National Assembly and through the mass media. The Thai
 National Assembly almost invariably has dissenting votes on
 legislation and on procedural decisions.
 The overwhelming majority of adult Thai have the right to
 vote. Thai children of an alien father who wish to vote must,
 however, have lived in Thailand for ten years and completed
 the equivalent of a sixth grade education. The Government
 encourages voter turnout but does not use either direct or
 indirect pressure to compel voters to cast ballots. Actual
 voter turnout for both national and local elections generally
 exceeds fifty percent.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has responded in the past to specific inquiries
 from Amnesty International and the International Commission of
 Jurists. The Government is generally willing to discuss human
 rights problems with both domestic and international human
 rights organizations. It permits human rights organizations
 of all kinds to visit Thailand, meet with appropriate
 government officials, and lobby for corrective action.
 Local civil rights groups, active on a wide range of issues
 including prostitution and enforcement of labor laws, have
 generally devoted most of their efforts to identifying and
 correcting human rights violations. Thai human rights
 organizations have had significant success in recent years.
 They have, for example, successfully encouraged the Government
 to tighten the discipline of police and paramilitary forces
 fighting the Communist insurgency. More recently, these
 groups have brought pressure on the Government to alleviate
 widespread abuses in child labor practices.
 In 1985 the Government did not harass individual human rights
 activists nor obstruct the investigations conducted by
 domestic groups interested in human rights.
 Thailand has involved itself in international human rights
 efforts, in particular by taking a leading role in preparing
 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) resolutions on
 Cambodia, including human rights violations, which are
 considered annually by the United Nations. Thai
 representatives were among the founding members of the
 Regional Council on Human Rights in Asia, a forum for the
 exchange of human rights information established in February
 1982. Thai members of the Asian Council helped draft a
 declaration on human rights to serve as the organization's
 statement of policy and goals.
 In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 that people were imprisoned for nonviolently expressing
 opinions deemed to be defamatory of or insulting to members of
 the royal family. It also investigated the reasons for the
 detention without trial of more than 20 alleged members or
 supporters of the banned Communist Party. In addition, it
 expressed concern about what Amnesty International believes to
 
 
 887
 THAILAND
 be the use of the charge of lese majeste to imprison prisoners
 of conscience. Freedom House rates Thailand "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 In 1985 the Thai population was 51.5 million, with a growth
 rate of 1.7 percent. Thailand has a free enterprise economic
 system with a large agricultural sector. In 1985 the
 industrial and service sectors were expanding more rapidly
 than the agricultural. Per capita gross domestic product,
 which had increased at an average rate of 4.3 percent from
 1965 to 1984, is expected to show a decline to about 2.5
 percent for 1985.
 Overall, the health of the Thai population is excellent.
 While caloric intake, 103 percent of recommended requirements
 in 1982, is generally adequate for most Thai, even for those
 living in the poorest rural areas of the northeastern
 provinces, ignorance about proper diet has led to isolated
 incidents of malnutrition which the Thai are making efforts to
 eliminate. About 64 percent of the population has access to
 safe water. Life expectancy at birth was 63 years and the
 average infant mortality rate had dropped from 77 per 1000 in
 1967 to 56.8 per 1000 in 1985. Average figures for infant
 mortality, however, obscure sharp differences between urban
 areas, where health care is very good, and rural areas, where
 health care standards are lower. For example, a recent study
 found infant mortality in rural areas to be half again as high
 as the average for the country as a whole.
 The percentages of the population below the absolute poverty
 level also show the continued gap in quality of life between
 urban and rural sectors; 34 percent are below the level in
 rural areas compared with only 15 percent in urban centers.
 Thailand has made steady progress in reducing illiteracy in
 recent years. The most current figures show a total adult
 literacy rate of 88 percent (92 percent male and 84 percent
 female).
 Thailand's primary school (compulsory for grades 1-6)
 enrollment rate is 99.5 percent of primary school ages
 according to official figures (101.7 percent of males and 97.7
 percent of females). Thailand has traditionally allocated a
 high percentage of central government expenditure (around 20
 percent) to education.
 Thai law prohibits the employment of children under age 12.
 Employment of children aged 12 to 15 is permitted for "light
 work." A recent study sponsored by the Government concludes
 that the laws governing child labor are inadequate by
 International Labor Organization (ILO) standards, poorly
 enforced, and that both children and adults work in
 substandard conditions. A major part of the problem is that
 the Thai labor protection law is vague, difficult to enforce,
 lacks severe punishment for offenders, and does not
 differentiate between adult and child workers. Although each
 year the press carries reports of employers tried and punished
 for violating the law, child labor abuse remains a chronic
 problem.
 The labor movement is represented on a tripartite committee
 which makes an annual recommendation on minimum wage levels.
 In Bangkok and surrounding provinces, where most industry is
 
 
 888
 THAILAND
 located, the minimum wage is 70 baht ($2.66) per day. This
 standard has been difficult to enforce, however, and many
 workers receive less than the minimum, especially in
 construction and the domestic non-export oriented sectors of
 the economy. Work conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium
 and large factories, which produce most of Thailand's exported
 goods, work standard 8-hour shifts and have working conditions
 which are reasonable by international standards. Where there
 are deficiencies, including child labor abuse and inadequate
 provision for health and safety, they are confined to the more
 difficult-to-enforce sectors of small manufacturing
 enterprises which produce lower quality goods for the local
 market.
 The status and role of women has improved steadily over the
 past several years. For the most part, women have equal legal
 rights in Thailand, with specific guarantees of property and
 divorce rights; and there are no allegations that these rights
 are denied. Women are not, however, permitted to participate
 fully in Buddhist religious institutions or to become monks.
 They are well represented in the labor force and becoming
 increasingly so in professional positions, particularly those
 in the commercial sector. In general, women are not legally
 barred from positions traditionally held by men, except for
 limitations on serving in the armed forces. In rural areas,
 sex stereotypes exist with respect to occupational and social
 roles. These barriers are being modified as mass
 communications bring modern role models to even the most
 remote communities. Women vote in numbers equal to men and
 participate fully in the political process. There are several
 female members of the national legislature. However, women
 are underrepresented in national politics and in high
 government positions.
 Hill tribes and other ethnic minorities are not legally
 excluded from any of the benefits of society, but their
 isolation and poor land has kept their living standards
 lower. Language and cultural barriers work against the ethnic
 Malay Muslim minority in south Thailand, but there is no
 official policy of discrimination. To promote higher
 education for the Muslim minority, the Government has reserved
 a certain number of university seats exclusively for Muslim
 students and has committed extensive personnel and financial
 resources to improving education of Muslim youth to make them
 more competitive in the economic sector. Attention has also
 been given to the improvement of administration and
 development in the South. To help coordinate efforts to
 assist Thailand's Muslim community, the Government established
 in 1983 a national foundation for Muslim affairs staffed with
 representatives from various government agencies.
 
 
 889
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL,,,        28.7     41.9     38.6
 LOANS ..............    ...  7.0    18.1     12.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 21.7     23.8     26.1
 AAO......................... 22.6    35.9     35.9
 LOANS ................ 7.0         18.1     12.5
 GRANTS .............   ...  15.6    17.8     23.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.),..         5.8      9.1      8.0
 B.fOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0     .0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        6.1      6.0      2.7
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    6.1      6.0      2.7
 PEACE  CORPS ......       2.7      3.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        3.4      3.0      2.7
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        96.2    101.2    102.3
 LOANS ..............  .... 76.0     94.0     95.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 20.2      7.2      7.3
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........    . 18.5      5.0      5.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       76.0     94.0     95.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        1.7      2.2      2.3
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TUTAL ECON. & NIL...       124.9    143.1    140.9
 LOANS ..............  .... 83.0    112.1    107.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 41.9     31.0     33.4
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0     16.3      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     16.3      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............    ....0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........   671.1    290.4    477.2   5779.3
 IBRO             393.1    152.6    112.5   3582.0
 IFC               62.8     57.7      0.6    232.3
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    125.1
 lO                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB              210.6     75.0    364.1   1719.8
 .AFDB              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               4.6      1.6      0.0     70.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      3.5      0.0     49.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 890
