 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy with a history of
 frequent military coups and powerful military-bureaucratic influence over political
 life. The King exerts strong informal influence on carefully selected issues. In Octo-
 ber the democratically elected administration of Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai
 completed its second year in office.
 The security apparatus has wide-ranging legal powers, largely derived from past
 militarily controlled administrations. Military leaders still have an informal but in-
 fluential role in internal politics. Since 1992 the military influence in politics has
 been substantially reduced, however, and the current military leadership has evi-
 denced a growing acceptance of permanent civilian rule.
 The police have primary responsibility for internal security and law enforcement.
 However, some police officers continue to commit serious human rights abuses with-
 out punishment.
 Thailand, a newly industrializing country with a flourishing free enterprise sys-
 tem, continued to enjoy remarkable economic growth. The political system generally
 provides strong protection for individual economic interests, including property
 rights. Although the industrial and services sectors are expanding rapidly, more
 than half the population is rural and dependent on ariture Despite the Govern-
 ment's efforts to close the economic gap between urban and rural areas, Thailand
 continues to suffer from a large and growing disparity in income distribution.
 Although the Government continued vocal advocacy of human rights, serious
 human rights problems remained unaddressed. Some police continued to resort to
 
 
 692
 physical abuse of detainees and sometimes summary executions in dealing with
 criminal suspects. The Government prosecuted few police officers accused of abuse
 or extrajudicial killings. Enforcement of a broad range of laws and regulations by
 police also remained noticeably lax. In August the police department was rocked by
 revelations of senior police officials' complicity in the deaths of the wife and child
 of a key witness in a 5-year-old case involving the theft of gems from a Saudi prince.
 In general the Government continued to uphold freedom of assembly and freedom
 of the press, although there were several isolated incidents in which the Govern-
 ment attempted to limit these rights. Also, the Government moved slowly to fulfill
 its policy of addressing the problem of trafficking in women, children, and minorities
 for the purposes of prostitution. Legal and societal discrimination against women,
 violence against women and children, and child labor continued.
 The number of protesters officially listed as "missing" after the bloody 1992 mii-
 tary crackdown on prodemocracy demonstrations dropped to 39.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The Government, legal organiza-
 tions, reputable nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), and the press continued to
 report, credibly, that some police officers summarily executed criminal suspects, par-
 ticularly in areas outside the capital. Reliable N  's reported, based on court
 records, that in 1993, the police kled 31 suspects while arresting them, while an-
 other 23 died in police custody. It is difficult to gauge accurately what percentage
 of these deaths could reasonably have been avoided. Complete statistics on the num-
 ber of criminals and suspects killed by police in 1994 were unavailable.
 In August police officers allegedly murdered the wife and child of a key witness
 in a 5-year-old case concerning jewelry and gemstones stolen by a Thai employee
 of a Saudi prince. High-level police involvement is widely suspected in the gems
 case; one midlevel and two senior police officers have been arrested thus far, with
 more arrests likely. While at year's end no police officers had been convicted, many
 remained under active investigation for their roles in the affair.
 In January press reports revealed that since 1992 a group of policemen robbed
 and murdered at least 15 Asian tourists. Chinese and Japanese visitors in Bangkok
 were targeted for kidnaping and extortion, and those killed were mutilated to ham-
 per identification and dumped in outlying provinces. Seven police officers who con-
 fessed to murder were arrested for their involvement. These cases had not come to
 trial by the end of 1994.
 In May an American citizen died of head wounds sustained while in police custody
 in Phuket. Police authorities vigorously investigated and determined that the
 wounds were self-inflicted. However, forensic pathology reports conducted in the
 United States 2 weeks after the incident raise questions about the case that remain
 unanswered. The FBI is assisting Thai authorities in investigating the matter.
 The courts rarely convict police officers involved in summary execution cases, in
 part because witnesses are often intimidated or bribed to withhold evidence. The re-
 sulting climate of impunity is the single largest factor militating against any signifi-
 cant change in police behavior. The law allows personal suits against police officers
 for criminal actions taken while making an arrest. However, due to flaws in the
 legal process and ingrained cultural attitudes, victims or their families rarely file
 suits agist the police. During the initial police inquiry, most police investigations
 routinely determine that no wrongful action was taken on the part of the police;
 judges generally follow the prosecutor's recommendations. If pursued by the family,
 the case is handled by the same office, in some instances by the same prosecutor,
 who has already ruled that no criminal action occurred. There is no information to
 determine how many cases are settled out of court, but in cases in which suits are
 filed, the Government often compensates the family of the deceased, and the suit
 is dropped.
 Two killings of political figures were reported in 1994. The mayor of Narathiwat,
 a provincial capital, was murdered in January by two strangers who fled the scene
 on a motorcycle without license plates. In a separate incident, a provincial council
 candidate who was a key figure leading villagers to rally against two local officials
 was murdered, apparently for political reasons.
 b. Disappearance.-There was one report of a disappearance in 1994. In December
 environmental activist Suchada Khamfubutra disappeared from her home. Because
 she had organized villagers in Lamphang province to protest pollution from a Tai-
 wanese-owned factory earlier in the year there initially was suspicion of foul play.
 As more information became available, NG0's and the police decided she had more
 
 
 693
 likely disappeared of her own volition because she was unable to repay some debts.
 Police were investigating her case at year's end.
 The governmental joint committee, which includes a prominent university profes-
 sor and other nonpolitical figures, investigating the military's violent suppression of
 prodemocracy demonstrations in 1992 reduced the number of protesters believed
 missing from 48 to 39. All those found were unharmed but had feared persecution
 for their role in the events. local investigations into the whereabouts of the remain-
 ing 39 continue, though many family members and NGO's suspect that most of
 them are dead. An amnesty decree issued during the last days of the Suchinda gov-
 ernment in May 1992, and reaffirmed by subsequent Governments, effectively pro-
 tects military leaders and protesters accused of criminal activities during the May
 1992 events from criminal prosecution. NGO's and relatives of the missing filed a
 civil suit against four of the top military leaders involved in the violence. In June
 the civil court ruled that because of the amnesty decree the military leaders could
 not be sued. Lawyers for the families plan to apeal on the grounds that the decree
 was unconstitutional because it was not approved by the Cabinet.
 A suspect in the 1989 murder of Saudi diplomats in Bangkok was acquitted by
 the Supreme Court in May. The judges determined the evidence submitted by the
 three witnesses was unreliable.
 Labor Congress of Thailand (LCT) President Thanong Po-an's 1991 disappearance
 remains unresolved. On Labor Day (May 1), the LCT again called on the Govern-
 ment to make a more serious attempt to locate Thanong. Most observers believe
 Thanong was kidnaped and killed because of his criticism of the military coup d'etat
 in February 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and in most cases police do not resort to physical abuse or violence. However, there
 continued to be credible reports that police sometimes beat and tortured prisoners
 and detainees. Criminal suspects regularly complain of police attempts to secure
 confessions or evidence through the use of torture such as electric shocks. Several
 times in 1994, senior police officials publicly acknowledged that torture is occasion-
 ally carried out in police custody, with the implicit backing of some senior police offi-
 cers. The Government instituted a human rights instruction course to try to address
 police brutality but made no visible efforts to convict and appropriately punish those
 who commit these abuses. (See Section 5 regarding reports of instances of police in-
 volvement in trafficking of women and children for the purposes of prostitution.)
 In general access to prisoners is not restricted. Conditions in most prisons do not,
 in general, tbreaten the life or health of inmates. However, some prison guards re-
 sort to physical abuse of both Thai and foreign prisoners in response to disciplinary
 problems. Solitary confinement and heavy leg irons are sometimes used to punish
 diffcult prisoners.
 Medical care in prisons is inadequate. For a total prison population of 100,000,
 the Corrections Department employs only 14 doctors and 5 dentists.
 Conditions at the Suan Phlu Immigration Detention Center (ITIC), which gen-
 erally holds between 2,000 and 3,000 detained illegal immigrants, are extremely
 poor. Serious overcrowding, lack of medical care, inability to exercise, and physical
 abuse are recurrent problems. Reliable international observers charge that both au-
 thorities and detainees sexually abuse female detainees. Immigration detention fa-
 cilities are not administered by the Department of Corrections and are not subject
 to many of the regulations found in the regular prison system. Nationals of coun-
 tries that will not accept deportees because of uncertainties over citizenship face an
 extended stay in the IDC. Some detainees are eventually released at the Burmese
 border and typically reenter Thailand illegally.
 While the law requires that prosecutors formally charge criminal suspects in court
 within 91 days of their detainment, some IDC detainees have been hed for several
 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Except in cases of crimes in progress the
 law generally requires arrest warrants. Arrested persons must be informed o? the
 likely charges against them immediately after arrest. Police have the authority to
 extend the detention period to 7 days to complete an investigation. After 7 days, the
 police must present the case to the public prosecutor to determine if the case should
 be pursued. While detainees have a right to have a lawyer present during question-
 ing, they are often not informed of this right. Foreign prisoners are often forced to
 sign confessions without knowing what is in them.
 There is a functioning bail system, but judges have considerable discretion in de-
 termining eligibility for bail. The only legal basis for detention by the police without
 specific charges for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities
 Act. No one has been detained under that Act's provisions since 1984.
 
 
 694
 Of the approximately 100,000 prison inmates in Thailand, approximately 23 000
 are pretrial detainees or those undergoing appeals. They are not segregated from
 the general prison population.
 Exile is neither practiced nor used as a means of political control
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Constitution provides for presumption of in-
 nocence, but in practice defendants are frequently presumed guilty. Access to courts
 or administrative bodies to seek redress is provided for and practiced. The civilian
 judicial system has three levels of courts: courts of first instance, courts of appeal,
 and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal and civil cases
 pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during periods of martial
 law. A serious flaw in providing due process rights is the lack of appeal from deci-
 sions of a military court. Islamic (Shari'a) courts provide due process and hear only
 civil cases concerning members of the Muslim minority.
 There is no trial by jury. Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a single judge,
 and more serious cases require two or more judges. While most trials are public,
 the court may order a trial closed. This is most often done in cases touching on na-
 tional security or the royal family. Career civil service judges preside over the
 courts. Judicial appointments and structures are not subject to parliamentary re-
 view. Although generally regarded as independent, the judiciary has a widespread
 reputation for venality.
 The widely publicized lese majeste trial against prominent social critic Sulak
 Siwarak that began in 1993 after his return from self-exile is still under way in the
 criminal courts. In October the trial concluded in the lese majeste and secession
 case of four Shiite Muslims, held in prison since their arrest in Pottanim (Pattani
 province) in 1990. Three were convicted on lese majeste and other charges and sen-
 tenced to between 6and 31 years in prison. The fourth was convicted on other crimi-
 nal charges and sentenced to 6 years in prison.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including access to a lawyer of their choosing. A government program provides free
 legal advice to the poor, but indigent defendants are not automatically provided
 with counsel at public expense. Most free legal aid comes from private groups, in-
 cluding the Thai Lawyers' Association and the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 Well-informed legal sources estimate that there are at most 10 political prisoners
 in Thailand. Political affiliation and questionable evidence may have influenced the
 ability of these prisoners to receive a fair trial or fair punishment. Muslim groups
 claim 16 political prisoners are held on criminal charges because of their political
 views. In the past few years the authorities used lese majeste laws in several high-
 profile cases to intimidate political opponents.
 Ex-Royal Thai Army Major General Manoon Roopkachorn, accused of master-
 minding a 1982 plot to assassinate the Queen, the Prime Minister, and the army
 commander, was cleared of all charges in 1994 and filed suit against the investigat-
 ing officers for falsifying evidence. The other two defendants in the case were also
 cleared.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires police to obtain a warrant prior to a search. Warrants are issued by the
 police with prior Ministry of Interior or provincial governor approval and are not
 subject to judicial review. There were some credible reports that officers sometimes
 endorse warrants in advance and then allow their noncommissioned subordinates to
 apply them as needed. The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged
 in "Communist suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but
 these powers rarely have been invoked in recent years and were not invoked in
 1994.
 Thai society is essentially open; membership in political organizations is vol-
 untary, and the unmonitoredexchange of ideas is generally permitted. However, se-
 curity services monitor persons espousing leftist or controversial views, including
 foreign visitors.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and citizens gen-
 erally enjoy, a substantial measure of freedom of speech. However, the law prohibits
 criticism of the royal family (lese majeste), threats to national security, or speaking
 in a manner likely to incite disturbances or insult Buddhism.
 Newspapers and periodicals practice some self-censorship, especially with regard
 to the monarchy and national security issues. However, strong media criticism of
 political parties personalities, and the Government is common and robust. Journal-
 ists are generally free to comment on government activities without fear of reprisal,
 although there were credible reports of occasional harassment or bribing of journal-
 
 
 695
 ists by individual politicians. Also, journalists are reluctant to criticize the judiciary
 out of fear that they will not be treated fairly by the judges during libel proceedings.
 Radio and television stations are government licensed and operated primarily by
 the Government and military. Radio stations are required by law to broadcast gov-
 ernment-produced newscasts four times daily. A bill to abolish the order requiring
 these broadcasts was passed by Parliament in October.
 Although programmers are generally free to determine the content and nature of
 television broadcasts, a government internal censorship board commonly edits or
 "blacks out' portions of programming deemed politically sensitive. Self- censorship
 is more prevalent in privately operated stations because their licenses must be re-
 newed every few years.
 In May the military shut down an army-owned radio station leased to a private
 news group for 3 days after the station ran a commentary critical of the armed
 forces. In another incident in February government-run media attempted to protect
 a prominent Buddhist monk accused of sexual misconduct by prhibiting interviews
 with another well-known Buddhist on his views about the allegations and declined
 to air a video documenting the monk's overseas travels.
 Representatives of the film industry continued to criticize the police-controlled
 film censorship board, which regularly deletes all references in films to a number
 of topics deemed politically controversial or considered pornographic. The police cen-
 sorship board initially banned the film "Schindler's List" because of a nude scene.
 However, after a furor in the press, the board reversed its decision.
 Thai domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and so-
 cial commentary. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and
 domestic books normally are not censored and circulate freely. The 1941 Press Law
 empowers the Police Director General to prohibit the import of printed matter
 deemed dangerous to public order and morals. The list mainly consists of porno-
 graphic material, but it also still includes books written by Communists.
 In May the Cabinet rescinded a 1976 military order prohibiting possession of
 printed materials that could cause divisions among members of the public.
 Academic and technical research is conducted freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The legal system recognizes
 the right of peaceful assembly and there were m any examples of people exercising
 their right to free and peacefI assembly unhindered by government interference in
 1994. However, government officials sometimes restrict this right. In July the Gov-
 ernment effectively blocked foreign participation at an NGO conference about East
 Timor and pressured potential host sites to refuse to host the seminar. After attor-
 nays called into question the legality of the Government's action the conference was
 allowed to take place. However, government intimidation was effective in preventing
 many, particularly overseas visitors, from participating (see Section 4).
 Private associations must register with the Government, but permits are not re-
 quired for private meetings or gatherings unless held on public property.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is protected by law and generally re-
 spected in practice. The de facto state religion is Theravada Buddhism, but other
 religions are not restricted.
 Members of minority religious movements occasionally are subjected to legal ac-
 tion. For example, the trials of dissident Buddhist leader Phra Potirak and his fol-
 lowers for allegedly violating the law governing the Buddhist ecclesiastical hier-
 archy and impersonating Buddhist monks or nuns continued. Phra Potirak and his
 followers remain free on-bail and continue their religious activities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right of citizens to change their residence or workplace was un-
 abridged. Travel was restricted in certain border areas where foreign or vestigial do-
 mestic insurgent groups remain active. Longstanding restrictions on the travel and
 place of residence of certain Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand re-
 mained in place. In addition, some long-term noncitizen residents of Thailand, in-
 cluding several hundred thousand tribal people, must seek permission from local au-
 thorities or the army for foreign or domestic travel.
 In September the police summarily detained and deported to Malaysia seven
 members of a Malaysian Muslim sect whose passports were revoked by the Malay-
 sian Government. The Malaysian Government subsequently jailed them for their
 dissenting views on Islam. (See the report on Malaysia.)
 Several regulations intended and used to help reduce trafficking in women and
 children for purposes of prostitution could be used to infringe on the right of women
 and children to travel freely. One statute (rarely used), dating to the last century,
 requires women to obtain their husband's permission before traveling outside Thai-
 land. Also, female passport applicants under age 36 must sit through a series of
 interviews regarding their employment records and finances. Passport applications
 
 
 696
 single Thai women and children under the age of 14 must also be approved by
 Department of Public Welfare.
 The Government has not revoked citizenship for political reasons.
 Thailand continued to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and Lao asylum seekers
 and to process them in accordaance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA)
 agreed to in Geneva in 1989. There were no reports of any puahbacks of Vietnamee
 or Lao asylum seekers, and no credible reports of forced repatriation. The Govern-
 ment announced that all Lao camps are to be closed by 1995 and continued to co-
 operate with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and Laos in a tri-
 lateral program to facilitate the voluntary repatriation of certain Lao in Thailand.
 Under Thai law, Burmese (and other non-Indochinese) asylum seekers are consid-
 ered illegal immigrants subject to deportation, but Thailand continued to permit
 Burmese asylum seekers to remain in camps along the Thai-Burma border and near
 Bangkok. While Burmese outside of camps were arrested eriodically and sent to
 areas not controlled by the Burmese Government on the borer, the Government did
 not deport any Burmese recognized by the UNHCR as a "person of concern."
 Residents of the "safe area7 first asylum camp for Burmese dissidents in
 Ratchaburi province had regular access to the UNHCR, which concluded that condi-
 tions at the safe area meet broadly accepted international standards for the protec-
 tion and welfare of asylum seekers. The safe area is open to all Burmese "persons
 of concern, whether or not they previously registered with the Thai Government.
 However, by year's end, only about 170 of the 2,500 Burmese "persons of concern7
 resided there.
 About 73,000 ethnic minority Burmese and 1,500 Burmese students and dis-
 sidents continued to reside in some 30 camps in Thailand along the Thai-Burma
 border. Thailand ordered the relocation of several camps to Burma, but continued
 to permit voluntary agencies and the UNHCR to provide food, medical, and sanita-
 tion assistance along the border.
 Thailand generly continued to accept new arrivals from Cambodia fleeing the
 fighting, but several subsequent repatriations occurred in which the safety of the
 returning refugees or the voluntary nature of their decision to return was in doubt.
 After heavy fighting along the Cambodian border in March, some 30,000 Cam-
 bodians fled into Thailand. Military officials provided assistance and moved the
 Cambodians back to an area of Cambodia that was not experiencing fighting. How-
 ever, the military refused access to the group by international observers prior to the
 repatriation. In May Thailand repatriated several dozen Burmese who had fled
 fighting in Shan state, in some cases before it ould be ascertained that the fighting
 had ceased. In July Burmese forces entered an outlying section of an ethnic Mon
 cam p (located on Burmese soil), prompting several thousand Mon to flee to a site
 inside Thailand. Thai authorities, after receiving assurances from Burmese forces
 th~at the incursion was a mistake and would not be repeated, eventually forced the
 Mont return to their original site in September, despite protests by the UNHCR
 and the international community. Thailand also instituted closer monitoring of the
 movements and activities of Burmese asylum seekers and NGO's along the border.
 In at least one area of the Burmese border, access to camps in Thailand was blocked
 on grounds that there was no longer any fighting in that part of Burma. New arriv-
 als were required to set up camps on the Burmese side of the border.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The democratically elected coalition government was generally successful in its ef-
 forts to strengthen democratic institutions. The military's role in politics has signifi-
 cantly declined since the 1992 elections, and the Thai military now seems increas-
 ingly supportive of the civilian government and democracy.
 While there are no legal restrictions on political participation, women are gen-
 erally under represented in national politics, especially at the senior levels. Also, the
 army still prohibits women from becoming generals, and women are not allowed to
 attend military academies or the Army General Staff College. However, the number
 of women in local and national politics continued to increase. In February more than
 400 women were promoted to the post of assistant district chief, a steppingstone to
 more powerful positions such as provincial governor. In September a woman was ap-
 pinted Secretary General of a major political party for the first time in Thai his-
 tory. The current parliamentary contingent of 16 female Members of Parliament in
 the lower house (out of 360) is thela t to date.
 No laws prohibit the p articipation of ethnic minorities, but few hold positions of
 authority in national olitics or the civil service. Ethnic minorities in the north often
 lack docmentation of Thai citizenship, effectively barring their participation in the
 
 
 697
 political process (see Section 5). Muslims from southern Thailand hold significant
 posts in the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations operate without government restriction. Inter-
 national human rights NGO's generally work freely in Thailand on controversial is-
 sues. Although the Government sometimes criticizes these groups for being politi-
 cally motivated and biased, it generally has neither penalized nor suppressed
 human rights observers. However, NGO's working with displaced Burmese have had
 problems in their relations with the Government (see Section 2.d.).
 When a locally supported regional NGO umbrella group planned a human rights
 conference (to discuss human rights problems in Burma and East Timor) to coincide
 with the ASEAN Ministerial Meetings in Bangkok in July, the Government, to avoid
 repercussions from other governments, sought to prevent the conference by invoking
 a little-used 1987 permit requirement for foreign participation at NGO conferences.
 To further limit foreign participation, the Government "blacklisted" 11 East Timor-
 ese dissidents, preventing them from entering the country, and deported one Aus-
 tralian NGO representative after claiming she was in the country illegally. The
 Labor Ministry pressured potential conference sites into refusing the NGO group ac-
 cess to a meeting room. Once human rights lawyers protested the Government's ac-
 tion, calling into question the legality of the permit regulation, the Government al-
 lowed the conference to take place, albeit with limited participation.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women generally have equal legal rights, but inequalities remain in do-
 mestic law. Whereas a man may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife has
 committed adultery, a woman faces the additional legal burden of proving her hus-
 band has maintained or honored another woman in a manner equal to his wife.
 Reliable statistics indicate that domestic abuse is rising and crosses all social
 classes. One NGO estimates that as many as 50 percent of women in Bangkok's
 slum areas are victims of abuse. Police do not enforce laws against such violence
 vigorously, and domestic violence often goes unreported. Under the Criminal Code,
 spousal and child abuse is covered under assault provisions, but rules of evidence
 often make prosecuting such cases difficult. Early in the year police began to use
 a female team to handle rape and abuse cases to encourage more victims to report
 these abuses.
 Prostitution, although illegal, flourishes and is deeply ingrained. Estimates of the
 numbers of women and children engaged in prostitution vary widely because of tem-
 porary sex workers and the migratory nature of prostitution. However, reliable NGO
 statistics generally discount the Government's claim that there are 70,000 pros-
 titutes in Thailand; most estimate the number closer to 250,000.
 Prostitution exposes women to a number of human rights abuses, as well as a
 high risk of contracting AIDS. Some women are forced into prostitution, although
 the number of such cases is unknown. Human rights monitors believe that the ma-
 jority who engage in prostitution are not kept under physical constraint, but they
 note that many women become indebted to brothel owners for large sums. It is com-
 mon for brothel procurers to advance parents a substantial sum against their
 daughter's future earnings, often without the consent of the young woman involved.
 The women are then obligated to work in a brothel for a fixed period of time in
 order to pay back the loan.
 In the past several years, there has been an increase in the number of women
 entering Thailand from neighboring countries to work as prostitutes, and there were
 continuing credible reports of corrupt police involvement in illegal trafficking
 schemes.
 Incidents of coerced prostitution most commonly involve women from hill tribes
 or neighboring countries. Brothel operators reportedly favor such women because
 they are cheaper to procure and their inability to speak Thai makes them easier
 to control. Sometimes lured with promises of jobs as waitresses or domestics, these
 women are then often threatened with physical abuse by brothel operators if they
 refuse to work as prostitutes. Because they are considered illegal immigrants, such
 women have no right to legal counsel or health care if arrested.
 The Government has set up vocational training and education programs to combat
 the lure of prostitution, but despite occasional high-profile raids on brothels, it has
 failed effectively to enforce laws against prostitution, and in many cases, brothels
 pay off local government representatives and police. There are credible reports of
 
 
 698
 instances in which corrupt police drove Burmese women across the border some-
 times in police vehicles and delivered them directly to brothels.
 Under the current Penal Code, prostitutes are considered criminals, whereas
 brothel owners, procurers, and clients are not subject to criminal statutes. In May
 the Cabinet approved draft legislation that would further criminalize those involved
 in the trafficking of women and children for the purpose of prostitution or slave
 labor. While clients of child prostitutes would be subject to criminal prosecution
 under the legislation, it still would not criminalize the clients of adult prostitutes.
 At year's end, the draft legislation was scheduled for parliamentary debate in May
 1995.
 Statistics compiled by NGO's concerned with women's issues note that women
 represent half of the economically active population and their numbers have in-
 creased in professional positions. Government regulations require employers to pay
 the same wages and benefits for similar work regardless of sex. However, two-thirds
 of female workers do not earn the minimum wage, and there is a significant gap
 between average salaries earned by men and women as a result of the concentration
 of women in traditionally lower payin jobs.
 NGO's concerned with the status of women have pressed the Government to abol-
 ish discriminatory practices within the civil service. Constitutional amendments
 passed in early 1995 included a new provision, Article 24, stipulating the equality
 of men and women.
 Children.-Abuse of children in prostitution and child labor continued. Although
 the Government claims to be committed to eliminating child prostitution, it has
 failed to enforce the current limited laws against child prostitution. In 1994 the
 Government established a special police task force to suppress child prostitution,
 and the Cabinet approved draft legislation that would revise the Criminal Code to
 toughen the laws regarding abuse of children under 18 years of age. Reliable NGO's
 report that police are often unwilling to raid a brothel that has child prostitutes un-
 less the NGO can provide the children's names, due to the problem of false identity
 cards with incorrect birth years. The police then will only remove those children
 named before the raid. There are no reliable statistics on the number of children
 involved in the sex industry.
 Children are particular victims of the AIDS epidemic. There are indications that
 the demand for child prostitutes may be growing as patrons believe that older pros-
 titutes are more likely to be infected with HIV. There is a small, but rapidly grow-
 ing, number of babies born to HIV-infectd mothers. Approximately 30 percent of
 these children will be infected and die within a few years. Those who are not in-
 fected themselves will be orphaned while stin in childhood, and are often discrimi-
 nated against as an extension of the social stigma directed against their parents.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 As in the case of domestic violence against women, police are often reluctant to pur-
 sue abuse cases, and rules of evidence make prosecution of child abuse cases dif-
 ficult.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Progress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into Thai society is limited. Only half of the estimated 500,000 to 700,000 members
 of hill tribes reportedly possess documentation as citizens, which prevents them
 from exercising their basic rights, including participation in the political process.
 Undocumented hill tribe people cannot own land, have limited access to educational
 opportunities, and are not subject to labor laws, including minimum wage require-
 ments.
 Approximately 45,000 Vietnamese who fled Indochina in the 1940's and 1950's re-
 side in northeastern Thailand and live under a set of laws and regulations restrict-
 ing their movements, residences, education, and occupations. The Government has
 slowly pursued a more lenient policy toward longtime Vietnamese residents in re-
 cent years. Noncitizen Chinese and their descendants who live in border areas must
 seek permission from local authorities to travel.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent a significant minority within Thailand
 as a whole and constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces that bor-
 der Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integrate the Muslim
 community into Thai society through developmental efforts and expanded edu-
 cational opprtunities, societal discrimination remains widespread. The number of
 incidents of political violence-yiay involving few, if any, casualties--decreased
 from 1993. While security officinas have attributed a number of those incidents to
 the Islamic Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO) separatist group, in-
 formed observers believe much of the violence in the South has been perpetrated
 by opponents of the Government in an effort to weaken the Government. Occasional
 
 
 699
 ambushes of security forces by suspected guerrillas, and counteroperations by mili-
 tary units, also occur in remote areas in southern Thailand's Muslim provinces.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government again took few steps to implement
 provisions in the Disabled Rehabilitation Law that established a quota system and
 employer incentives for hiring the disabled. Another regulation requiring factories
 to hire one handicapped person for every 200 nonhandicapped employees was also
 not enforced. There are no laws mandating access to public facilities for disabled
 persons.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-There were no significant changes in the general
 labor environment, either in terms of new legal initiatives or labor unrest.
 The law grants freedom of association only to private sector workers. Workers also
 have the right to form and join unions of their own choosing without prior author-
 ization; to decide on the constitutions and rules of these associations and unions;
 to express their views without government or employer interference; to confederate
 with other unions; to receive protection from discrimination, dissolution, suspension,
 or termination by any outside authority because of union activities; and to have em-
 ployee representation in direct negotiations with employers. However, no law explic-
 itly protects workers from discrimination due to their participation in organizing
 new unions that have not yet been officially registered. Union leaders report that
 employers do discriminate against workers seeking to organize unions.
 In place of unions, the law allows workers in each state enterprise to form a sin-
 gle "association" after at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees submit a pe-
 tition to the Ministry of Labor to register such association. These associations sub-
 mit employee grievances to management and propose changes in benefits and work-
 ing conditions, but may not negotiate wages. Associations do not have the right to
 confederate or to join private sector federations. Unofficial contacts between public
 and private sector unions continue, however, and the Government has not interfered
 with these relationships. A number of associations maintain affiliations their prede-
 cessor unions had with international labor organizations.
 The law denies all state enterprise workers the right to strike. In the private sec.
 tor, a proposed strike must be approved by a majority of the union members in a
 secret ballot.
 In 1991 the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized labor law amend-
 ments adopted in March 1991 that dissolved state enterprise unions, transferred
 their assets, limited the number of associations which may be formed in each state
 enterprise, set unusually high minimum membership requirements for associations,
 denied associations the right to affiliate with private sector unions, and completely
 forbade strikes in state enterprises. The Government has not vigorously enforced
 these restrictions. The ILO continues to request that the Government rescind or re-
 vise the law. The Government has pending a new version of the law that would re-
 store for the most part the rights enjoyed by state enterprise workers prior to the
 1991 changes. It was apprvedby the Cabinet in December 1993 and passed its first
 reading in Parliament on September 28.
 The Government has the authority to restrict private sector strikes that would
 "affect national security or cause severe negative repercussions for the population
 at large." The Government seldom invokes this provision and did not do so in 1994.
 Labor law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more broadly
 than the ILO criteria for such services. No strikes were disapproved on those
 grounds in 1994. The number of approved strikes has averaged fewer than 10 annu-
 ally for the past 15 years; there were 3 in the first 8 months of 1994.
 Over half of the work force is employed in the unorganized agricultural sector.
 Less than 2 percent of the total work force, though nearly 11 percent of industrial
 workers is unionized. Cultural traditions and unfamiliarity with the concept of in-
 dustrial relations are often cited as the reason for low rates of labor organization.
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 mysterious disappearance
 of outspoken labor leader Thanong Po-an remains unsolved.
 There is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were exploited by the
 military, politicians, or employers for their own purposes, but private unions gen-
 erally operate independently of the Government and other outside organizations.
 Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade union organizations,
 and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 recgnizes the right to organize and bargain collectively for private sector workers
 and defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-assisted con-
 ciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. In practice, genuine collective bar-
 
 
 700
 gacning probably occurs only in 10 to 20 percent of workplaces and in most instances
 continues to be characterized by autocratic attitudes on the part of employers.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labor law for the private sector. Workers may also seek redress for their
 grievances from a tripartite Labor Relations Committee. Redress of grievances for
 state enterprise workers is handled by a State Enterprise Labor Relations Commit-
 tee. Labor leaders did not indicate dissatisfaction with the treatment their concerns
 receive in these forums.
 No separate labor legislation applies to export processing zones, where wages and
 working conditions often are better than national norms because of the preponder-
 ance of multinational firms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, except in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law.
 However, there are reports of sweatshops in the informal sector that physically re-
 strain workers from leaving the premises. There are no estimates of how many such
 workshops exist, but the growing number of illegal aliens, particularly from Burma,
 increases the opportunities for such abuse.
 For several years, the ILO has cited Thailand for violations of Convention 29 on
 Forced Labor. The primary focus of the ILO criticism is forced child labor, especially
 child prostitution. Since the ILO raised these concerns, the Government has cooper-
 ated in setting up important institutional links, particularly with the International
 Program on the Elimination of Child Labor, to help improve this situation.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for em-
 ployment is 13; most children complete compulsory education at age 12. The law
 permits the employment of children between the ages of 13 and 15 only in "light
 work," where the lifting of heavy loads and exposure to toxic materials or dangerous
 equipment or situations is restricted. The employment of children at night (10 p.m.
 to 6 a.m.) is prohibited. The Government estimates that there are 100,000 children
 between the ages of 13 and 15 in the labor force, but the actual number is probably
 much larger.
 The Miistry of Labor has increased the number of inspectors specifically respon-
 sible for child labor issues, although not all these officers are engaged in full-time
 inspection work. Enforcement of child labor laws continues to be inadequate. The
 inclination when dealing with violators is to negotiate promises of better future be-
 havior, rather than seek prosecution and punishment. labor Ministry records indi-
 cate that the number of prosecutions for violations of labor laws was up slightly in
 1994 (a total of 168 through August).
 The Government is also dealing with child labor by extending compulsory edu-
 cation from 6 to 9 years.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gov-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives increased the daily legal minimum
 wage twice in 1994. Minimum wage rates now vary between $4.20 (105 baht) and
 $5.42 (135 baht) per day depending on the cost of living in different provinces. The
 wage is not adequate to support an urban worker and his family. With extended
 family member financial ontributions, the minimum wage provides the basis for a
 marginally adequate overall standard of living. However, more than half of workers
 countrywide receive less than the minimum wage, especially in the provinces. Un-
 skilled migrant workers who pour into Bangkok from the poorer countryside, as well
 as illegal aliens, often work for less than the minimum wage. The Ministry of Labor
 is responsible for ensuring employers meet minimum wage requirements. Despite
 encouragement of employees to report violations to Labor Inspectors, enforcement
 of minimum wage laws is mixed.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire labor force.
 By relation, commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week, em-
 ployees in industry work 48, and those in "dangerous" work such as in the chemical,
 petroleum, mining or other industries involving heavy machinery, 42. Transpor-
 tation workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement of thiese
 standards is weak. There is no 24-hour rest period mandated by law.
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. In medium-sized and large factories,
 go vernment health and safety standards are often maintained, but lax enforcement
 of safety standards is common. In the large informal sector, the health and safety
 environment is substandard. The Government designated 1994 the "Year of Work-
 p lac Safety" and initiated a vari'ety of programs to deal with continuing problems.
 Employers are abe o ignore safey reglatons in part bcause nonuonizea work-
 ers often do not understand safety and health standards and do not report viola-
 tions. When 188 workers lost their lives in the May 1993 Kader Toy Factory fire
 near Bangkok, the Government brought suit against eight persons, including the
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 701
 managing director. The case commenced in June 1994 and is expected to be lengthy.
 There is no law affording job protection to employees who remove themselves frm
 dangerous work situations. The Ministry of Labor promulgates health and safety
 regulations regarding conditions of work. Labor inspectors are responsible for en-
 forcement of health and safety regulations; the strictest penalty is 6 months in jail.
