 THAILAID
 Thailand is a constitutional monarchy. National elections
 were held in April 1979. Under the constitution promulgated
 on December 2, 1978, there is a strong executive led by a
 prime minister, and a bicameral legislature composed of a
 301-member elected lower house and a 225-member senate
 appointed by the prime minister and approved by the King.
 Neither the prime minister nor his cabinet need to be elected
 members of parliament. The prime minister is elected by the
 house and senate sitting in joint session.
 In February 1980, Prime Minister Kriangsak Chamanan resigned
 in the face of dissatisfaction with his government's economic
 performance, and was replaced through constitutional proced-
 ures by General Prem Tinsulanon. His cabinet is dominated by
 civilians and supported by a majority coalition in the National
 Legislative Assembly (NLA). The Prem government has carried
 forward elements of its predecessor's policies which emphasize
 national reconciliation and reinstitution of democratic pro-
 cesses.
 Through 1980, the focus of human rights activism in Thailand
 continued to shift away from the aftermath of the 1976 distur-
 bances to concern over more recent alleged abuses of authority
 by paramilitary forces in rural areas. The present government
 has promised to bring these units under stricter control, and
 local civil rights groups and legislators continue to press
 for investigations and corrective action. Restrictions on
 media content,.political gatherings and associations, and an
 anti-connunist law with arbitrary detention provisions remain
 on the books and at times generate local attention, but these
 laws are rarely and lightly enforced.
 Through 1980 Thailand continued its policy of offering refuge
 and assistance to Indochinese refugees in close cooperation
 with international relief agencies and foreign countries.
 Near year's end, over 250,000 refugees were in camps on Thai
 soil and thousands more remained in groups on the border with
 Kampuchea. The Thai government, with assistance from the
 United States, laid plans in October to implement a sea and
 air surveillance program to suppress pirates in the Gulf of
 Thailand who have been preying on Vietnamese boat refugees.
 In 1980, the government prosecuted accused pirates and
 several were convicted and received lengthy sentences.
 Terrorist and insurgent incidents in 1980 called attention
 anew to separatist activities within the Muslim minority
 in the far south of Thailand. While language and cultural
 barriers disadvantage the Muslims, there is no overt policy
 of discrimination and the government has given priority
 attention to improvement of administration and development
 in the south. Income levels in the south are generally
 higher than either the north or northeast, but the southern
 region faces similar rural development problems and a com-
 paratively higher incidence of crime and insurgency. Venal
 and insensitive local officials contribute to the problem.
 Despite the persistent security threat from Indochina, the
 percentage of the government budget dedicated to development
 remains high and unchanged. Social programs initiated by
 prior governments are expected to be further pursued by the
 new regime. Of particular importance is the national drive
 
 
 705
 to eliminate health and income disparities among regions and
 between the urban and rural sectors. Continued attention will
 be paid to population control with the aim of generally improv-
 ing the lot of women and further integrating them into economic
 life.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is not used as an instrument of government policy. Al-
 legations of maltreatment have been made in the past by the
 Coordinating Group for Religion in Society (CGRS), a Thai human
 rights group, but there were no new allegations in 1980. There
 are recurring reports of persons arrested on criminal charges
 who are allegedly being mistreated by police.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Thai government has stated its opposition to the
 use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment, the CGRS, in
 its periodic reports, has cited alleged cases of brutality and
 mistreatment by police and military personnel and asserted that
 most of these offenders go unpunished. The majority of cases
 are reported to occur in rural areas where communist insurgency
 is a problem and clear evidence is difficult to obtain.
 According to human rights activists in Thailand, abuses of autho-
 rity relating to torture, disappearances, cruel and inhuman
 punishment or treatment, and arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 have declined during the past year due in part to unfavorable
 publicity which focused on incidents of this type. This publi-
 city has led to a tightening of discipline and efforts to exert
 better control over police and paramilitary forces.
 A recent study conducted by five organizations concerned with
 human rights concluded that prison conditions in Thailand are
 poor as a consequence of low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and the high incidence of drug use among pri-
 soners. Prisoners are subject to strict regulations which in-
 clude corporal punishment for infractions. Under a new program
 instituted in October 1980, prisoners with less than twb years
 remaining on their sentences are allowed to work outside their
 prison as a form of rehabilitation.
 During the past year, newspapers and civil rights groups drew
 attention to the plight of 213 illegal aliens who had been de-
 tained for periods of up to nineteen years. These inmates were
 persons who entered Thailand illegally, subsequently were con-
 victed of crimes, and were ordered deported. Their respective
 countries of origin, however, refused to accept them back and
 they remained in detention. In response to the public attention
 drawn to their plight, the government on December 1, 1980 re-
 leased 186 of the detainees into the custody of interested
 private organizations, allowing them to live in Thailand although
 officially still classed as illegal aliens. Twenty-seven aliens
 remain in custody due to legal problems, apparently lack of
 adequate documents. Civil rights groups continue to press for
 their release.
 
 
 706
 c.   Disappearances
 Over the past year, local human rights groups have alleged
 that there have been cases of persons suspected of communist
 or criminal activity disappearing as a result of actions by
 government officials, such as police officers or rural
 para-military units. The alleged incidents have been scat-
 tered, occurring mainly in rural areas experiencing problems
 with communist or separatist insurgency, where confirmation
 is difficult to obtain. Reported incidents are few in
 number.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Martial law powers allowing arbitrary arrest and imprison-
 ment were significantly reduced by the repeal of martial
 law rder o. 22 in 1979. By mid-1980 most prisoners held
 under its provisions had been released, though some were
 charged with criminal offenses and subsequently tried in
 court.
 At present, the only remaining legal basis for imprison-
 ment without trial, other than severely limited provisions
 of martial law remaining in effect, is a provision of the
 anti-communist act which provides that persons accused of
 communist activities can be detained for up to 210 days
 with the approval of the police director-general and up
 to 480 days with the permission of a military or criminal
 court. Accurate figures on persons held under this provi-
 sion are not available, but the number appears to be small
 and concentrated in southern Thailand. The anti-communist
 act also provides that armed communist insurgents who
 surrender to the government must undergo compulsory political
 training before returning to their homes. Several suspected
 communist insurgents who had been held since 1976 were tried
 and acquitted during 1980.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The constitution of 1978 (-hapter 3, ection 27) guarantees
 Thai citizens the presumption of innocence and access to
 courts or administrative bodies to seek redress. They
 have the right to legal counsel in all cases before a
 court but can be denied that right during the pre-trial,
 or investigative period. This limitation diminishes due
 process protection. After this initial stage, however,
 defendants have the right to counsel throughout the trial
 and appeal stages.
 There is no evidence of clandestine imprisonment. The
 Thai have an evidentiary legal system, although not a
 jury system; cases are heard on the basis of specific --
 usually well documented -- charges which must be brought
 within a limited time period.
 On July 23, 1980, the Thai National Legislative Assembly
 passed a law shifting certain categories of offenses from
 the military back to the civilian courts. Cases which
 involve sexual offenses, offenses constituting public
 danger or threats to life, limb or property will now go
 before civilian courts. Military courts will retain juris-
 diction over cases which involve internal and external
 national security, Thai relations with other nations, and
 
 
 707
 offenses against the Royal Family. and public peace. Persons
 tried in either military or civilian courts enjoy a broad
 range of legal rights, including the right to counsel, but
 a decision by the military court cannot be appealed whereas
 a decision by a civilian court can be appealed to a higher
 court.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Thai law requires that police have a search warrant before
 entering the owner's home without his consent. There are,
 however, sections of the anti-communist act which allow a
 search without a warrant when officials are involved in
 specifically designated "communist suppression operations".
 These powers appear to have been used sparingly and human
 rights groups have not made allegations regarding abuse of
 this particular authority during 1980.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Access to adequate goods, shelter and primary education is
 almost universal, although the record in the delivery of
 health care is less consistent. During the 1970's Thailand
 enjoyed a compounded real annual GNP growth rate of 7 percent
 and a per capita growth rate of 4.2 percent, despite strong
 pressures on the balance of payments and the inflation rate
 because of reliance on foreign petroleum.
 In recent years the Thai government has emphasized economic
 development to improve the standard of living of all its
 citizens with particular attention paid to lessening rural/
 urban and regional income disparities. In each of the last
 five, the government has devoted more than half of its budget
 to meeting basic economic needs.
 In pursuit of development objectives, the Thai government
 is supported significantly by the World Bank ($537 million
 in 1980 alone), the Asian Development Bank, and other
 bilateral donors. Thailand promotes foreign investment
 actively, although with considerable regulation and against
 a background of debate over the dangers of external economic
 influences. In this area, Thai civil rights groups and
 others in 1980 questioned the adequacy of controls on
 foreign business operations to protect Thai workers and
 independent farmers from exploitation by foreign capital.
 Thailand has made steady progress in alleviating the poverty
 of its population, though success has been uneven with income
 distribution heavily skewed in favor of central Thailand,
 especially Bangkok and environs. Those living in absolute
 poverty ($90 per person per year) declined from 52 percent of
 the population in 1963 to 34 percent in 1969 and to 25 percent
 by 1976, according to the International Bank for Reconstruc-
 tion and Development studies.
 Health care in Thailand is largely the responsibility of the
 private sector with about 20 percent of the health services
 delivered by the government and the remaining 80 percent by
 private sources.
 Availability of health care is very heavily tilted in favor
 of the capital, Bangkok. A 1975 survey disclosed that
 
 
 708
 Nakhonluang Province, which encompasses Bangkok, had a popu-
 lation of 5,307,000 with 3,425 doctors or 64.5 doctors per
 100,000 people. This same survey showed that 344 of Thai-
 land's 659 administrative districts had no full-time doctors.
 The government recognizes this problem and now requires
 newly-licensed doctors to spend two to three years in the
 provinces.
 Statistics for life expectancy and infant mortality also
 favor Bangkok and Central Thailand, while indicating lower
 health levels for the rural north and northeast. Bangkok,
 however, is unfavorably affected by a population growth rate
 twice that of Thailand as a whole.
 In an attempt to improve access to basic human needs, the
 government has instituted a series of price controls and
 guaranteed minimum prices for basic commodities. The govern-
 ment gudrantees minimum prices to the farmer for rice and
 sugar cane while maintaining price controls on rice, sugar,
 cement, cleaning products, petroleum products, and other
 products. The system is now under heavy pressure because
 of the rapidly increasing costs of energy and other counodi-
 ties. Prices for some of these items have been allowed to
 float upward while still under government supervision.
 Based on a survey which asked individuals to evaluate their
 own ability to read, the government states that four-fifths
 of the adult population is literate. This figure approximates
 the 80 percent of the adult population which has completed at
 least four years of education. A significant percentage of
 rural adults with only a fourth grade education, however,
 is probably now functionally illiterate. Furthermore, only
 17.5 percent of the adult population continues formal educa-
 tion beyond the fourth grade. More than 90 percent of chil-
 dren between ages 7 and 12 are estimated to attend school or
 have completed the first four years.
 There are 23.4 million people in the work force, 84 percent
 of whom are in non-urban areas. About 6 percent are unem-
 ployed, but the government estimates that another 22 percent
 are under-employed.
 Thai workers have the right to organize and both the number
 of trade unions and the number of organized workers are in-
 creasing. In 1979 there were a little over 104,000 trade
 union members, of whom 77 percent were in the greater Bangkok
 area. Strikes occur despite the fact that they are proscribed
 under the martial law regulations of 1976; some strikes suc-
 ceed in increasing wages, although the hand-to-mouth existence
 of most union members puts them at a disadvantage in bargain-
 ing with management.
 Because a large percent of union members earn either the
 minimum wage or a small amount above it, the trade union
 movement is active in seeing that the government keeps the
 minimum wage up with the inflation rate, which has been
 running close to 20 percent per year. Although it will pro-
 vide an adequate minimum standard of living, enforcement of
 the mimimum wage among small employers is poor. Agricultural
 laborers are not covered under minimum wage legislation.
 
 
 709
 Enforcement of health and safety regulations has tended to be
 spotty, and unions have used strike action to focus government
 attention on safety conditions. The government has also estab-
 lished a workmen's compensation system which covers only regu-
 lar, full-time employees of establishments which employ 20 or
 more workers. An old-age social security system for industrial
 workers is now in the planning stages.
 A report issued in 1980 by the Anti-Slavery Society for the
 Protection of Human Rights charged that child labor abuse is
 widespread in Thailand and that the government is not effec-
 tively addressing the problem. The report estimates that there
 are 3.5 million working children in Thailand between the ages of
 11 and 15 years, the vast majority working illegally and, con-
 sequently, under very poor conditions. The children come mainly
 from the poverty-stricken northeast and are hired out on long
 term contracts (commonly 1-3 years) for a fee paid to their
 parents of only $25 to $100 per year. Room and board, often
 inadequate, are provided by the employer but not much else.
 The government has responded that the report greatly exagger-
 ates the problem and that in fact only about 60,000 children
 between the ages of 12-18 years are employed legally in the
 industrial sector and about 5,000 children are employed ille-
 gally under the age of 12. The vast majority of child laborers
 work with their families in the traditional agriculture sector.
 The director-general of the Labor Department stated that so
 long as economic conditions remain severe, especially in the
 northeast, it will be difficult to eliminate the problem. He
 added that the government is trying to suppress the illegal
 exploitation of child labor but government resources are
 limited: approximately 50 inspectors monitor all facets of
 labor. Parental acquiescence also complicates the issue.
 Traditionally, Thai farmers have owned the land they work,
 but since the end of the Second World War, population pressure
 has led to the growth of tenancy. This has been especially
 true in the north and central regions. There is relatively
 little absentee landlordism.
 Thai women actively participate in most professions and in
 all sectors of the economy. For example, women play an impor-
 tant role in both the educational and medical professions and
 are well represented in the civil service. In rural households,
 women often hold the household funds and usually play key roles
 in economic decision-making. Their participation in the labor
 force is very high. Women in Thailand, however, face disadvan-
 tages in advancement and training opportunities in the labor
 force, especially rural women. Outnumbered by men in sub-
 professional occupations, women are also under-represented in
 most higher income jobs. Despite the guarantee of equal legal
 status which was provided to women by the Civil and Commercial
 Code Amendment Act of October 5, 1976, their role in formal
 decision-making beyond the family unit remains limited except
 in some business enterprises and in the government sector,
 notably in the economic ministries.
 
 
 710
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Basic freedoms and rights are affirmed, in principle, in the
 constitution of 1979 (Chapter 3). In practice, Thai citizens
 enjoy some freedom of speech, with some criticism of government
 policies permitted. There are, nevertheless, restrictions
 against insulting the monarchy or advocating a communist system
 of government. The Thai press is privately owned, open, and
 often critical of the government, but continues to operate
 under the restrictions imposed by the Press Law of 1941 and
 Martial Law Order 42. These laws allow the government to
 close newspapers and revoke the licenses of editors of news-
 papers which publish stories deemed to be libelous or contrary
 to national security interests.
 In August 1980, Thailand's largest circulation daily news-
 paper, the Thai Rath, was ordered closed by the police
 director-gen-eal--and the editor arrested for publishing an
 article on alleged corruption in the Police Department. The
 ministry of interior reversed the order on the same day but
 the editor remains under arrest, though out on bail. In
 late 1980 three episodes served to heighten distrust between
 the government and the press. On October 28 police operating
 with a search warrant searched offices of the daily, Matichon,
 for illegal materials stored on the premises. On December I
 the daily, Ban  u     was ordered closed for five days for
 publishing an article alleging corruption by Deputy Prime
 Minister Bunchu. Order 42 reportedly charged Ban M    anwith
 reporting lies and publishing articles that thretene-n the
 government's stability. On December 4 the government ordered
 indefinite closure of the weekly, Siam Nikorn, for publishing
 articles linking Prime Minister Prem anT~F-oe close to him
 with sabotage and negligence concerning a munitions factory
 explosion. The paper reopened under a different name and
 continued to publish further articles on the explosion.
 The press in Thailand continues to be quite open and candid
 and the government's relations with the media are on the
 whole good. The government occasionally does use its power
 over the press, and awareness of this power is a restraint
 on local press activity and various groups lobby for a
 lifting of Order 42. The government has not indicated that
 it will do so. The government regulates television coverage
 of international news, requiring that satellite news broad-
 casts be prescreened.
 In October 1980, the government upheld banning of 15 books
 because they were found to advocate violent overthrow of
 the government or violent social change. In September the
 ministry of interior had banned the sale or possession of
 96 books on more general national security grounds, bring-
 ing to 300 the number of books banned since 1977. In the
 face of strong protests, the minister reviewed the listing,
 reducing the number of books banned from 96 to 15.
 Martial Law Order 4 remains nominally in effect, prohibiting
 political gatherings of five or more persons. During 1980,
 however, students, organized labor, politicians and other
 
 
 711
 political groups held large rallies without significant
 interference from the authorities.
 The Prem government has maintained a moderate policy toward
 organized labor and generally has not restricted the develop-
 ment of the labor movement or labor participation in political
 activities. Martial law orders still prohibit strikes, but
 the government has promised to reconsider the ban. Meanwhile
 labor strikes do occur. Leaders rarely are arrested and
 punishments have been very light.
 Workers are represented on the government Wage committee, the
 national labor advisory board and on the labor courts, which
 arbitrate labor disputes and grievances. Government holds the
 majority in each of these bodies.
 Freedom of Religion is practiced throughout Thailand, and is
 protected by law and custom.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Aside from long-standing restrictions on the travel of Viet-
 namese nationals in Thailand, the only limitations on travel
 are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas believed
 to be used as bases by communist insurgents. There are no
 restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 Thailand is one of the countries most affected by refugees
 as a geographic first asylum. Since 1975 more than half a
 million people from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia have fled
 into Thailand. They include 60,000 Vietnamese, 210,000
 Khmer and 250,000 Lao; about a quarter million have been
 resettled in third countries. Thai policy has not permitted
 permanent resettlement of these people in Thailand, although
 about 80,000 Vietnamese with alien status from the French
 Indochina period remain living in Thai villages and towns,
 primarily in the northeast.
 As of late 1980 some 265,000 refugees were in camps in
 Thailand. The Khmer and some 5,000 Vietnamese refugees
 classed as illegal aliens have not been permitted to enter
 resettlement programs except for small numbers with close
 family connections abroad. The United Nations High Com-
 missioner for Refugees (UNHCR) generally endorses this policy
 of limiting Khmer resettlement programs. The hope is to
 encourage to the greatest extent possible voluntary repatri-
 ation by the Khmer people.
 Since mid-1974, Thailand has also permitted a number of
 Cambodian population concentrations to exist along the
 border, some entirely or partially in Thailand. The numbers
 of residents in the centers has varied from a high of several
 hundred thousand to under a hundred thousand by late 1980.
 Thailand has also facilitated provision of food and medical
 care by international and voluntary agencies in the border
 concentrations.
 During 1980, Thai policy encouraged both resettlement and
 the voluntary repatriation of Cambodian and Lao refugees.
 In coordination with UNHCR, Thailand allowed 65 ethnic Lao
 to return home in September 1980. In mid-June, 9,000 Khmer
 returned from holding centers under UNHCR supervision. At
 
 
 712
 least 2,000 Khmer had returned earlier in 1980 in formal
 arrangements between Thai authorities, Khmer factional
 leaders and the refugees themselves. No significant for-
 cible repatriation has taken place since June 1979.
 Once in camps, or holding centers, refugees are well-
 treated.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The most recent national elections were held in April,
 1979, to elect the members of the lower house of the
 National Legislative Assembly. All political parties were
 allowed to participate except for the outlawed Communist
 Party of Thailand. The elections were considered generally
 fair and open. The great majority of Thais, both men and
 women, have the right to vote, but there are constitutional
 requirements which, in some cases, prevent the Thai children
 of alien parents from voting.
 The Thai political system is relatively open with citizens
 able to participate meaningfully. In February, 1980, the
 leadership of the government was changed through constitu-
 tional means when Gen. Kriangsak resigned and Gen. Prem was
 selected by the National Legislative Assembly to be the new
 prime minister. The Prem Cabinet is dominated by civilians
 drawn from a coalition of the leading political parties.
 Opposition exists openly and opposing views are heard both
 within the National Legislative Assembly and through the
 mass media. The Communist Party of Thailand is the only
 political party which is outlawed.
 Women have equal rights under the law in Thailand and are
 well represented in the labor force. Women fully partici-
 pate in the political process but are under-represented at
 the political leadership level as well as in some profes-
 sional fields, top management and some high government
 positions.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the past the Thai government has permitted several inter-
 national groups to investigate prison conditions. There
 were no requests for visits in 1980, although the government
 has responded to specific inquiries from Amnesty International
 and the International Comuission of Jurists,
 During the past year, domestic groups interested in human
 rights have not been obstructed by the government in their
 investigations.
 The Lawyer's Association of Thailand has played a leading
 and effective role in opposing the many martial law restric-
 tions on civil liberties which remain in effect. Another
 leading group, the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society,
 has been particularly active in drawing attention to abuses
 of authority by rural authorities. The Union for Civil Liberty
 has also been active in bringing to public view alleged human
 rights violations. The Federation of Journalists of Thailand
 has sought to have the legal restrictions on the press lifted.
 
 
 713
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        10.8     25.4     29.7
 LOANS..... ........         5.5      8.0      5.8
 GRANTS.............         5.3     17.4     23.9
 A.AID ....................... 7.5       21.6     26.0
 LOANS.............          5.5      8.0      5.8
 GRANTS.............         2.0     13.6     20.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      2.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         3.3      3.8      3.7
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         3.3      3.8      3.7
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         1.8      1.9      1.8
 OTHER............         1.5      1.9      1.9
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        38.6     32.1     37.4
 LOANS..............        29.5     30.0     36.0
 GRANTS.............         9.1      2.1      1.4
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         8.0      1.2      0.6
 B.CREDIT SALES-FNS....        29.5     30.0     36.0
 C.INTL MILED.TRNG....         1.1      0.9      0.8
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,.         49.4     57.5     67.1
 LOANS..............        35.0     38.0     41.8
 GRANTS.............        14.4     19.5     25.3
 OTHER US LOANS..........         4.5    102.9     23.2
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         4.5     86.7     21.5
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0     16.2      1.7
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 TOTAL........    348.6    383.3    729.7   2942.4
 IBRO             243.5    170.2    555.0   1965.2
 IFC                2.1     45.2      0.5     83.6
 IDA               33.1     60.0      0.0    125.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB.              65.2     91.9    164.8    677.7
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               2.2      6.2      9.4     59.8
 OTHER-UN           2.5      9.8      0.0     31.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 714
