 THAILAND
 Senior military officers have exercised political
 authority in Thailand under two successive constitu-
 tions and martial law decrees since 1976. The present
 Thai Government assumed control in October 1977, one
 year after the October 1976 coup. The Government,
 headed by Prime Minister (and General, ret.) Kriangsak
 Chamanan, has civilian and military Ministers, and
 coordinates major policy decisions carefully with a
 group of senior military officers. An interim consti-
 tution, signed by the King of Thailand in late 1977,
 established an appointed National Assembly and called
 for national elections no later than April 1979. This
 represented a considerable acceleration of the previous
 government's goal of national elections by 1988.
 A permanent constitution, which passed the National
 Assembly and was promulgated by the King on December
 22, 1978, provides for a strong executive and a bi-
 cameral legislature composed of an elected lower house
 and an appointed senate. It abolishes the National
 Policy Council. Both the Prime Minister and the
 Cabinet can be appointed from outside the ranks of
 politicians. Prime Minister Kriangsak is governing
 under the transitory provisions of the new consti-
 tution until the election, now set for April 22, 1979.
 The Kriangsak Government has from the outset emphasized
 national reconciliation and has taken steps to address
 human rights problems which existed between October 1976
 and October 1977. There has been a partial renewal of
 trade union activity. Respect for due process has
 increased. The Government granted amnesty to students
 and activists who were being tried for their role in
 the 1976 Thammasat University disturbances.
 Among remaining problems is the practice of temporary
 detention without trial, usually for 30-90 days. The
 Government asserts that this is required because of
 the political turmoil in recent years and the continuing
 externally-supported armed insurgency in Thailand's
 
 (424)
 
 
 425
 border areas. Recent press closures appear to be a
 step backward from the relaxation in strictures on the
 press adopted in 1977.
 Thailand's relatively open society allows considerable
 freedom of the individual and permits full freedom of
 worship. The country has a long history of tolerance
 and hospitality and has permitted scores of thousands
 of refugees from the neighboring countries of Indochina
 to take refuge in Thailand.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The Department of State does not believe torture is
 used as an instrument of government policy. There have
 been, however, allegations of instances of torture in
 rural areas of Thailand which are affected by Communist
 insurgency. For example, in its May 1978 appeal con-
 cerning prisoners in Thailand, Amnesty International
 called on the present Government to conduct a public
 inquiry into one such allegation by eleven men arrested
 as communist suspects in May 1976 (under the Seni Pramot
 government). Also, the Coordinating Group for Religion
 in Society (CGRS), a human rights group working in
 Thailand, alleges frequent mistreatment and torture
 by rural authorities. Three peasants sentenced to
 death for their involvement in the death of a police-
 man are appealing to the Thai Supreme Court on the
 grounds that their original confessions were extracted
 by torture.
 An independent human rights evaluation prepared by the
 Congressional Research Service of the Library of
 Congress concludes, "...the available evidence suggests
 that incidents of torture and-physical abuse have been
 quite limited except in the period immediately following
 the violence of October 6, 1976."
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Recent Thai governments, including the previous Thanin
 Government (October 1976-October 1977) as well as the
 
 
 present Government, have opposed the use of cruel, in-
 human or degrading punishment. Several of the students
 and activists who were arrested and subsequently
 released following the student-police confrontation at
 Thammasat University on October 6, 1976 have claimed
 they were subjected to harsh treatment (e.g., beatings)
 immediately following their arrest. The CGRS, in its
 periodic reports, has cited instances of alleged police
 brutality and mistreatment.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 On October 6, 1976, then-Prime Minister Seni Pramot,
 head of the last democratically-elected government,
 ordered the arrest of a group of students at Thammasat
 University. The resulting police-student confrontation
 left 40 dead and about 3,000 persons, mostly students,
 arrested (all but some 400 were released within two
 weeks). In August and September 1977, charges were
 brought in a military court against eighteen students
 and activists for their role in the Thammasat disturb-
 ances. The Kriangsak Government in November 1977
 amended the Military Court Act to permit defendants the
 right to legal-counsel. The Thammasat 18 were released
 on September 16, 1978 under a general amnesty initiated
 by Prime Minister Kriangsak and approved by the National
 Assembly and the King. The amnesty benefited all
 persons involved in the October 4-6 Thammasat demonstra-
 tions, including the Thammasat 18 and 30 other persons
 who were in hiding and who had been charged in absentia.
 The military leadership that took control of the govern-
 ment after the October 6, 1976 violence issued martial
 law Order Number 22, which allows for detention without
 trial for 30 days and further "vocational training"
 indefinitely. The Order specifies nine categories of
 offenders, six of which involve criminal activity, and
 three of which potentially involve political conduct --
 instigating confusion, advocating political systems other
 than those headed by the King and undertaking labor
 strikes.
 Of the several thousand detained under Order Number 22,
 most were arrested for criminal activity and were held
 for short periods of time before release. Available
 information suggests that in mid-1978 about 400-500
 
 
 427
 persons were being arrested monthly under Order 22.
 While Order 22 prisoners are initially detained in a
 provincial jail, those not soon released are located
 in special training camps. Apparently some of those
 released have subsequently been rearrested. No members
 of the previous democratically-elected government or the
 post-coup Thanin Government were arrested or detained.
 According to government reports, the total number of
 detainees over the last six months of 1978 remained
 fairly constant at around 800.
 Amnesty International in May 1978 estimated that the
 number of "political prisoners held in Thailand,
 including those detained by emergency decree, amounts
 to several hundred, and possibly as many as a thousand."
 Presumably Amnesty International's figure includes all
 those detained without trial under Order 22. The Thai
 Government counters that only two or three are held
 under the political provisions of the decree.
 Article 27 of the former interim constitution gave the
 Prime Minister, with the approval of the Cabinet and
 the National Policy Council, the authority to take any
 action necessary to suppress any activity which endangers
 national security, public order or the national economy.
 This provision permitted the Prime Minister to order
 summary criminal punishment without trial. Incomplete
 statistics indicate that Prime Minister Kriangsak has
 invoked Article 27 in 24 cases involving 94 persons.
 All cases involved criminal rather than political
 offenses. The majority of those affected have received
 terms in prison. Under the current Government, six
 persons, three rapists/murderers and three narcotics
 traffickers, have received the death penalty and have
 been executed. A similar article (Article 200) is
 included in the transitory provisions of the new consti-
 tution. The provision's ambiguous wording leaves open
 the possibility that use of summary justice by the Prime
 Minister could continue.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Except for the provisions of Article 200 and Order 22,
 Thai citizens enjoy a presumption of innocence and have
 access to courts or administrative bodies in order to
 redress perceived violations of their rights under law.
 
 
 428
 Thai citizens have the right to legal counsel. Under
 the provisions of martial law Order 22, those accused
 of certain categories of crimes related to national
 security must be tried by a military court. The judg-
 ments of Military Courts may not be appealed. There are
 no trials under Article 200.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 To the knowledge of the Department of State, the
 privacy of the home is respected by the Thai Government.
 Under Thai law, search warrants are required before the
 police may enter a home without the owner's consent.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Adequate public education, agricultural development and
 health care programs exist. The Kriangsak Government
 has repeatedly stated its intention to give high priority
 to improving such services, especially to the urban and
 rural poor. About 20 percent of the total FY 1979
 budget of $4.5 billion is allocated to economic
 service programs such as land reform, small-scale
 farmer support, extensive small-scale irrigation projects
 and reforestation. Education accounts for another 20
 percent of the budget, and 11 percent of the total is
 allocated to public health and public utilities.
 Thailand's fourth Five-Year Plan seeks to reduce income
 disparities between the urban population, principally
 in the Bangkok area, and the rural population. The
 Government in its current budget has committed about
 40 percent of its expenditures to development programs
 (economic services plus education), preponderantly in
 rural areas. Recently the Government also raised
 prices paid to the farmers for their rice and increased
 the minimum wage in an effort to ensure better income
 distribution. A recent World Bank study stressed that
 while significant income distribution disparities
 continue to exist, rural poverty has dramatically
 declined in absolute terms in every region of Thailand
 since 1962.
 Thailand's upland minorities, located mostly in the
 north, have traditionally lived on the margins of Thai
 
 
 429
 society. However, beginning in 1960 and especially in
 the past eight years, the King's Hilltribe Project and
 government programs have attempted to bring improved
 educational and social services to the hill minorities.
 Corruption is endemic in Thailand. For the most part
 it involves public officials augmenting their small
 salaries by demanding additional payments for services
 rendered to the public. Even though official corruption
 is tolerated by the public, to a degree, its pervasiveness
 and large scale undermines popular support and respect
 for the Government.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The political restrictions of Order 22 mentioned above
 restrict freedom of thought and speech. Most Thai are
 careful not to risk a violation of Order 22. Neverthe-
 less, private discussions of a political nature are
 generally uninhibited. The Kriangsak Government
 dissolved the formal mechanism used by the Thanin Govern-
 ment to restrict the Thai press. However, it has on
 several occasions revoked the license of editors of
 publications under Order 42 (October 20, 1976) and the
 Press Act of 1941, although the publications continue
 to appear under different editors. The Daily News,
 Thailand's second largest daily paper, was closed for
 three weeks in November on the grounds that a column
 it carried was detrimental to peace and order. Subse-
 quently the Prime Minister warned the press to be very
 careful in reporting the news.
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand.
 Meetings for political purposes of over five persons
 have been formally barred since October 6, 1976.
 However, the activities and views of political figures
 have been widely reported in the press. Political groups
 are now increasing substantially their informal activi-
 ties and contacts in preparation for the 1979 elections.
 The Kriangsak Government has relaxed several restric-
 tions on organized labor. It has reaffirmed the right
 of workers in state enterprises to organize, permitted
 
 
 labor unions to resume regular meetings, allowed foreign
 labor assistance organizations to hold labor seminars
 and officially recognized the Labor Congress of Thailand,
 the country's first broadly based labor union federation.
 At the same time, the Government maintains the martial law
 ban on strikes and the prohibition on political activities
 by labor leaders. The traditional method of resolving
 labor/management problems through informal negotiations
 outside the organized labor framework continues with no
 government interference.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Aside from long standing restrictions on the travel of
 Vietnamese nationals in Thailand, the only limitations
 on travel in Thailand are restrictions on entry into
 rural areas used as bases by Communist insurgents.
 There are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Although political parties remain illegal, most former
 political party leaders retain their former party
 contacts, are identified in the public mind as leaders
 of political groupings, and are preparing actively for
 the general elections scheduled by the Government no
 later than April 1979. The Government also tacitly
 recognized their stature when it named seven leaders
 of former major parties to serve on the Constitutional
 Drafting Committee. The new constitution calls for an
 elected lower house and appointed senate.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed Amnesty International and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
 inspect the prison conditions of the Thammasat 18 in
 1977. The International Court of Jurists (ICJ) pub-
 lished in the December 1977 issue of the ICJ Review
 a brief and essentially factual report on developments
 as of that time.
 On the other hand, three workers of the Coordinating
 Group for Religion in Society, who were reportedly
 
 
 431
 investigating the arrest and disappearance of five
 allegedly innocent villagers, were arrested in
 February and held for three weeks on charges of
 "communist activities".
 
 
 
