 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy that until 1992
 had a history of military coups and powerful bureaucratic and military influences
 on political life. Since 1992 there have been four national multiparty elections,
 which transferred power to successor governments through peaceful, democratic
 processes. The King continues to exert strong informal influence, but has never used
 his constitutionally mandated power to veto legislation or dissolve the elected House
 of Representatives. The country adopted a new Constitution in October 1997. There
 is a bicameral legislature and an independent judiciary. A coalition Government, led
 by Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai's Democrat Party, was formed in November 1997,
 following the resignation of prime minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh. The judiciary is
 independent, but is subject to corruption.
 The security forces have wide-ranging legal powers, derived primarily from past
 militarily controlled administrations. Since 1992 the armed forces have become in-
 creasingly professional and increasingly subject to civilian control. Their influence
 in politics has been diminishing. The Royal Thai Police have primary responsibility
 for internal security and law enforcement. Elements of both the armed forces and
 the police have a reputation for corruption. Some members of the security forces
 committed serious human rights abuses.
 Thailand is a newly industrializing country with a strong tradition of private en-
 terprise. However, state enterprises continue to play a significant role in bureau-
 cratic and economic culture. A severe financial crisis led to devaluation of the cur-
 rency in July 1997. Economic growth during the year was negative, and annual per
 
 
 1069
 capita income, which peaked at $3,000 in 1996, has fallen by one-third. Although
 industrial and service sectors contribute more than half the Gross National Product,
 approximately 60 percent of the population is rural and agrarian. The economic
 downturn led to high urban unemployment. Government regulations generally pro-
 vide protection for individual economic interests, including property rights. How-
 ever, lack of transparency in bureaucratic decisionmaking and a gap between regu-
 lation and enforcement sometimes leads to uneven commercial treatment for favored
 firms and institutions. Some areas of the Government are subject to corruption.
 Government efforts to close the gap between urban and rural living standards large-
 ly have been ineffective, and groups of farmers occasionally expressed their griev-
 ances in large demonstrations in Bangkok.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 some significant problems remain in several areas. Police officers killed a number
 of criminal suspects while attempting to apprehend them and killed prisoners in
 custody during escape attempts. The Government investigated some members of the
 security forces who were accused of extrajudicial killings, but remained reluctant to
 prosecute vigorously those who committed such abuses. Police occasionally beat sus-
 pects, at times to coerce confessions. An ingrained culture of corruption persists in
 many parts of the civilian bureaucracy and the security forces. Routine demands for
 bribes undermine the rule of law and permit a climate of impunity for various ille-
 gal activities, such as income tax evasion, gambling, trafficking, goods smuggling,
 and prostitution. Enforcement of a broad range of laws and regulations by police
 continues to be noticeably lax.
 Conditions in immigration detention facilities are poor, and lengthy pretrial de-
 tention and the prolonged detention of aliens remain problems. The judiciary suffers
 from corruption, and at time security forces infringed on citizens' privacy rights. The
 media practiced some self-censorship, and there were some restrictions on freedom
 of movement. Although the new Constitution led to new laws that increased legal
 protections for women and the disabled, some legal discrimination remains. Societal
 discrimination against women, violence against women, trafficking in women and
 children, forced prostitution, and societal discrimination against ethnic minorities
 persist. Illegal and forced child labor also remain problems.
 The new Constitution provides for the establishment of a permanent National
 Commission on Human Rights; however, at times the Government hindered the ac-
 tivity of human rights groups.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings by government agents. However, legal organizations, reputable
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), and the press continued to provide credible
 reports that some police officers used lethal force in apprehending criminal suspects.
 In the climate of increasingly prolific and violent narcotics trafficking, police officers
 continued to use deadly force during some arrest attempts, At least 81 criminal sus-
 pects were killed during arrest attempts between January and November.
 Police also killed seven prisoners during attempts to escape from custody. In Jan-
 uary prison guards shot and killed four inmates attempting to escape from the
 Bangkok remand prison. The Corrections Act allows prison guards to fire on a group
 of three or more prisoners who are armed, harm officials, or refuse to surrender.
 However, local legal associations claimed that the guards responded with excessive
 force. Police investigated the incident and subsequently charged four guards with
 homicide; they were released on bail.
 The Government investigated some cases of extrajudicial killing. However, it pros-
 ecuted few police or military officers accused of such abuses. Through November, 38
 cases in which government officials had been accused of extrajudicial killing were
 brought to court; no officials had been convicted by year's end. Routine exoneration
 of police officers contributes to the climate of impunity that is a significant factor
 in preventing any major change in police behavior. This also discourages relatives
 of the deceased from pressing for prosecution. Families rarely take advantage of a
 provision in the law that allows personal law suits against police officers for crimi-
 nal action during arrest. During the initial police inquiry, most police investigations
 routinely determine that police took no wrongful action; judges generally follow the
 prosecutor's recommendations. If pursued by the family, the case is handled by the
 same office-in some instances by the same prosecutor-who already has ruled that
 no criminal action occurred. There is no information available to determine how
 many cases are settled out of court. However, in cases in which suits are filed, the
 official charged often compensates the family of the deceased, and the law suit is
 
 
 1070
 
 waived. Some law suits filed during the year remained under consideration at year's
 end.
 In September the police department revived an investigation into the 1996 case
 of the killing of six suspected drug dealers in police custody in Suphan Buri. Pretrial
 hearings to determine whether there was sufficient evidence to try the police officers
 involved were ongoing at year's end.
 The case of the 1996 killing of environmental protester Thong-in Kaew-wattha is
 still under consideration by the courts, and there were no developments in the un-
 solved 1995 death of conservation activist Winai Chantamanao. However, the
 Chaiyaphum provincial court ruled that the 1996 killing of farmer activist Joon
 Bhoonkhuntod during police arrest was unjustified. The court is considering wheth-
 er to pursue criminal charges against the police officer involved in the killing. The
 officer remained in active service.
 In January Muslim separatist organizations in the south carried out bomb attacks
 that resulted in several deaths. On January 1, a grenade attack on a New Year
 party in Yala killed three persons; there were no arrests. On January 2, assailants
 ambushed a police car in Pattani, killing two policemen and a girl who was hit by
 stray gunfire. Four Muslim separatists surrendered, and police are pursuing further
 suspects.
 In March Burmese troops entered Thailand to destroy a displaced persons' camp;
 they killed two persons before retreating into Burma (see Section 2.d.). Thai forces
 did not engage the Burmese troops.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were no developments in the 1994 disappearance of environmental activist
 Suchada Khamfubutra nor the 1991 disappearance of Labor Congress of Thailand
 president Thanong Po-an.
 There were no developments in investigations into the whereabouts of the remain-
 ing 38 prodemocracy protesters listed as missing following the military forces' sup-
 pression of demonstrations in May 1992. Most, if not all, are presumed by family
 members and NGO's to be dead. In July the Supreme Court overturned two lower
 court rulings in a case brought against then-commanding General Suchinda and
 other members of the military and police forces. The Supreme Court ruled that the
 defendants are not protected in this case by a 1992 amnesty.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment;
 however, NGO's and legal organizations continued to report that some police occa-
 sionally beat suspects in order to coerce confessions. Security forces in border areas
 at times beat persons. In January a lawyer's association petitioned the House Com-
 mittee on Human Rights to conduct a hearing on a case in which three members
 of the New Pattani United Liberation Organization (New Pulo), a separatist move-
 ment, allegedly were beaten in detention by security agents. Neither the Committee
 nor other authorities moved to investigate the charges; the prisoners are in deten-
 tion at a medium security prison at the Lard Yao prison complex in Bangkok.
 Local NGO's and Members of Parliament assisted several female suspects to pur-
 sue legal action against police officers whom they accused of raping them in deten-
 tion. In February authorities suspended a police sergeant from active duty and
 charged with rape after a medical examination confirmed that a 14-year-old female
 prisoner had been assaulted sexually while in custody.
 In July the media continued to call for government action in the 1997 case of four
 Lao women who were raped in the Rayong district police station; three of the offi-
 cers involved in the incident were transferred to inactive posts. The police depart-
 ment investigated the actions of three additional senior officers allegedly involved
 and determined that two of the officers were not guilty. The third officer was found
 guilty of negligence of duty and received limited disciplinary action described as
 "confinement" at the police station for a period of 3 days. The police station chief,
 who had not been under investigation initially, also received 3 days' confinement.
 No monetary fines were imposed on the two officers found guilty of negligence of
 duty, nor were criminal charges brought following the results of the internal police
 department investigation.
 In January police used force against a disorderly protest staged on a highway in
 Bangkok by workers from an auto parts factory.
 Prisons are severely overcrowded; conditions are Spartan but in general they do
 not threaten the life or health of inmates. Sleeping accommodations and access to
 medical care remain areas of concern that require continued attention to meet mini-
 mum international standards. Medical care in prisons is inadequate. To care for a
 total prison population of 176,114 inmates, the Corrections Department employs
 only 13 full-time doctors and seven full-time dentists. Three of the 13 doctors are
 
 
 1071
 on educational leave. The Department of Corrections eliminated 11 part-time posi-
 tions of medical doctor during the year.
 Diplomatic observers reported that prison guards resorted to physical abuse of
 both Thai and foreign prisoners in response to disciplinary problems.
 Prison authorities sometimes used solitary confinement to punish difficult pris-
 oners. They also used heavy leg irons randomly and without apparent cause. Credi-
 ble sources continued to report that prisoners caught in escape attempts were beat-
 en severely, and in seven cases guards killed would-be escapees (see Section 1.a.).
 Conditions in Bangkok's Suan Phlu Immigration Detention Center (IDC) were
 poor, as were immigration facilities throughout the country. Immigration detention
 facilities are not administered by the Department of Corrections and are not subject
 to many of the regulations that govern the regular prison system. Overcrowding and
 shortages of food and water were the principal problems; the IDC's population was
 2,688 at year's end. Conditions in provincial detention centers were significantly
 worse, and many detainees transferred to Bangkok arrived in a debilitated state.
 The Government responded by constructing two new provincial facilities with a ca-
 acity of 300 to 500 each. Some IDC detainees who cannot afford repatriation have
 been held for several years.
 Access to prisons is not restricted, and the Government permits visits by human
 rights monitors and the Thai International Red Cross.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-With few exceptions, including crimes in
 progress, the law requires that police officers making an arrest have warrants, and
 authorities respect this provision in practice. Under the new Constitution, persons
 must be informed of likely charges against them immediately after arrest and must
 be allowed to inform someone of their arrest. While detainees have a right to have
 a. lawyer present during questioning, they often are not informed of this right. For-
 eign prisoners often are forced to sign confessions and stand trial without benefit
 of a translator.
 Police also are required to submit criminal cases to prosecutors for the filing of
 court charges within 48 hours of arrest. However, lawyers report that police rarely
 bring their cases to court within this period since the Criminal Procedure Code al-
 lows police an extension period of up to 3 days. In addition, current laws and regula-
 tions place any offense for which the maximum penalty is less than 3 years under
 the jurisdiction of the district courts, which have special procedures; in these cases,
 police are required to submit cases to public prosecutors within 72 hours of arrest.
 There is a functioning bail system. The only legal basis for detention by the police
 without specific charges for long periods (up to 480 days) remains the Anti-Com-
 munist Activities Act, which was not invoked during the year. However, since April
 officials from the Interior Ministry and opposition Members of Parliament have ar-
 gued that this law is unconstitutional. Their proposed legislation would abrogate the
 act; at year's end, their proposals remain under debate.
 As of October, there were 176,114 prison inmates. Approximately 42,000 were
 charged with narcotics violations. Approximately 15 percent of the total prison popu-
 lation were pretrial detainees. Pretrial detainees usually are not segregated from
 the general prison population.
 At year's end, there were 49 asylum seekers of concern to the UNHCR who were
 incarcerated in the Immigration Detention Center, of whom 41 were Burmese. An-
 other 24 Burmese activists, arrested for demonstrations in Bangkok in August, re-
 mained in the Police Special Detention Center (SDC) in Bang Khen, Bangkok. Seven
 other demonstrators arrested at the same time were subsequently released into the
 Burmese Center (formerly the Burmese Student Safe Area) in Ratchaburi province.
 None of the 31 demonstrators had been formally charged, although they were de-
 tained under provisions of the Immigration Act regarding illegal aliens. One Bur-
 mese detainee, held without charge since June 1997, was released.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, while the judiciary generally is regarded as independent, it has a
 reputation for venality.
 The civilian judicial system has three levels of courts: Courts of first instance;
 courts of appeal; and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal
 and civil cases pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during peri-
 ods of martial law. There is no right to appeal military court decisions. The newly
 established Constitution Court began operating in May. It is charged with interpret-
 ing the new Constitution, and provides a mechanism to implement the Charter
 fully. Islamic (Shari'a) courts provide due process and hear only civil cases concern-
 ing members of the Muslim minority.
 The Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence. Access to courts or
 administrative bodies to seek redress is provided for and practiced.
 
 
 1072
 There is no trial by jury. Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a sole judge,
 and more serious cases require two or more judges. While most trials are public,
 the court may order a trial closed. This is done most often in cases touching on na-
 tional security or the royal family. Career civil service judges preside over the
 courts. Judicial appointments and structures are not subject to parliamentary re-
 view.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including access to a lawyer of their choosing. A government program provides free
 legal advice to the poor, but indigent defendants are not provided with counsel at
 public expense automatically. Most free legal aid comes from private groups, includ-
 in the Thai Lawyer's Association and the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 There are no known political prisoners aside from one Muslim mullah, Sorayut
 Sakunnanasantisat, who is serving an unusually lengthy criminal sentence of 12
 years' imprisonment for leading a 1990 political protest in Pattani. He was convicted
 in 1994 of offenses against the monarchy and violating national security.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With-Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-With
 few exceptions, including crimes in progress, the-law requires police to obtain a war-
 rant prior to conducting a search. Under the new Constitution, warrants must be
 issued by a court, rather than by the police. However, the procedures for issuing
 warrants are not standardized, primarily because various laws such as the Criminal
 Procedure Code and internal government regulations, including those that apply to
 the police department, have not been amended to comply with the new Constitution.
 Lawyers' associations reported that police at times endorsed blank search warrants
 or used legitimate warrants to conduct intrusive searches outside the stated evi-
 dentiary domain.
 Credible sources again reported that they were subjected to a warrantless search
 of their premises or person by low-level police offlcias.
 The Ati-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged in "Communist sup-
 pression operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these powers have
 been invoked rarely in recent years and were not invoked during the year (see Sec-
 tion 1.d.). Security services monitor persons who espouse extremist or highly con-
 troversial views, including foreign visitors.
 Several NGO's concerned with the welfare of women reported that hospitals and
 district officials automatically change the titles of expectant unwed mothers from
 "'Miss" to "Mrs.," although it is illegal to do so, ahd despite the fact that these
 women possess no marriage or divorce certificates. Lacking these documents, the
 women encounter severe difficulties in obtaining official documents needed for some
 business and government transactions. They also report that female government of-
 ficials face disciplinary action for failing to register their marriages or for having
 children out of wedlock.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and citizens gen-
 erally enjoy, a large measure of freedom of speech and the press, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects these rights in practice. However, the Government may re-
 strict these rights to preserve national security, maintain public order, preserve the
 rights of others, -and protect public morals. In practice this rarely has been done.
 Laws prohibiting criticism of the royal family (les6 majeste), threats to national se-
 curity, or speech likely to incite disturbances or insult Buddhism remain in place
 under the 1997 Constitution.
 The new Constitution makes it unlawful for the Government to censor, ban, li-
 cense, or restrict print or broadcast media, except by specific legislation in times of
 crisis. There were no reported attempts to intimidate journalists who reported ad-
 verse economic news. While newspapers and periodicals practice some self-censor-
 ship, especially with regard to the monarchy and national security problems, media
 criticism of political parties, public figures and the Government is common and vig-
 orous. Journalists generally are free to comment on governmental activities without
 fear of official reprisal. There were no reports of violence or physical retaliation
 against journalists for their reporting.
 Local media focused attention on the ingrained culture of corruption within the
 police forces. The Government and police department have made some effort to im-
 plement internal reforms.
 Under the Printing and Advertisement Act of 1941, the Royal Thai Police Special
 Branch issues warnings to publications for various violations such as disturbing the
 peace, interfering with public safety, or offending public morals. It issued 58 warn-
 ings in 1997 and 3 warnings through September. The 1941 Act permits police clo-
 sure of newspapers or printing presses in times of war or national emergency, but
 only with a court order. No such closures occurred during the year.
 
 
 1073
 
 Domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and social
 commentary. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and domes-
 tic books normally are not censored and circulate freely. Police have the authority
 to ban the importation of publications but generally do not exercise it. Revolutionary
 Order Number 43, which has been in effect for many years, prohibits the public
 from possessing publications deemed detrimental to national security, including
 books written by Communists. The Legislature attempted to delete this order in
 many sessions during the year; the motion is still under active consideration.
 Radio and television stations are licensed by the Government, but regulations
 that are consistent with the new Constitution remain to be drafted. Most stations
 are operated under the direct or indirect oversight of the Government or armed
 forces. They enjoy the same constitutional protections of freedom of expression and
 speech that the print media does. Radio stations must renew their licenses every
 year, and their signals are broadcast via government transmitters. They are re-
 quired by law to broadcast government-produced newscasts twice daily, 30 minutes
 each in the morning and evening.
 Following a merger during the year, there are two cable television networks. They
 enjoy almost complete autonomy under the indirect oversight of the Mass Commu-
 nications Authority of Thailand. In addition a wholly independent ultra-high fre-
 quency television station managed by a private consortium including the outspoken
 Nation Multimedia Group began operating in 1996.
 Programmers are generally free to determine the content and nature of television
 broadcasts. However, as with the print media, self-censorship exists. Stations occa-
 sionally edit or "black ou ' portions of programming deemed politically sensitive or
 pornographic. A governmental internal censorship board exists in the Prime Min-
 ister's office, but it rarely takes action to restrict television or radio broadcasts.
 An antipornography law allows police to restrict or confiscate printed publications
 and other materials deemed obscene; the interpretation generally covers hard-core
 pornographic materials. Under the Film Act of 1930, theater owners and broad-
 casters must submit films that they plan to show to the film censorship board for
 review. The board can require that portions of the film be removed, or it can decide
 to ban the film. Reasons for censoring films include violating moral and cultural
 norms and disturbing the public order and national security. Theater owners and
 broadcasters frequently censor films themselves before submitting them to the
 board. The film censorship board reports that it bans 3 to 4 films out of an average
 of 300 films submitted yearly. Through September the board had banned two films,
 one for insulting Buddhism and one for containing pornographic material.
 Activity on the Internet remains unregulated.
 The new Constitution provides for the right to engage in academic pursuits, and
 academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The legal system recognizes
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 Permits are not required for private meetings or gatherings unless held on public
 property; these are granted routinely.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association. Private associations must
 register with the Government; such registration is approved routinely.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is protected by law, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice. In effect the state religion is
 Therevada Buddhism, but other religions are not restricted.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their resi-
 dence or workplace, and authorities respect this right in practice. Long-standing re-
 strictions on the travel and domicile of certain Vietnamese aliens who immigrated
 to Thailand in 1945 and 1946 and Chinese who immigrated between 1953 and 1961
 remain in place. In addition some long-term noncitizen residents, including several
 hundred thousand tribal persons, are required to seek permission from local au-
 thorities or the army for foreign or domestic travel. In practice authorities rarely
 enforce these restrictive measures, and registered resident aliens are able to move
 freely within the country.
 In 1996 the Government issued a regulation allowing illegal alien workers already
 in the country to register and obtain work permits for manual labor employment
 in 43 of the 76 provinces. From September 1996 until May 1997, over 323,000 of
 an estimated 700,000 to 1 million aliens registered, and over 313,000 were issued
 work permits. Aliens taking advantage of this regulation are allowed to work and
 move freely for a 2-year period, after which the Government reserves the right to
 deport them formally. During 1997 and 1998, in response to the economic crisis, the
 Government rescinded these regulations in most industries, with the exception of
 some sectors such as fisheries and rice milling. Additional allowances for employ-
 
 
 1074
 
 ment of migrant labor were made in border areas. The Government deported ap-
 proximately 300,000 migrant workers to Burma.
 Thailand continued to provide asylum to small numbers of Vietnamese and Lao
 asylum seekers pending their resettlement in third countries, as well as to persons
 unable to meet the refugee definition pending arrangements to return them to their
 countries of ongin. There were no reports of new refugees arriving from either Laos
 or Vietnam andno retorts that officials had turned back persons seeking asylum
 from those countries. Along the border with Burma, the Government generally fol-
 lowed its policy of providing first asylum to new arrivals, but continued to condition
 entry on "flight from fighting," -rather than on broader grounds of persecution on
 the basis of race, religion, ethnic group, social class, or political opinion. Con-
 sequently, there were several thousand asylum seekers, mostly of the Karen ethnic
 group, who resided in Thailand but were not officially acknowledged as refugees,
 and were not permitted to receive assistance and protection in designated refugee
 camps. In addition, in March security forces failed to provide adequate protection
 to refugees in three camps in Tak province against intruding forces from Burma.
 However, there were no reports that securty forces forcibly repatriated any asylum
 seekers to Burma. The Government continued to provide first asylum to 35,000 citi-
 zens of Cambodia who had crossed into Surm  Sa Kaew, and Trat provinces since
 1997 to escape factional fighting in Cambodia. There were no reports that any per-
 sons were forcibly returned to a country where they feared persecution.
 There is no legislation regarding the treatment of refugees. However, the Govern-
 ment continued to permit the United Nations High Commissionerfor Refugees
 (U-NH&R) to exrcise its mandate with regard to small numbers of Vietnamese and
 Lao asylum seekers who were mostly screened out and awaiting return to their
 countries of origin, as well as more that 30,000 Cambodians. For the first time, the
 Government officially agreed to a formal role for the UNHCR in monitoring and pro-
 viding protection to about 112,000 refugees from Burma, mostly ethnic minorities,
 in more than one dozen sites near the border with Burma. This action was a signifi-
 cant expansion of the UNHCR's previous mandate, which had been limited to a few
 hundred ethnic Burman students at the Burmese Center, formerly known as the
 Burmese Student Safe Area, located in Ratehaburi province. The Government con-
 tinued to restrict access to the Center to those persons from Burma to whom the
 UJNHCR had accorded refugee status prior to mid-1996. In September the Govern-
 ment admitted 190 Burmese whose family members were already resident in the
 Center, and agreed in principle to admit several hundred other persons recognized
 under the UNHCR's mandate who had been awaiting entry, some for more than 2
 years. However, by year's end, none of the latter group had been allowed to enter
 the Center.'
 The Government also continued to allow NGQ's to provide food, medical services,
 housing, and other services to Burmese refugees near the border. While government
 officials periodically arrested Burmese outside designed camps as illegal aliens, the
 Government did no deport any Burmese person recogized by the UNHCR as a
 "person of concern." In one incident, a group of Burmese dissidents, including some
 recognized as refugees by the UNHCR, were arrested, taken to the border and or-
 dered to return to Burma. The group had declined UNHCR assistance and re-
 quested deportation in the belief that they would be released inside Thailand. At
 year's end, 45 persons of concern, including 6 Burmese dissidents, remained in im-
 migration detention centers in the central provinces. At the Special Detention Cen-
 ter, 30 persons of concern remained, including 24 of the 31 Burmese citizens who
 had been arrested for demonstrating at the Burmese Embassy in August (see Sec-
 tion 1.d.).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Righlt of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose or change their gov-
 einent peacefully through free and fair elections based on universal suffrage. iti-
 zens exercised this right in 1996, in an election that was generally viewed as free
 but marred by widespread vote-buying, a recurrent problem in elections. The Con-
 stitution prohibits monks and nuns from voting or seeking public office. It includes
 provisions to place supervision of elections under an independent Election Commis-
 sion. The Senate completed selection of the five-member Commission in November
 1997. Under the new Constitution, voting is compulsory. Eligible voters who fail to
 exercise their voting responsibilities may forfeit certain rights, yet to be determined
 by the Election Commission. The Constittion and the 1998 Election Law allow eli-
 gible voters who are living outside their home districts to regster to vote at their
 temporary residences, provided that they have resided there for more than 90 days.
 Voters who have lived in their temporary abodes less than 90 days, or those who
 
 
 1075
 
 fail to register there, must return to their home districts at election time to vote.
 The Constitution and the Election Law also allow citizens living overseas to vote
 by absentee ballot.
 While there are no legal restrictions on their political participation, women gen-
 erally are underrepresented in national politics, especially at senior levels. There
 was essentially no change in the number of women assigned or elected to positions
 of leadership. Women make up less than 10 percent of the Senate, Parliament, and
 civil service. There are 22 women in the 386-member Parliament, and 8 in the 256-
 member Senate. There are two women in the Cabinet.
 No laws prohibit the participation of ethnic minorities, but few hold positions of
 authority in national politics. Members of ethnic minorities in the north often lack
 documentation of citizenship, effectively barring their participation in the political
 process (see Section 5). Muslims from the south hold significant elected posts in the
 Government, although they continue to be underrepresented in local and provincial
 government positions, which are appointed by the central Government. Muslims
 make up 4.4 percent of Parliament. There are 8 Muslim Members of the Senate,
 and 17 Muslim Members of Parliament, including House Speaker Wan Muhamad
 Noor Matha.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of local human rights organizations operate without government
 restriction.
 The Government generally did not penalize or hinder human rights observers.
 'However, at times the Government hindered the activity of human rights groups.
 For example, there are credible reports that the Government occasionally directs po-
 lice units to enforce laws in monitoring the activities of human rights activists selec-
 tively. In March police forces at a debate concerning East Timor, Indonesia, required
 work permits for foreign guest speakers who had been invited to participate as pan-
 elists before they were allowed to speak; the panelists eventually were allowed to
 participate, but the debate had to be postponed.
 International human rights NGO's also generally work freely on controversial
 problems, investigating and publishing their findings without official hindrance.
 The new Constitution created a provision for the establishment of a permanent
 11-member National Commission on Human Rights. The Commission would be a
 government, rather than an independent, body, with a mandate to prepare an an-
 nual evaluation of the human rights situation for the National Assembly, propose
 policies and recommendations for amending laws to the National Assembly, promote
 measures to educate citizens on human rights, and investigate cases of human
 rights abuse. To carry out this mandate, the Government drafted legislation that
 has been discussed in several hearings in locations around the country. Local
 NGO's, human rights organizations, and the local news media lobbied to increase
 the membership for nongovernmental organizations and to strengthen the Commis-
 sion's independence and investigative powers. However, the establishment of this
 Commission is still pending passage of a National Human Rights Commission Law
 by the National Assembly.
 NGO's have lobbied vigorously for the inclusion of private individuals on the selec-
 tion committee and for the Committee to hold investigative power into allegations
 of human rights abuses. The Government responded, in part, by appointing a large
 number of private citizens to its 42-member National Human Rights Master Plan
 Drafting Committee, which was charged with developing government policies for
 promoting and protecting human and civil rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal treatment under the law without respect to
 race, sex, religion, disability, language, or social status. In practice some discrimina-
 tion exists, and government enforcement of equal protection statutes is uneven.
 Women.-Domestic abuse continues to be a serious problem affecting the welfare
 of many women; reliable reports indicate that domestic abuse crosses all social
 classes. Under the Criminal Code, spousal abuse and child abuse are covered by as-
 sault provisions, but rules of evidence often make prosecuting such cases difficult.
 Police do not enforce laws against such violence vigorously, and domestic violence
 often goes unreported.
 Under the Criminal Code, rape is illegal. However, a husband cannot be pros-
 ecuted for spousal rape. Male rape is considered sexual harassment under the law
 and carries a much lighter punishment than heterosexual rape. During the year, the
 Government proposed changes to the Criminal Code that would redefine the term
 
 
 1076
 
 rape to include male rape and rape within marriage- According to credible sources,
 another reason that rape and sexual assault are underreported is a widespread be-
 lief that law enforcement agencies are not capable of bringing the perpetrators to
 justice. Since 1994 a pilot, project operating in three Bangkok police stations has
 provided female teams totaling 13 investigators to handle and encourage reporting
 of rape and abuses. However, one factor that may limit expansion of this program
 is that police and military academies still do not accept female students.
 Prostitution, although illegal, flourishes, is deeply ingrained, and is often pro-
 tected by local officials with a commercial interest in its continuation. Thailand is
 a source, transit, and destination for trafficking in women and children. Govern-
 ment and NGO estimates of the number of women and children engaged in prostitu-
 tion vary widely because of the often temporary and migratory nature of prostitu-
 tion. Many NGO's and government departments use a figure of approximately
 200,000 persons, which is considered credible. These figures include estimates of
 children.
 Some women are forced into prostitution, although the number of such cases is
 difficult to determine. Coerced prostitution often involves primarily women from hill
 tribes and neighboring countries. Because foreign women frequently cannot speak
 Thai and are considered illegal immigrants, these women are particularly vulner-
 able to physical abuse, confinement, and exploitation. Some women are lured with
 promises of jobs as waitresses or domestic helpers, but then forced to work as pros-
 titutes. Those women who are illegal immigrants have'no rights to legal counsel or
 health care if arrested (see Section 2.d.). Nor do the amnesty provisions under
 UNHCR auspices apply. The number of Burmese and Cambodian women and chil-
 dren trafficked, and in some cases abducted for prostitution, reportedly increased
 again during the year. Vietnamese, Chinese, and Russian citizens also reportedly
 were trafficked to Thailand. Their illegal entry reportedly was accomplished with
 the complicity of local officials. According to a local NGO, girls between the ages of
 12 and 18 increasingly are trafficked from southern China, Burma, and Laos to
 work in the commercial sex industry.
 The majority of prostitutes are not kept under physical constraint, but a large
 number labor in debt bondage. Brothel procurers often advance parents a substan-
 tial sum against their daughter's future earnings, often without the consent of the
 young woman involved. The women are then obligated to work in a brothel to repay
 the loan.
 The Prostitution Prevention and Suppression Act of 1996 makes prostitution ille-
 gal and further states that customers who patronize child prostitutes are punishable
 by law. Parents who allow a child to enter the trade also are punishable.
 The Government and NGO's have established vocational training and education
 programs to combat the lure of prostitution. However, despite occasional highly pub-
 licized raids on brothels, the Government has not enforced laws against prostitution
 effectively, and in many cases, brothels operate with the protection of local govern-
 ment officials and police. During the year, there were numerous reports of the in-
 volvement of local officials.
 The 1997 Prevention and Suppression of Trafficking in Women and Children Act
 increased the penalties for trafficking in women and children for the purposes of
 prostitution or slave labor, and provided for wide powers of search and assistance
 to victims. The authorities utilized these powers during the year. Shelter, rehabilita-
 tion, and reintegration programs for children involved in the sex industry are pro-
 vided by NGO's and government agencies. However, there continue to be credible
 reports of involvement by some corrupt police, soldiers, and government officials in
 trafficking schemes.
 The new Constitution has six gender-related articles that provide women with
 equal rights and protections, but inequalities remain. A man may sue for divorce
 on the grounds that his wife committed adultery, but a woman faces the additional
 legal burden of proving that her husband has acknowledged publicly another woman
 as his wife.
 Women represent 47 percent of the economically active population and hold an
 increasing share of professional positions. Government regulations require employ-
 ers to pay equal wages and benefits for equal work regardless of gender. However,
 there is a significant gap between average salaries earned by men and women be-
 cause women are concentrated in lower paying jobs. In practice, women also gen-
 erally receive lower pay for equal work in virtually all sectors of the economy. De-
 spite improvements in the Government's Verformance regarding women's rights,
 many NGO's remain skeptical about women s prospects to enjoy equal opportunities
 or positions. In the new labor law, the term sexual harassment is vague and a coali-
 tion of NGO's has noted that this ambiguity may make it difficult for women to pur-
 
 
 1077
 sue cases through the legal system. The term covers only women, and only those
 women working in the formal business sector.
 Women generally have access to higher education; more than half the university
 graduates each year are women. The Ministry of University Affairs removed the
 quota that favored male students who sought to enter state universities and voca-
 tional schools. The Government also acted to remove seldom-enforced regulations re-
 stricting the appointment of certain positions, including deputy district chief, dis-
 trict chief, deputy provincial governor, provincial governor, and the rank of general
 in the armed forces, to men. The Women and Constitution Network, a league of 35
 women's organizations, played an important role in securing the inclusion of gender
 equality clauses in the new Constitution, including an article that provides that at
 least one-third of a House of Representatives committee drafting laws concerning
 women be representatives of local women's groups.
 Children.-The Government took steps to promote the rights and welfare of chil-
 dren, and the new Constitution provided for the right of access to free public edu-
 cation through grade 12. However, child labor and the relatively small compulsory
 education requirements of 6 years remain areas of concern. The Governments 1997
 Social Welfare Plan for Underprivileged People doubled the budget for children's
 programs for 1997-2001, compared with the previous 5-year plan. However, NGO's
 and the news media reported an increase in the number of children leaving school
 due to the severe economic downturn.
 Child prostitution, including forced prostitution and trafficking of children, is a
 serious problem (see Section 6.c.). The Government and NGO's estimate that there
 are 20,000 to 40,000 prostitutes under the age of 18. In 1996 the Government en-
 acted a stronger law against trafficking in, patronizing, or profiting from child pros-
 titutes. Since the promulgation of the 1996 act, government sources confirm that
 352 individuals have been arrested for violating this law. As of August, 14 of these
 persons had been convicted and sentenced. NGO's reported that there was a small
 decline in the trade in children for commercial sex; however, it is uncertain whether
 this decline is due to the new laws.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 However, as with domestic abuse, police often are reluctant to investigate abuse
 cases, and rules of evidence make prosecution of child abuse cases difficult. In an
 action that elicited strong public debate, the Government proposed draft Criminal
 Code legislation in February that is designed to allow children to give evidence on
 videotape and in private surroundings in the presence of a psychologist, psychia-
 trist, or other social worker.
 People With Disabilities.-The law requires that firms hire one disabled person for
 every 200 other workers, but this provision has not been enforced. Employers may
 be exempted by contributing to a fund that benefits persons with disabilities. Na-
 tionwide, there are 7 government-operated and 10 NGO-operated training centers
 for the disabled. The new Constitution provides for access to public facilities by dis-
 abled persons, but laws implementing the provisions have not yet been enacted.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent approximately 10 percent of the coun-
 try's population but constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces,
 which border Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integrate Mus-
 lim communities into society through developmental efforts and expanded edu-
 cational opportunities, societal discrimination remains widespread.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities-qPrgress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into society is limited. Only half the estimated 500,000 to 600,000 members of hill
 tribes reportedly possess documentation that either identifies them as citizens or
 certifies their eligibility for future citizenship. The remainder lack documentation,
 and thus access to adequate education and health care. As noncitizens they are also
 barred from participating in the political process. Undocumented hill tribe persons
 cannot own land and are not protected by labor laws, including minimum wage re-
 quirements. Approximately 45,000 Vietnamese immigrants live in five northeastern
 provinces, and 50,000 Chinese, former Chinese soldiers, and dependents of a Kuo-
 mintang army that fled China after the Communist takeover, reside in the north.
 Both groups live under a set of laws and regulations that restrict their movement,
 residence, education, and occupation (see Section 2.d.). The Sino-Thai population is
 well integrated and do not face discrimination. Despite a strong desire for Thai citi-
 zenship, fewer than 100 Vietnamese and 3,000 to 4,000 Chinese have been able to
 naturalize in the last 33 years. Children who were born in Thailand of these legal
 permanent resident immigrants may request citizenship through district offices.
 These requests are granted routinely. Approximately 10,000 Vietnamese children
 born in Thailand have acquired citizenship in this manner, as have 8,000 Chinese
 children born in the country.
 
 
 1078
 Authorities attempted to establish the origins of about 13,000 members of the
 Hmong ethnic group at Wat Tham Krabok in Suraburi province.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act grants freedom of as-
 sociation to private sector workers. Workers have the right to form and join unions
 of their choosing without prior authorization; to decide on the constitutions and
 rules of these associations and unions; to express their views without government
 or employer interference; to confederate with other unions; to receive protection
 from discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or termination by any outside author-
 ity because of union activities; and to have employee representation in direct nego-
 tiations with employers. However, no law explicitly protects workers from discrimi-
 nation due to their participation in organizing ijew unions that have not been offi-
 cially registered. Union leaders report that employers often discriminate against
 workers seeking to organize unions.
 Workers in the public sector do not have the right to form unions. In state enter-
 prises, the law allows workers in each state enterprise to form a single "association"
 after at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees submit a petition to the Min-
 istry of Labor to register such an association. These associations submit employee
 grievances to management and propose changes in benefits and working conditions
 but may not negotiate wages.
 Associations do not have the right to confederate or to join private sector federa-
 tions. Unofficial contacts between public and private sector unions continue, how-
 ever, and the Government has not interfered with these relationships.
 The law denies all state enterprise workers the right to strike. In the private sec-
 tor, to be considered legal, a proposed strike must be approved by a majority of the
 union members in a secret ballot and be registered beforehand with the Ministry
 of Labor.
 In 1991 the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized labor law amend-
 ments adopted by the military-appointed legislature in March 1991 that dissolved
 state enterprise unions, transferred their assets, limited the number of associations
 that may be formed in each state enterprise, set relatively high minimum member-
 ship requirements for associations, denied associations the right to affiliate with pri-
 vate sector unions, and completely forbade strikes in state enterprises.
 The Government did-not enforce the laws restrictions vigorously and sought to
 pass a new version of the law that would restore most rights enjoyed by state enter-
 prise workers prior to the 1991 changes.
 In October the House of Representatives passed the State Enterprise Labor Rela-
 tions Act (SELRA) that if enacted would have restored worker rights to state enter-
 prise workers. In November the Constitution Court ruled the act unconstitutional
 on a drafting technicality. The Government stated that it would again seek to enact
 refo legislation in 1999. In late November, in a new session, the Government re-
 introduced legislation intended for enaction in March 1999.
 The Government has the authority to restrict private sector strikes that would
 "affect national security or cause severe negative repercussions for the population
 at large." The .Government seldom invokes this provision and did not do so during
 the year. Labor law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more
 broadly than the ILO criteria for such services. No strikes were disapproved during
 the year. The number of legal strikes has averaged fewer than 10 annually for the
 past 10 years.
 More than half the work force is employed in the unorganized agricultural sector.
 Less than 2 percent of the total work force, although nearly 11 percent of industrial
 workers, is unionized. Cultural traditions, unfamiliarity with the concept of indus-
 trial relations, and efforts by the Government to diminish union cohesiveness are
 often cited as the reasons for low rates of labor organization.
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 disappearance of outspoken
 labor leader Thanong Po-an remains unsolved (see Section 1.b.).
 There is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were exploited by the
 military forces, politicians, or employers for their own purposes, but private unions
 generally operate independently of the Government and other organizations.
 Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade organizations, and
 they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 recognizes the right of private sector workers to organize and bargain collectively
 and defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-assisted con-
 ciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. In practice genuine collective bar-
 gaining occurs only in a small fraction of workplaces and in most instances contin-
 ues to be characterized by a lack of sophistication on the part of employee groups
 
 
 1079
 and autocratic attitudes on the part of employers. Wage increases for most workers
 come as a result of increases in the minimum wage, rather than as a result of collec-
 tive bargaining.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labor law for the private sector. Workers may also seek redress for their
 revances through the Tripartite Labor Relations Committee. Redress of grievances
 orat enterprise workers is handled by the State Enterprise Labor Relations
 Committee. Labor leaders generally did not indicate dissatisfaction with the treat-
 ment that their concerns received in these forums, although they complained that
 union leaders dismissed unjustly usually are awarded only monetary compensation.
 No separate labor legislation applies in exportprocessing zones, where wages and
 working conditions are often better than national norms because of the preponder-
 ance of Western and Japan-based multinational firms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor by all persons except in the case of national emergency, war,
 or martial law. These provisions generaly are enforced; however, there are reports
 of sweatshops in the informal sector that physically restrain workers from leaving
 the premises. There are no estimates of how many such workshops exist, but the
 growing number of illegal aliens from Burma, Cambodia, and Laos increases the op-
 portunities for such abuse.
 The Constitution does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children,
 and such practices occur.
 Although the law prohibits trafficking of women and children for purposes of pros-
 titution, some women and children are forced into prostitution. Burmese, Cam-
 bodian, Lao, and Chinese women and children also are reportedly trafficked and, in
 some cases, abducted to Thailand for the purpose of prostitution. Although the Gov-
 ernment passed strong antiprostitution legislation in 1996 increasing the criminal
 penalties for traffickers of women, owners of places of prostitution, and parents who
 sell their children into the sex industry, the authorities have not enforced this law
 effectively. There are credible reports that police, military personnel, and govern-
 ment officials are involved in trafficking schemes (see Section 5).
 For several years, the ILO has cited Thailand for violations of Convention 29 on
 forced labor. In 1995 it was the subject of a country "observation," but the ILO de-
 clined to make the country the subject of a special paragraph. The primary focus
 of ILO criticism is forced child labor, especially child prostitution. Since the ILO
 raised these concerns, the Government has cooperated in establishing important in-
 stitutional links, particularly with the International Program on the Elimination of
 Child Labor, to address the problem.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-In August
 the Government raised the legal minimum age for employment from 13 to. 15 years.
 Nearly 90 percent of children complete the six grades of compulsory  education at
 age 12; only 60 percent of 13-year-olds are enrolled in seventh grade, although this
 percentage is increasing. The law permits the employment of children between the
 ages of 15 and 18 only in "light work", where the lifting of heavy loads and exposure
 to toxic materials or dangerous equipment or situations is restricted. The employ-
 ment of children at night (from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m.), or in places where alcohol is
 served, is prohibited by law. An analysis based on population and school enrollment
 data showed that from 850,000 to 1,480,000 children work, mostly on family farms.
 An estimated 240,000 to 410,000 (2 to 4 percent of children between the ages 6 and
 14) work in urban employment at particular risk of labor abuse. Most children em-
 ployed in urban settings work in the service sector, primarily at gasoline stations
 and restaurants. Child labor is not evident in larger foreign or Thai export oriented
 factories. NGO's have found it difficult to gain access to the shop houses that em-
 ploy children under harsh conditions to make goods for assembly in small and me-
 dium sized factories. Consequently, no comprehensive survey of child labor in this
 sector exists. The Ministry of Labor has increased the number of inspectors specifi-
 cally responsible for child labor problems, although not all officers are engaged in
 full-time inspection work. Enforcement of child labor laws is not rigorous, and in-
 spectors usually respond only to specific public complaints or exposes in newspapers.
 Their inclination when dealing with violators is to negotiate promises of better fu-
 ture behavior, rather than to seek prosecution and punishment. The Constitution
 does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, and such practices
 occur (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government's attempt to address the problem of child labor by proposing to
 extend compulsory education from 6 to 9 years failed. Instead, the new Constitution
 contains provisions that provide all children with the right to free public education
 through the 12th grade.
 
 
 1080
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gov-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives agreed in 1997 to increase the daily
 legal minimum wage by 7.6 percent. The minimum wage ranges from $3.20 (128
 baht) to $3.93 (157 baht) per day, depending upon the cost of living in various prov-
 inces. This wage is not adequate to provide a decent standard of living for a worker
 and family. With extended family members' financial contributions, the minimum
 wage provides the basis for a marginally adequate overall standard of living. Na-
 tionwide, however, more than half of workers receive less than the minimum wage,
 -especially in rural-provinces.
 Unskilled migrant workers, as well as illegal aliens, often work for wages signifi-
 cantly less than the minimum wage: The minimum wage does not apply to undocu-
 mented hill tribe members, who are likewise not protected by other labor laws. The
 Ministry of Labor is responsible for ensuring that employers adhere to minimum
 wage requirements. Despite encouragement of employees to report violations to
 labor inspectors, the enforcement of minimum wage laws is mixed.
 In August the Government mandated a uniform work~veek of a maximum of 48
 hours per week, with a limit-on overtime of 35 hours per week. Employees engaged
 in "dangerous" work, such as in the chemical, mining, or other industries involving
 heavy machinery, may work a maximum of 35 hours per week. The petrochemical
 industry has been excluded from these regulations.
 Working conditions vary widely. The rate of injury from industrial accidents has
 remained relatively constant over the last 10 years at 4.5 percent of the total work
 force. However, NGO's claim that in the last 7 years, the average rate of work-relat-
 ed deaths was. high at 25 per 1,000 workers. Occupational diseases rarely are diag-
 nosed or compensated, and few doctors or clinics specializing in occupational dis-
 eases exist, In medium-sized and large factories, government health and safety
 standards are often applied, but enforcement of safety standards is lax. In the large
 informal sector, health and safety protections are substandard.
 There is no law affording job protection to employees who remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations. The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, promulgates
 health and safety regulations regarding conditions of work. Labor inspectors are re-
 sponsible for enforcement of health and safety regulations; the strictest penalty is
 6 months' imprisonment. New provisions in the Labor Protection Law include the
 establishment of welfare committees, which include worker representatives, in fac-
 tories employing over 50 persons. These committees are to set and review health
 and safety conditions in each factory. New provisions of the Labor Protection Act
 include expanded protection for pregnant workers with prohibitions on working
 night shifts, overtime, or holidays, as well as work with dangerous machinery or on
 boats.
 There were no new developments in the case of the May 1993 Kader Toy Factory
 fire near Bangkok.
