 THAILAND
 Thai]and's government is a constitutional monarchy, with a
 strong executive branch and a bicameral legislature composed of.
 a 300-member elected lower house and a 225-member appointed
 Senate. Since 1932, Thai politics have, in fact, been dominated
 by the military.
 The Prime Minister and members of his cabinet are subject to
 parliamentary no-confidence votes, although they themselves need
 not be elected. National elections were held in April 1979 and
 the current Prime Minister, General (ret.) Prom Tinsulanon, was
 selected by the Parliament in February 1980. The next elections
 are scheduled in the spring of 1983 when the current four-year
 parliamentary term expires.
 Thailand is a middle-income developing country with a free
 enterprise system. Its economy remains primarily agrarian and
 it is one of the world's few net food exporters, but it also has
 a rapidly expanding, light industrial sector concentrated around
 the Bangkok metropolis. The country has maintained an average
 real growth rate in the seven percent range for two decades, has
 cut its birth rate to two percent or less, and continues to
 expand both economic infrastructure and social services.
 However, problems and inequities remain, notably a classic
 urban/rural income disparity, but the Government recognizes
 these difficulties and seeks to address them.
 Thailand is making progress in meeting the basic human rights
 and needs of its population. The infrastructure of democracy is
 evolving under the terms of the constitution promulgated in 1978
 which foresees an increase in the powers of the elected house in
 1903.' The press is generally open and free, political
 gatherings and associations are allowed, and freedom from
 arbitrary detention or search is generally safeguarded,
 notwithstanding some restrictive laws still in effect. Human
 rights activists in Thailand are able to bring issues to the
 attention of the public and lobby for corrective action.
 Communist insurgents, ethnic separatists, and organized groups
 of criminals operate in rural areas and use terrorism to advance
 their respective aims. Armed communist insurgents have
 continued to mount attacks on government installations and
 civilians who resist proselytizing, although in recent months
 communist strength has markedly declined owing to a number of
 factors including government programs and internal Communist
 Party strife. The Royal Thai Government has recently emphasized
 political rather than military means to counter subversion and
 has moved over the last year to impose greater control on
 paramilitary forces accused of abusing special security powers.
 Thailand has continued its policy of affording refuge and
 assistance to Indochinese refugees, in close cooperation with
 international organizations, third countries, and private
 voluntary relief agencies. As of September 30, approximately
 170,000 Khmer, Lao, and Vietnamese refugees were sheltered in
 camps in Thai territory. Another 200,000 Khmer lived in self-
 administered encampments along the Cambodian border. On July
 16, 1982, the Government initiated a UN High Commissioner for
 Refugees-funded program to suppress pirates who prey on
 Vietnamese boat refugees and Thai seamen. Trials of pirates
 arrested during an earlier US-funded program continued,
 resulting in several convictions and lengthy prison sentences.
 
 
 811
 Although considerably less frequent than in 1981, sporadic
 terrorist and insurgent incidents continued in )982, calling
 attention, inter alia, to separatist activities within the
 ethnic Malay Muslim minority in the far south of Thailand.
 While language and cultural barriers disadvantage the Muslims,
 there is no overt policy of discrimination. Muslims living in
 the four provinces in the south have the right to have civil
 cases decided by Muslim judges who base their verdicts on
 Islamic law. The Government has given priority attention to the
 improvement of administration and development in the south,
 including the building of mosques.
 Notwithstanding the security threat from Indochina, the
 percentage of the government budget dedicated to development
 remains high and unchanged. Of particular importanc, is the
 national drive to eliminate health disparities among regions and
 between the urban and rural sectors. Continued attention will
 be paid to population planning programs with the aim of
 generally improving the lot of women and further integrating
 them into the economic life of the country.
 ]. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Frpedom
 from:
 a.   Killing
 Murder is not an instrument of government policy. In rural
 areas, communist insurgents, ethnic separatists, narcotics
 traffickers, and organized groups of criminals employ violence
 in their activities. The Government has taken steps to reduce
 the level of rural violence, focusing in particular on abuses of
 authority by paramilitary forces operating against insurgents.
 In 1982 journalists noted that a large number of journalists had
 been killed in rural areas, but though this issue caught the
 attention of local human rights groups, there was no suggestion
 from any quarter that the murders were political in nature. The
 political aspects of the problem are difficult to assess as many
 Thai who label themselves journalists are freelancers, sometimes
 with business interests and only a nominal attachment to the
 profession. The Coordinating Group for Religion in Society, a
 Thai human rights group, has alleged a police department death
 squad exists to eliminate habitual criminals operating in the
 rural areas. These allegations are unsubstantiated and have
 received little attention even in the crime-oriented popular
 press.
 b.   Disappearance
 Local human rights groups have alleged the disappearances of
 persons suspected of communist or criminal activity, and ascribe
 these to actions by police officers or rural paramilitary
 units. The alleged incidents have been scattered, occurring
 mainly in rural areas experiencing problems with communist or
 separatist insurgency, where confirmation is difficult to
 obtain. Reported incidents are infrequent. Communist
 insurgents nationwide and separatists in the south have used
 terrorism as a political weapon resulting in the deaths of
 civilians and government officials. The Communist Party of
 Thailand continues to use assassination as a tool to intimidate
 villagers and low-level government officials.
 c.   Torture
 Torture is not an instrument of government policy. Allegations
 of such treatment have been made in the past by the Coordinating
 
 
 812
 Group for Religion in Society as we]] as other activists, but
 there were no new, substantiated allegations in 1982. There are
 recurring allegations of mistreatment by the police of persons
 arrfsted on criminal charges.
 d.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Thai Government has stated its opposition to the
 use of cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment, the Coordinating
 Group for Religion in Society, in its periodic reports, has
 cited alleged cases of brutality and mistreatment by police and
 military personnel and has asserted that most of these offenders
 go unpunished. The majority of cases allegedly occur in rural
 areas where communist insurgency is a problem. Clear evidence
 remains difficult to obtain.
 According to credible human rights activists in Thailand, abuses
 of authority such as torture, abduction, cruel and inhuman
 punishment or treatment, and arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 -have declined over the last several years, due in part to
 unfavorable publicity which focused on incidents of this type.
 This publicity has led to a tightening of discipline and efforts
 to exert better control over police and paramilitary forces.
 Prison conditions in Thailand are poor as a consequence of
 serious overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and the high incidence of drug use among
 prisoners. Prisoners are subject to strict regulations which
 include corporal punishment for infractions.
 About one-fifth of the prison population was released in 1982
 under a general amnesty in connection with bicentennial
 celebrations, but over 60,000 remain in jail occupying cells
 designed to hold about 34,000. Prison conditions according to
 the prisoner's social status and relative affluence as well as
 the nature of his offense. In rural areas there are allegations
 that detainees, whohave not been formally charged, are used as
 unpaid labor. Overall, however, there seems to be no systematic
 discrimination save that Westerners are generally given
 preferential treatment.
 In 1982 newspapers and civil rights groups continued to draw
 attention to the plight of 30-40 illegal aliens who have been
 detained for periods of up to 19 years. These inmates are the
 last of some 213 persons who entered Thailand illegally.
 Subsequently they were convicted of crimps and ordered
 deported. Their respective countries of origin, however,
 refused to accept them back and they remained in detention until
 December 1980 when most were released. Those who remained in
 detention lack documentation and sponsors and in the latter half
 of 1982 the Thai authorities have not processed their cases
 further.
 e.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Martial law powers allowing arbitrary arrest and imprisonment
 were significantly reduced by the repeal of Martial Law Order
 No. 22 in 1979. At present, the only remaining legal basis for
 imprisonment without trial, other than severely limited
 provisions of martial law remaining in effect, is a provision of
 the Anti-Communist Act which provides that person accused of
 communist activities can be detained for up to 210 days with the
 approval of the police Director-General and up to 480 days with
 the permission of a military or criminal court. Accurate
 figures on persons held under this provision are not available,
 but the number appears to be less than 1000 concentrated in
 
 
 813 ,
 southern Thailand. According to local human rights groups these
 detainees have not been mistreated.
 The Prem Government has deemphasized the Anti-Communist Act,
 making greater use instead of orders which emphasize political
 measures including a broadened amnesty program.
 f.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution of 1978 guarantees Thai citizens the
 presumption of innocence and access to courts or administrative
 bodies to seek redress. They have the right to legal counsel in
 all cases before a court but may be denied that right during the
 pretrial or investigative period. After this initial stage,
 however, defendants have the right to counsel throughout the
 trial and appeal stages. The Cabinet, in 1981, approved a pilot
 program to provide free legal advice to the poor.
 At present a proposal is under consideration by the Parliament
 to liberalize the criminal procedure code. This amendment
 provides for free legal assistance under certain conditions and
 will allow suspects to have confidential legal counsel during
 the investigative phase, visitors during this period, and the
 right to contest extensions of the pre-trial period of
 detention. Human rights leaders in Thailand believe that this
 revision of the criminal code would be a significant advancement
 in the rights of a defendant.
 Through mid-1982, Thai human rights activists continued to
 express concern for approximately 100 prisoners who'were
 sentenced to jail during period 1975 - 1978 on criminal
 charges. Under laws in force at that time, they were given
 summary justice without a trial or counsel.. Amnesty
 international's report for 1981 also took note of this
 situation. Thailand's Justice Minister told the press in
 October 1982 that the special committee he chairs was continuing
 its review to establish which prisoners would be freed. He said
 that more than half of the 200 people originally arrested have
 already been released. Amnesty International in its 1982 Report
 stated its concern with the use of detention without trial for
 political offenses. Amnesty also took note of the
 recommendation of the special committee in November that the
 remaining prisoners should be pardoned.
 There is no evidence of clandestine imprisonment. The Thai have
 an evidentiary legal system, although not a jury system. Cases
 are heard on the basis of specific -- usually well documented --
 charges which must be brought within a limited time period.
 Military courts have jurisdiction over cases involving internal
 and external national security, Thai relations with other
 nations, and offenses against the royal family and public
 peace. Cases involving sexual offenses and crimes constituting
 a public danger or a threat to the life, limb, or property have
 been handled in the civilian courts since 1980.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights including the right to counsel, but
 a decision by the military court is final, whereas a decision by
 a civilian court can be appealed to a higher court.
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Thai law requires that police possess a search warrant prior to
 entering an owner's home without his consent. Depending on the
 nature of the offense, these warrants are issued either by the
 public prosecutor, the courts, commissioned police officers,
 
 
 814
 district and military officers, or governors. There have been
 allegations that most officers endorse warrants in advance and
 then allow their subordinates (non-commissioned officials) to
 apply them as needed. Sections of the Anti-Communist Act allow
 searches without warrants when officials are involved in
 specifically designated "communist suppression operations."
 These powers appear to have been used sparingly, however.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Basic freedoms and rights are affirmed in the Constitution
 of 1978. In practice, Thai citizens enjoy substantial
 freedom of speech, and criticism of government policies is
 permitted. There are restrictions against insulting the
 monarchy or advocating a communist system of government. The
 Thai press is privately owned, open, and often critical of the
 Government, but operates under the restrictions imposed by the
 Press Law of 1941 and the Martial Law Order 42. These laws
 allow the Government to close newspapers and revoke the licenses
 of editors of newspapers which publish stories deemed to be
 libelous or contrary to national security interests.
 Continuing a positive trend, in 1982 there were few closings of
 newspapers or magazines for violating provisions of these laws.
 In April 1982 the daily newspapers "Matuphum" and "Mathum" were
 shut down for a brief period after they printed articles
 satirizing the royal guard. During the summer, "Kho Chaturat,"
 a political weekly magazine, and "Nakhomthai," a tiny daily
 newspaper, were temporarily closed.
 For the most part, the domestic press in Thailand continues
 to be open and candid and the Government's relations with
 domestic media have been generally good. Awareness of
 governmental powers over the press does act as a restraint on
 local press activities and on groups lobbying for a lifting of
 Martial Law Order 42.
 The Government regulates television coverage of international
 news, requiring that satellite news broadcasts be prescreened.
 International publications circulate freely in Thailand.
 Early in 1.982 the Thai Government banned the sale and
 distribution of the "Asian Wall Street Journal" for two months
 after the newspaper published an article speculating on the
 monarchy's future. In July one of the "Asian Wall Street
 Journal's" Bangkok-based correspondents was expelled for two
 months for writing an article on the Thai-run "austere" camps
 for Vietnamese refugees. Despito theseincidents and other
 frictions, the Thai Government has not restricted the activities
 of the more than 100 foreign journalists based in Bangkok. It
 has adopted a new policy, however, of issuing visas to
 journalists valid for only six months rather than one year.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Martial Law Order 4 remains nominally in effect, prohibiting
 political gatherings of five or more persons. Since 1979,
 however, organized labor, politicians, and various special
 interest groups have held sizeable rallies without significant
 interference from the authorities.
 The Prem Government has maintained a moderate policy toward
 organized labor and generally has not restricted the development
 of the labor movement or labor's participation in political
 
 
 815
 activities, but less than ten percent of the labor force in
 non-agrarian occupations is unionized. In 1982 Thailand's
 largest labor congresses began taking a more active role in Thai
 politics and several labor figures founded the Labor Democratic
 Party, as yet a minor party, to promote labor interests through
 electoral politics. Unions in the private sector as well as
 some state enterprises have the right to strike if negotiations
 in accordance with Thai labor laws fail to resolve the dispute.
 In practice, the Government has rarely acted even when the
 negotiating requirements of the cumbersome Labor Law have been
 ignored. Workers are represented on the Government wage
 committee, on the National Labor Advisory Board, and on the
 labor courts, which arbitrate labor dispute and grievances.
 Unions have the right to maintain relations with international
 organizations that promote the interests of labor.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is permitted throughout Thailand and is
 protected by law and custom of long standing. Theravada
 Buddhism is the state religion and the King is required to
 profess the Buddhist faith. About 80 percent of the Thai
 practice Buddhism. Thailand nevertheless is a secular society
 and there is a clear-cut separation between state and church.
 There are no restrictons on religious ceremonies or the teaching
 of religion nor is conversion from one religion to another
 prohibited. There is no discrimination against or persecution
 of those affiliated with minority religions such as Christianity
 or Islam. The Government has taken pains to demonstrate to the
 Muslim communities, which are thO majority in Thailand's
 southern provinces, that the Government will provide support for
 Islamic institutions such as Koranic civil law. There is no
 special advantage in being Buddhist in Thailand, though the vast
 preponderance of senior Thai officials and political leaders are
 at least nominally Buddhist.
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from long-standing restrictions on the travel of
 Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, the only limitations of
 travel are restrictions on entry into certain rural areas
 believed by the Government to be used as bases by communist
 insurgents. There are no restrictions on foreign travel or
 emigration. Citizenship   revocation is rare and there have been
 no more than a handful of such cases in recent years. Thailand
 is the first-asylum country most affected by the refugee exodus
 from Indochina. Since 1975 almost 600,000 persons from Vietnam,
 Laos, and Cambodia have fled to Thailand. They include 94,000
 Vietnamese, 210,000 Khmer, and 272,000 Lao. About 400,000 have
 so far been resettled in third countries. As of late 1.982 some
 170,000 refugees remained in camps in Thailand. The Thai
 Government has not permitted permanent resettlement of these
 people in Thailand. About 50,000 Vietnamese with alien status
 from the French-Indochina war remain in Thai villages and towns,
 primarily in the northeast. Although no large-scale forcible
 repatriation has taken place since 1979, local Thai authorities
 forced 350 Hill tribes people to return to Laos involuntarily in
 June 1981. Local authorities in the coastal provinces have also
 recently pushed off boats of refugees from Vietnam.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has so
 far not succeeded in negotiating a program of voluntary
 repatriation for Khmer refugees with the Phnom Penh
 authorities. The Government has continued to assist Khmer
 voluntarily relocating from camps in Thailand to the border
 
 
 816
 concentrations. Since mid-1980, of the 165,000 Khmer who
 entered Thai camps in late 1979 and early 1980, about 39,000
 have relocated to the border.
 A formal UNHCR repatriation agreement with Laos in late 1980 has
 resulted in the return so far of about 1,700 lowland and
 highland Lao with UNHCR assistance. Since mid-1979, Thailand
 has permitted a number of self-administered Cambodian population
 concentrations to exist along the border, some entirely or
 partially in Thailand. The population has fallen from about one
 half million in mid-1980 to about 220,000 in late 1982.
 Thailand has facilitated provision of food and medical care by
 international and voluntary agencies to the border
 concentrations.
 Since February 1980, the Thai Government has refused to allow
 any new Khmer arrivals to enter Thailand. In May 1981, this
 policy was extended to bar admittance of Vietnamese who crossed
 Cambodia overland seeking refuge in Thailand. By December 1982,
 more than 2,400 Vietnamese refugees were held in camps with poor
 sanitary conditions along the Thai-Cambodian border. By the end
 of the year, however, the RTG agreed to allow many of those
 refugees to be proposed for third-country resettlement.
 Processing began in early January.
 During 1981, the Thai Government imposed strict new measures on
 lowland Lao and Vietnamese refugee arrivals in hopes of
 deterring potential refugees from seeking asylum in Thailand.
 Lowland Lao refugees who arrived after January 1, 1981 and
 Vietnamese boat refugee who arrived after August 15, 1981 are
 housed in 'austere' camps and prohibited from applying for
 third-country resettlement. This 'humane deterrence' policy
 continued during 1982.
 e.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Since 1932 Thai politics have been dominated by military
 leaders. The present cabinet has a majority of civilians,
 although Prime Minister Prem was an active duty general when he
 came to power through constitutional means in February 1980
 after the resignation of General Kriangsak. Prem was selected
 by the National Legislative Assembly.
 The Thai political system is relatively open. Citizens
 participate in active opposition parties. Opposing views are
 presented both within the National Legislative Assembly and
 through the mass media. The Communist Party of Thailand is the
 only political party which is outlawed. The most recent
 national elections were held in April 1979 to elect the members
 of the lower house of the National Legislative Assembly. All
 political parties, were allowed to participate except the
 Communist Party. The elections were generally considered fair
 and open. National elections are scheduled to take place in
 April 1983. The great majority of Thai, both men and women,
 have the right to vote: there are constitutional requirements
 which in certain cases prevent the Thai children of alien
 parents from voting.
 Women have equal rights under the law in Thailand and are well
 represented in the labor force. Women fully participate in the
 political process, but are under-represented at the political
 leadership level as well as in some professional fields, top
 management, and high government positions.
 
 
 817
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 In the past year the Thai Government has permitted international
 groups to investigate prison conditions and the Government has
 responded to specific inquiries from Amnesty International, the
 International Commission of Jurists, and the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
 Local civil rights groups are active. The Lawyer's Association
 of Thailand has played a leading role in opposing the martial
 law restrictions on civil liberties which remain in effect. The
 Coordinating Group for Religion in Society has been particularly
 active in drawing attention to abuses of authority by rural
 officials. The Union for Civil Liberty has also been active in
 bringing to public view alleged human rights violations. The
 Federation of Journalists of Thailand has campaigned openly to
 have the legal restrictions on the press lifted. The Justice
 and Peace Commission seeks to make the rural population aware of
 its legal rights.
 During the past year, domestic groups interested in human rights
 have not been obstructed by the Government in their
 investigations. Neither the national police system operating
 under the Ministry of Interior nor the internal security
 operations command, which directs the anti-insurgency operations
 in rural areas, interferes with human rights efforts, except in
 instances where their anti-communist or anti-insurgency mandates
 are believed paramount. In August 1982 the Thai Government,
 which had previously refused to do so, permitted the
 registration of the Union for Civil Liberty. This was viewed as
 evidence of improved official support for groups concerned with
 human rights.
 Thai representatives were among the founding members of the
 Asian Council on Fundamental Human Rights, a forum for the
 exchange of human rights information established in February
 1982. The Asian Council is now drafting a declaration on human
 rights. Ultimately it aspires to emulate the European Council
 on Human Rights.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The Thai economy has maintained an impressive growth record. In
 1981, output expanded in real terms by more than seven percent.
 Agriculture, the leading sector, grew by 6.9 percent with
 production gains in all major crops except cassava. The
 manufacturing sector benefited from the country's strong
 agricultural performance and output increased by eight percent.
 While the country's rapid growth has benefited all memlbrs of
 the society, the increased wealth tended to be concentrated in
 Bangkok and surrounding areas.
 There is little overt sexual or racial discrimination, with some
 women reaching the top of both the civil service and business,
 and the large Sino-Thai minority rapidly integrating into Thai
 society while playing a dominant role in the private business
 sector. Problems continue to exist with laws reserving certain
 jobs, mainly at the unskilled and semi-skilled level, to Thai
 citizens. These laws have their greatest effect on Vietnamese
 refugees from the French-Indochina War period, a majority of
 whom live in northeast Thailand.
 The right to own property, alone as well as in association with
 others, is protected under Thai law. In practice, large
 
 
 818
 government-owned corporations in areas such as cement and road
 transportation, as well as government-granted oligopolistic
 industries such as brewing, place some limits on the private
 sector's ability to compete in all areas of the Thai economy.
 The delivery of health care services is 80 percent vested in the
 private sector. According to the latest available statistics
 (1975), Bangkok had one doctor per 1,549 people while the ratio
 for the country as a whole was one to 8,366. The Government has
 tried to overcome the centripetal movement by requiring
 newly-licensed doctors to practice in government-operated
 provincial hospitals for two to three years before entering
 private practice. In spite of this problem, the overall level
 of health has improved with life expectancy increasing from 50.8
 years in 1960 to 57.1 in 1.970 and 62.5 in 1980. Birth control
 services are widespread and wel -accepted with the result that
 the population growth rate has declined from higher than three
 percent in the 1960s to two percent in 1980. As a result of
 government efforts, the general health condition of women and
 young children, especially in rural areas, has improved
 significantly.
 Thailand is one of the world's five major grain-exporting
 countries. There is almost no evidence of caloric intake
 deprivation. Poor nutritional habits, however, often the result
 of ignorance, affect a small but significant percentage of the
 population.
 Rapidly declining birth rates should prove to be a major benefit
 in helping the Government to reverse a slight decline in the
 percentage of children attending elementary school and advance
 its goal of universal education through the fourth grade.
 Primary school enrollment declined from 83 percent in 1960 to 82
 percent in 1979. The ratio of boys attending school (85
 percent) to girls (78 percent) suggests a bias within the
 society.
 The income disparity between the rich and the poor, especially
 between Bangkok and the rural areas, is the major socioeconomic
 problem in Thailand. While the stated policy of the Royal Thai
 Government is to improve income distribution, some argue that
 its fiscal policies in part work against this goal.
 At current prices, per capita income in Thailand in 1980 was
 $698 with a per capita income in Bangkok of $2,077. In the
 northeast, the poorest section of Thailand, per capita income
 reached only $284 while in Nakhon Phanom, the poorest province
 in Thailand, per capita income stood at $225 or 10.6 percent of
 the level in Bangkok. For the country as a whole, excluding
 Bangkok, per capita income in 1980 was $532 or 25 percent of
 that of Bangkok.
 These income disparities are increasing. Between 1976 and 1980,
 per capita real income in Bangkok grew at an annual rate of six
 percent while that of the rest of the Kingdom grew at only a 2.7
 percent rate.
 
 
 819
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS -MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1980     1981     1982
 I.CGON. ASSIST.-ToTAL...,        29.6     30.8     35.9
 LOANS ..............         5.8     12.2     17.7
 GRANTS............        23.8     18.6     18.2
 A.AID ...................      26.0'    26.2     31.2
 LOANS ............... 5.8           12.2     17.7
 GRANTS .   ............     20.2     14.0     13.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...          2.0      2.0      5.0
 5.FOO FOR PEACE .......         0.3      0.0      0.0
 LJANS.............         C.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL                    0......0...  O.0  0.0  0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Ii-TJTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV I WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,,...          0.0      n.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          3.6      4.6      4.7
 LOAN5.0..........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 4RANTS ................     3.6     .4.6      4.7
 PEACE  CORDS.. ,* .       1.7       2.1      2.3
 NARCOTICS .......         1.9       2.5      2.4
 OTHER .............     O.C        0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         37.4     54.6     80.7
 LOANS ..............    ....36.0     53.4     74.7
 GRANTS ..............       1.4      1.2      6.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ....0.....         0.6      0.4,     4.5
 S.CREDIT SAL!S-FMS..,          36.0     53.4     74.7
 C.INTL ML.Ec.TRNG ....         0.3      0.8      1.5
 U.TRAN-tX(!SS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0.
 e.OTHNR GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & 4iL ..         67.0     5.4    116.6
 LOANS ............     .... 41.3     65.6     92.4
 GRANTS.............         25.2     19.a     24.2
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        73.4 "    4.3     24.4
 EX-IM SANK LOANS .......         1.?      4.3     24.4
 ALL OTHER ..............      1.7        0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM :NTERNAT:ONAL A;ENCIES
 1930     19h1     1932     1946-82
 TOTAL ........   729.7     507.5    7.11.1  4295.7
 16RD             555.0     307.9    474.0   2-32.0
 lFC                0.5      27.6      0.0    111,Z
 IuA                0.0       0.0      0.0    1Z4.8
 1D                 0.0       0.'      C.0      0.0
 ADS              164.3     170.0    222.4   1070.1
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      :.0      0.0
 UNaP                9.4      2.9      0.0      61.8
 OTHER-UN           .0       0.0     14.7     45.8
 tL                0.0       3.u      0.0      0.0
 
 
 820
