 THAILAND
 Thailand is a constitutional monarchy with an elected, democratic government.
 The country's history has been marked by frequent military coups and powerful
 military-bureaucratic influence over political life. The King exerts strong informal
 influence,
 Until elections were held in March, the National Peacekeeping Council (NPKC),
 installed by the military after the 1991 coup, retained control of the Government.
 The NPKC acted through a caretaker Government under Prime Minister Anan
 Panyarachun, who was able to exercise some independence from the Council.
 Parties that supported the militar formed a coalition Government following the
 March elections which were held under a new Constitution drawn up under NPKC
 auspices. Unable to agree on a Prime Minister, the coalition turned to General
 Suchinda Khaprayun, who had masterminded the 1991 coup, although he was not
 an elected Member of Parliament (M.P.) and had stated he woul- not serve as
 Prime Minister.
 The naming of Suchinda led to prodemocracy protests In May, which were sup-
 pressed by the military on the orders of the Supreme Military Commander with the
 knowledge and consent of Prime Minister Suchinda. Excessive use of force by the
 military led to at least 52 deaths. In addition, a nongovernmental organization
 (NGO) reported that nearly 200 protesters remained missing at year's end. In a rare
 case of direct intervention the King called in both sides to resolve their differences
 peacefully. Suchinda was forced to resign on May 24, and Anan again formed a care-
 taker government.
 New elections, held on September 13 and probably the freest and fairest in Thai-
 land's history, gave power to an opposition coalition under civilian Prime Minister
 Chuan Likphai, which took office on October 1. The Chuan administration has made
 clear its strong commitment to upholding democratic rights. It has presented Par-
 liament with specific proposals to extend the benefits of the nation's robust economic
 growth to all areas of the countr.
 Thai security services have wide-ran  legal powers, largely deriving from past
 military administrations. However fo owing the May events the summary legal
 power assumed by the NPKC has been abrogated, the military leaders at the fore-
 front of the crackdown have been moved to inactive positions, and crowd control au-
 thority has been moved from the military to the police. There were again credible
 reports of summary executions and physical abuse of detainees by police officers.
 Prosecutions in such cases are infrequent and convictions rare.
 Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Con-
 trol and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were $1,843,000,000.
 It is anticipated that moderate real growth in defense spending will continue in the
 near term. Military expenditures for 1992 are expected to represent less than 3 per-
 cent of the gross national product.
 A middle-income developing country with a free enterprise economic system, Thai-
 land continued to en~oy remarkable economic growth, among the highest in the
 world. The Thai political system generally provides strong protection Ior individual
 economic interests, including property rights. While the industrial sector is expand-
 ing, the majority of the people live in rural areas where agriculture is the chief
 source of livelihood. The Chuan Government has made improvement in rural in-
 comes one of its top priorities and included rural development projects in its budget
 bill to the Parliament.
 With the recent restoration of democratic rule, Thai citizens enjoyed a wide range
 of civil liberties under one of the most open and progressive governments in Thai
 history. Freedom of the media was expanded when the second Anan administration
 authorized in September the establishment of two privately owned television chan-
 
 
 nels, which will join the five channels under government control. Areas of human
 rights abuse in 1992 included instances of extrajudicial killing of criminal suspects
 and abuse of prisoners by police and government failure to prosecute offenders; legal
 and societal discrimination against women; violence (including trafficking for pur-
 poses of prostitution) against women and children, widespread child labor, and some
 restrictions on freedoms of speech and press.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Induding Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Eatrojudicial Kilng.-There continued to be credible re-
 ports that police sometimes summarily executed criminal suspects, particularl in
 areas outside the capital with high crime rates. Some officials assigned to these
 areas acknowledge the practice, which they appear to regard as an unexceptionable
 method of dealing with alleged habitual criminals. Credible reports indicate that
 convicting police or summary executions is difficult, as evidence is often fabricated
 and witnesses are intimidated or paid not to testify. Official statistics on the num-
 ber of criminals and suspects killed by police in 1992 were unavailable. One reliable
 nongovernmental source with access to court records put the number killed in the
 northeastern region alone at approximately 30 for the first half of the year.
 The law allows personal suits against police officers for actions taken while mak-
 ing arrests. However, due to flaws in the legal process, the threat of being sued does
 not act as a deterrent. Prosecutors usually defend the accused officers and
 rubberstamp police investigations that declare no wrongful death occurred. Judges
 generally follow the prosecutors' recommendations. A blood relative of the deceased
 can then sue, but the prosecution is handled by the same office-in some instances
 by the same prosecutor-that has already determined that no wrongful death oc-
 curred. Such procedures rarely result in the officer involved being punished.
 Of the two cases involving Burmese students of concern to the U.N. High Com-
 missioner for Refugees (UNHCR) allegedly killed by Thai police in 1991, one was
 still pending at year's end after the court honored a UNHCR request for postpone-
 ment. The other case involved allegations that Thai police had killed a student
 whose body was found along the border in Kanchanaburi province on November 4
 1991. In 1992, after den  the UNHCR's request to assist in the investigation and
 despite evidence presented by the UNHCR to the contrary, the commission assigned
 to investigate the charges reported that the victim was not killed on Thai soil and
 dropped the case.
 Killings remained a feature of election campaigns in 1992. Hired gunmen killed
 over 50 vote canvassers during the March and September election campaigns. Police
 and Interior Ministry officials generally deny these murders were politically moti-
 vated, but informed observers believe that a majority of the canvassers' deaths oc-
 curred either because they were too successful at garnering votes, or they took
 money from more than one party and their duplicity was discovered, or they failed
 to deliver the number of promised votes.
 The Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO), a Muslim separatist group
 claimed responsibility for a bombing in a train station in the southern commercial
 hub of Hat Yai on August 13, which killed three people and wounded dozens more.
 Two weeks later, police issued warrants for the arrest of four members of the group.
 b. Disappearance.-Initial estimates of those missing following the suppresion of
 the May prodemocracy demonstrations ranged as high as 1,209. At year's end nearly
 200 were still missing according to NGO figures. NGO's, the Ministry of the Inte-
 rior, and police officials have cooperated since May to account for the missing. A
 parliamentary subcommittee devoted entirely to investigating missing persons ex-
 amined several locations purported to be mass grave sites without finding anything.
 The subcommittee has been generally credited with hai  conducted an impartial
 investigation. NGO's remained active at year's end in developing files on those per-
 sons still missing in the hopes of being able to determine their fates.
 One prominent case of disappearance, that of labor leader Thanong Po-An, re-
 mained unresolved as of October. A government-appointed committee reported on
 August 31 that a thorough investigation had found no evidence that Thanong was
 still alive but offered no further explanations. Thanong, President of the Labor Con-
 gress of Thailand, disappeared shortly after the 1991 coup.
 In an April incident at the Site Eight displaced persons' camp, eight Cambodian
 residents suspected of violent crimes in the camps and in neighboring Thai villages
 were turned over to local Thai police by the Thai Displaced Persons Protection Unit
 (DPPU) and subsequently disappeared. The UNHCR and the DPPU both have re-
 quested an accounting of the eight prisoners from Thai police officials, which had
 not been provided by year's end.
 
 
 661
 c. Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Althouph Thailand's Criminal Code forbids cruel Inhuman, or degradino treatment
 or punishment there continue to be many credible reports of police beatings of pris-
 oners and detainees. The Government has done little to address the problem.
 International observers note that conditions at the Suan Phlu Immigration Deten.
 tion Center constitute cruel and unusual punishment; with extreme overcrowding
 and lack of medical care. Detainees are also held for extended periods without being
 allowed to leave their cells or exercise.
 Government treatment of Cambodian displaced persons in camps along the Thai-
 Cambodian border, a subject of concern in previous years, was good in 1992. Thai-
 land has earned widespread international recognition for serving as a first asylum
 country for more than a million Indochinese refugees during the past 17 years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Ezile.-Thailand's Criminal and Penal Codes are
 based largely on Western European models. Except in cases of crimes in progress,
 arrest warrants are gene      required but are issued by the police rather than the
 courts. Specific charges mus be brought against detainees within 48 hours, but po-
 lice have the authority to extend the period to 7 days if required to complete an
 investigation. Detainees do not have the right to have their lawyers present during
 questioning.
 There is a functioning bail system, but there have been unsubstantiated reports
 that police have refused to allow detained persons to contact relatives after arrest,
 thus effectively denying them baiL The only legal basis for detention without ske-
 cific charges for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act.
 No one has been detained under the Act's provisions since 1984.
 In what many legal authorities say was an unconstitutional act, police arrested
 one of the leaders of the May prodemocracy demonstrations, M.P. Chamlong
 Simuang. He was arrested while Parliament was in session, without the parliamen-
 tary consent stipulated in the constitution in effect at the time.
 During the May 17-20 protests, the military and police forces took into custody
 and detained over 3,500 people, including onlookers and some 500 children. Wit-
 nesses reported that many were initially treated very roughly, including beatings.
 Almost all of the detainees were released within 1 or 2 days, and very few were
 actually charged.
 On May 23., the Government granted amnesty to protesters and troops who may
 have committed illegal actions during the 4-day protest period. On October 8, the
 newly elected Parliament voted overwhelmingly to reject the amnesty decree, but on
 November 9 the Constitutional Tribunal ruled that the amnesty would remain in
 effect nonetheless. At years end, NGO attorneys planned to assist relatives of the
 May victims in bringing suit against the military despite the ruling.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trid.-The Thai legal system provides for the presump-
 tion of innocence and access to courts or administrative bodies to seek redress. The
 civilian judicial system includes three levels of courts: courts of first instance, courts
 of appeal, and the Supreme Court. A separate military court system tries cases in
 which the accused are military personnel, cases involving threats to the royal far-
 fly, and security-related cases brought to trial during periods of martial law. Ordi-
 nary courts may be designated to sit as military courts for the purpose of hearing
 such cases, the last of which was the so-called  asa  on case in 1991 (see Section
 2.b.). A serious flaw in providing due process rights is the lack of appeal from deci-
 sions of a military court. Separate Islamic courts are permitted to hear certain civil
 cases involving members of the country's Muslim minority.
 Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a single judge, or by at least two judges
 in more serious cases, in courts of first instance, and by a panel of judges at the
 appellate level. The courts have been relatively independent of external pressures.
 While most trials are public, the court may order a trial be closed. This is most often
 done in cases touching on religious sensitivities, foreign policy matters, or the royal
 family. Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal
 rights. Although they have no right to counsel during the investigative phase of
 their cases, detainees are granted access to a lawyer of their own choosing before
 and during the trial. A government program provides free legal advice to the poor,
 but indigent defendants are not automatically provided with counsel at public ex-
 anse. Moat free legal aid comes from private groups, including the Thai Lawyers'
 Asiation and thehai Women Lawyers' Association.
 Court proceedings continued in the cases of four persons, described officially as
 political prisoners, who were arrested in Pattani in 1990.
 The trial of 14 members of a self-styled "revolutionary council3 arrested in 1989
 on charges of sedition ended in the acquittal of all defendants in 1992.
 The trials of two former members of the outlawed Communist Party of Thailand
 indicted in 1991 on charges of having joined in a 1982 plot to assassinate the
 
 
 662
 Queen, the Prime Minister and the army commander continued. The attorney de-
 fending the two resigned after his request for a copy of witness statements was de-
 nied on grounds that the hearings were 'closed door.' There has been no further
 action taken in the case against former Chatchai government minister Chaloem
 Yubamrung alleging he paid the two defendants to lie about the case. He remains
 free on bail and won a seat in the September 13 parliamentary elections.
 Of the 25 former officials of the Chatchai government found guilty of being 'un-
 usually wealthy by an NPKC-appointed committee in 1991, 15 had been acquitted
 by March. The remaining cases were being appealed to the Supreme Court at year's
 end.
 A struggle between the Judiciary Commission and the Justice Minister, begun in
 1991 over the appointment of the Supreme Court President, continued until Prime
 Minister Anan attempted to solve the problem by using an emergency decree to
 form a new commission. The new Parliament rejected the widely criticized decree
 in October, and the Judiciary Commission's candidate was approved in early Decem-
 ber.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires that police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home without the
 owner's consent. However, search warrants are issued by the police and are not sub-
 ject to prior judicial review. There have been credible reports that officers some-
 times endorse warrants in advance and then allow their noncommissioned subordi-
 nates to apply them as needed. The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials
 engaged in "Communist suppression operations" to conduct searches without war-
 rants but these powers rarely have been invoked in recent years and were not in-
 voked in 1992.
 Thai society is essentially an open and tolerant one where membership in political
 organizations is voluntary, and the unmonitored exchange of ideas is generally eer-
 mtted. In recent years, however, it has been widely assumed that security services
 engage in surreptitious monitoring of persons espousing leftist or controversial
 views. During the May demonstrations, credible sources reported a significantly
 stepped up monitoring effort aimed at those suspected of harboring views in opposi-
 tion to the military leadership.
 In July the caretaker Government scrapped a reforestation project launched by
 the military in 1991 which called for large scale forced resettlement of farm families
 all over the country. The abrogation of the resettlement plan did not immediatel
 solve the problem of some affected villagers. In late September, many who had a-
 ready been evicted complained that they could not return to their original villages
 as provided for in the July 3 Cabinet resolution because people from other villages
 had occupied their property while they were away.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres-While Thai citizens generally enjoy a substan-
 tial measure of freedom of speech, several laws place limits on this freedom. The
 principal legal restrictions are prohibitions on defaming, insulting, or threatening
 the king, queen, heir apparent, or regent (lese meste); defaming the character of
 other persons; advocating a Commumst system o government; and speaking in a
 manner likely to incite disturbances, threaten national security, or insult religion.
 In addition to the four Shiite Muslims charged with lese majeste in 1990 (see Sec-
 tion 1.e.), the office of the Supreme Attorney in August ordered social critic and aca-
 demic Sulak Sivaraksa to be prosecuted on the same charge. Sulak remained
 abroad, where he fled following the issuance of a warrant for his arrest in 1991,
 until his voluntary return in mid-December. In the only case involving charges of
 lese majeste in 1992, a Canadian citizen was arrested in a Bangkok restaurant in
 March for allegedly making disparag'ng remarks about a member of the royal fam-
 ily. Police detained the accused without bail until November, then released her
 when the charge was dropped.
 Thai governments generally permit criticism of their policies. Though prominent
 critics have on occasion been targets of violence by mysterious assailants, no such
 incidents occurred in 1992. The privately owned press practices self-censorship. It
 is particularly cautious about criticism of the monarchy and, to a lesser degree, the
 military and the Buddhist hierarchy.
 In early 1992, a furor erupted in the press over changes to the Civil and Commer-
 cial Codes which would have resulted in a minimum fine of $160,000 for conviction
 in a defamation case.
 The Government admitted the new law was a mistake and withdrew it.
 There were several attempts, at time successful, sharply to curtail freedom of the
 press during the May protests. All newspapers were prohibited from printing dlcu-
 ments thmstenini national Recurity or disturbine oublic law and order. The Eng-
 
 
 663
 lish-language daily Bangkok Post went to press with large blank spaces in place of
 articles and editorials that its editors said could be deemed to violate the order. On
 May 20, police personnel censored the front page of the International Herald Trib-
 une before it was distributed, using a felt-tipped pen on every copy to black out an
 article critical of the military's involvement in the Thai economy, while leaving in.
 tact two other items pertaining directly to the demonstrations.
 The order was largely ignored by the other English language paper, The Nation,
 and by two Thai-language dailies, Manager and Forefront. As a result, the police
 Director General on May 21 signed an order closing the papers, only to rescind the
 order a few hours later. By May 22, the print media had resumed normal coverage.
 In the ast, there have been a number of cases of journalists being murdered, par-
 ticularly in rural areas either to suppress or to retaliate for their reporting. Such
 killings appear to have become less frequent in recent years, and there were no such
 cases in 1992. However, during the may vialence, 31 reporters working for both
 Thai and English language newspapers were injured, some seriously, by soldiers or
 police.
 Thai governments have maintained significantly tighter control over the electronic
 media than they have over the press. Radio stations are government licensed and
 operated by government, military, and private entities as commercial enterprises.
 They are required to broadcast government-produced newscasts four times daily and
 a military-produced commentary once a day, but are free to originate other news
 and commentary.
 In September the Government authorized the establishment of two new, jprivately
 owned television channels in what was seen as an important expansion of freedom
 of the press. Of the existing five national television channels, two are run by the
 army and three by the Government. News coverage on these stations is sometimes
 biased, and programming about controversial subjects and persons continues to be
 barred or subject to censorship.
 By all accounts, freedom of the press for the broadcast media reached its nadir
 during the May events. All five television channels were severely criticized by the
 public for presenting only the Government's view of events as they unfolded. Some
 said that the media actually worsened the situation at the scene of the violence be-
 cause coverage was so obviously one-sided that many people went there just to see
 for themselves what was happening. Radio coverage during the disturbances was
 equally poor. Local stations failed to provide unbiased coverage of the events, while
 one station set up solely to provide traffic information turned into another propa-
 ganda channel for the Government.
 Representatives of the Thai film industry complain with justification that the film
 censorship board, composed largely of police officers, regularly deletes all references
 in films to a number of topics deemed politically sensitive. Among the topics sub-
 jected to such censorship are police corruption, misconduct by members of the Bud-
 dhist clergy, and the 1973 student uprising.
 Thai domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and so-
 cial commentary in 1992. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign
 and domestic books normally are not censored and are permitted to circulate freely.
 The 1941 Press Law empowers the police Director General to prohibit the import
 of printed matter deemed dangerous to public order and morals. The police director
 publishes a list of books barred from import in the "Royal Gazette" each year. While
 the list mainly consists of literature widely regarded as pornorphic, it also con-
 tains books which have been banned for many years because they were written by
 Communist authors. The Government imposed no new permanent or temporary
 bans on the import of foreign publications during 1992, and the last case of a foreign
 publication being barred from import occurred in 1989. Academic and technical lit-
 erature continued to circulate freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-While the Thai legal system
 generally recognizes the right to peaceful assembly, in practice government officials
 at times act to restrict this right. Official intolerance of public demonstrations ap-
 pears highest in rural areas, particularly in the northeast of the country. Residents
 of these areas who stage peaceful public protests are sometimes charged under the
 Penal Code with inciting unrest and assembly of 10 or more persons with intent to
 commit violence. There were three such cases in 1991 and one in 1992.
 On May 17-20, military forces, under a 'destroy the enemy" order issued by the
 Supreme Commander of the armed forces with the knowledge and consent of Prime
 Minister Suchinda, used excessive force to suppress prodemocracy demonstrations
 in Bangkok which involved about 100,000 demonstrators. At least 52 demonstrators
 were killed and over 700 injured in the indiscriminate use of force by the military,
 which included unprovoked beatings of demonstrators and others. At year's end
 nearly 200 remained missing, according to NGO figures. Over 3,500 were arrested
 
 
 664
 for violating an emergency ban on 'abnormal' gatherings of over 10 people, though
 they were soon released under an amnesty that applied both to demonstrators and
 security forces.
 After a series of peaceful demonstrations, violence flared when demonstrators
 started throwing rocks after police turned water cannon on them, and subsequently
 guickly escalated. Unconfirmed reports immediately after the event stated that
 agents provocateurs" had been planted among the demonstrators to provoke vio-
 lence.
 In an impartial report, a government commission investigating the tragedy,
 placed blame on both sides. To prevent a recurrence of such excessive use of force,
 Prime Minister Anan, installed after the violence, removed authority for crowd con-
 trol from the military and placed it in the hands of the police. His administration
 also recommended the police train special units for crowd control. In November the
 Chuan administration followed up by passing two related bills through the House-
 one requiring the Defense Ministry to seek Cabinet consent before using troops to
 suppress public unrest, the other abrogating the Internal Peacekeeping Directorate
 Act of 1976. At year's end the Senate, approximately 80 percent of which was in-
 stalled by the NPKC in 1991, had appointed a committee to study for 30 days the
 measure revoking the peacekeeping act, effectively delaying its passage until Par-
 liament reopens in May 1993.
 The Government has not interfered with peaceful public gatherings subsequent to
 the May violence. Permits are not required for meetings or gatherings, except when
 they are held on public proerty.
 Forty-three residents of Yasothon province, who had been arrested in March 1991
 on several counts including assembly of 10 or more persons with intent to commit
 violence, were released. The leader of the group was later elected to Parliament on
 September 13.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is generally practiced and protected
 by law and custom. The de facto state religion is Theravada Buddhism, but other
 faiths are not restricted. Religious publishing, regardless of faith, is allowed. For-
 eign clergy are permitted to preach freely, although there are limits on the number
 of foreign missionaries admitted.
 There are no restrictions on religious ceremonies or instruction, or on conversions
 from one faith to another, but members of minority religious movements have on
 occasion been subjected to legal action. One example of this has been the two ongo-
 ing trials (begun in 1990) ofPhra Potirak, leader of a dissident Buddhist sect, and
 his followers, who have been accused of violating the law governing the Buddhist
 ecclesiastical hierarchy and impersonating Buddist monks or nuns. Phra Potirak
 and his followers remain free on bail and have continued their religious practices.
 Like other private associations, religious grouLs are generally required to register
 with the Government. Since the 1970 a, in an effort to limit the number of separate
 registrations by Christian denominations, the Government has required most Chris-
 tian church bodies to join one of five umbrella groups. Fixed numbers of work per-
 mits for missionaries and church workers are allocated to each umbrella group.
 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has been applying to the Govern-
 ment unsuccessfully for independent registration for a number of years. Thai offi-
 cials have noted that, because of domestic sensitivities, no new religious denomina-
 tion has been registered since the early 1960's. The officials have suggested that the
 Church join one of the existing umbrella groups if it desires registration. Under a
 longstanding tacit agreement, the Government allowed Mormon missionaries to
 enter the country on tourist visas. In August 1992, the Government accorded the
 Church a quota of 100 visas for its missionaries, along with permission for Mormon
 missionaries to renew their visas in country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, EmiTration, and Re-
 patriation.-Longstanding restrictions on the travel and place of residence of certain
 Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand remained in place in 1992. The
 right of citizens to change their residence or workplace was unabridged. Travel was
 restricted in certain border areas where foreign or vestigial domestic insurgent
 groups remain active.
 At the time of the May demonstrations, the Government ordered a ban on foreign
 travel by a total of 17 opposition figures, including current Interior Minister General
 Chawalit Yongchaiyut, current M.P. Major Gen. Chamlong Simuang, and current
 Foreign Minister Prasong Soonsiri. The ban ended when the amnesty decree went
 into effect.
 Passport applications by single Thai women and children under the age of 14
 must be approved by the Department of Public Welfare. In addition, a 1985 statute
 criticized by some women's rights advocates requires that female passport appli-
 cants under age 36 sit throuah a series of interviews regarding their employment
 
 
 665
 records and finances. These provisions are intended to prevent the export of children
 for sale and women for purposes of prostitution.
 The Government has not revoked citizenship for political reasons.
 While not a party to international conventions on the status of refugees, Thailand
 has acted in the spirit of those agreements by providing first asylum to over 1 mil-
 lion people from Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since 1975, including about 350,000
 Cambodian displaced persons in camps along the Thai-Cambodian border. Repatri-
 ation to Cambodia of this population under the auspices of the UNHCR began on
 March 30, 1992. By year's end more than half had been repatriated under UNHCR
 T  land continues to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and Lao asylum seekers
 and to process them in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA)
 agreed to in Geneva in 1989. There were no reports of any pushoffs of Vietnamese
 asylum seekers in 1992. While there were isolated reports of pushebacks of Lao asy-
 lum seekers by Thai government officials in 1992, Lao asylum seekers in Thailand
 continue to be screened under provisions of the CPA to determine their eligibility
 for refugee status. Thailand has announced that all Lao camps are to be closed by
 1995 and continues to cooperate with the UNHCR and Laos in a trilateral program
 to mana   the voluntary repatriation of certain Lao asylum seekers.
 Official. Thai policy since April 1, 1989, has designated Burmese asylum seekers
 in Thailand as illegal immigrants subject to deportation. Nevertheless, few students
 or dissidents have been subject to deportation. In late March, the MOI announced
 that all Burmese students would be required to register for a safe area, an open
 facility in Ratchaburi province to be administered by the Ministry of Interior with
 the assistance of NGO's. Burmese students and dissidents held in detention for ille-
 gal entry were registered and released. Overall, approximatel 600 of the more than
 2,000 asylum seekers "of concern' to the UNHCR registere   for the safe area and
 received cards that provided them protection from arrest for immigration violations.
 The MOI recognized 376 of them as students and 220 as political dissidents- 11
 were rejected. Burmese students strongly oppose plans for a safe area. The Thai
 Government has not announced a formal policy towards nonstudent Burmese politi-
 cal dissidents. The MOI has stated that Burmese students who do not register for
 the safe area will be subject to detention.
 Approximately 2,500 Burmese students live in camps along the Thai-Burma bor-
 der, along with some 65,000 members of Burmese ethnic minorities. The Thai Gov-
 ernment permitted voluntary agencies to increase their food and medicine assist-
 ance programs along the border in 1992 in response to the influx of 10,000 new ar-
 rivals fleeing fighting in Burma.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citiens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The military, either through undue influence or outright coups, has often denied
 the Thai people the right to change their Government. The year began with a care-
 taker Government installed under military auspices. Procedurally correct elections
 were held in March under a new Constitution, the drafting of which was heavily
 influenced by the military. As noted earlier in this report, prodemocracy Thais took
 to the streets of Bangkok in May to protest continued military influence in the polit-
 ical process, resulting ultimately in another caretaker Government and new, demo-
 cratic elections September 13.
 The military declared it would stand aside in the September elections and hon-
 ored its commitment. The election resulted in a victory for the civilian political par-
 ties that had led the May demonstrations and the formation of a coalition Govern-
 ment under the widely respected Chuan Likphai, leader of the Democrat Party,
 which had the largest numbow of M.P.'s in the new Parliament. While future inter-
 vention in politics by the mitary cannot be ruled out, representative democracy ap-
 pears more secure than herofore.
 Women are underrepreseifted in national politics and high government positions
 but play prominent roles in most other sectors of Thai society. In late December
 1992, the Department of Local Administration formally recommended the abolition
 of civil service commission regulations that bar women from becoming deputy dis-
 trict officers, a key position in Thailand's highly centralized system of local adminis-
 tration. Prime Minister Chuan has also gone on record as supporting this change.
 If this recommendation is approved the change would open the door to women to
 hold more powerful positions, including those of district officer and provincial gov-
 ernor. Female military and police officers are barred from service academies and the
 military command and general staff college, effectively limiting them to the rank of
 colonel or below.
 
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Aleged Violations of Human Rights
 Thai human rights organizations have had some success in specific areas, includ-
 ing pressing the Government to address abuses in child labor practices and in pris-
 ons. Although government officials are generally willing to talk to these groups, it
 is not uncommon for them to encounter official suspicion or even hostility, particu-
 lary when working in rural areas.
 In 1992 local human rights organizations were credited with helping to bring
 about changes in the Constitution, nationality law, acquired immunodeficiency po-
 icy, and the land resettlement project. Their most obvious success was in pressing
 the Government to account for the hundreds of people missing after the May dem-
 onstrations.
 International human rights NGO's have not been impeded from coming to Thai-
 land for their investigations, including of the May demonstrations and the Burmese
 refugee situation.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex; Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress in integrating its minorities, but some
 problems remain. Fewer than half of the estimated 500,000 to 700,000 members of
 hill tribe. are believed to possess documentation as Thai citizens, a lack which pre-
 vents their participation in the political process. Advocates consistently cite the dif-
 ficulties faced by many hill tribe members in obtaining Thai citizenship as the pri-
 mary obstacle to their successful integration into society. In addition, credible
 sources reort many hill tribe members have been subjected to deportation or reset-
 tlement efforts, often without regard to how long they have resided in Thailand.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in four of Thailand's
 southernmost provinces bordering Malaysia. The Government has targeted develop-
 ment efforts and attempted to expand educational opportunities in order to inte-
 grate Thai Muslims into Thai society. However, although there are no de jure re-
 strictions on their participation in the political process, Muslims remain
 underrepresented in the professions, and in higher education, primarily because of
 the effects of lower educational achievement. Some resentment of Muslims has been
 expressed by non-Muslims because of a longstanding government policy waiving col-
 lege entrance exam requirements for Muslim students.
 The community of Vietnms which fled Indchina in the 1940's and 1950's to
 northeastern Thailand lives under a set of laws and regulations restricting its mem-
 bers' movements, residences, education and occupations. Since 1980, these Vietnam-
 ese have even been forbidden to buy new cars. Pme of these restrctions, however,
 are laxly enforced. Those born in Vietnam are not eligible for Thai citizenship under
 Thai law. Although 20,000 to 34,000 Thai-born descendants of this community have
 been eligible for Thai citizenship since 1991, informed sources report local and pro-
 vincial level administrative officials have been slow to implement the new poicy.
 Women genrally have equal legal rights in Thailand, with specific guarantees of
 equality with men in the areas of matrimonial property, the right to choose habi-
 tation and employment, and child custody. There has been a national commission
 on women's affairs since 1991. However, legal inequality remains in the area of di-
 vorce rights. Whereas a man may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife has
 committed adultery, a woman under similar circumstances faces the additional legal
 burden of proving her husband has maintained or honored another woman in a
 manner equal to his wife.
 In an important step' amendments to the Thai Nationality Act of 1965 were
 passd in 1992,extending for the first time Thai nationality to prsons born of Thai
 mothers or fathers whether in Thailand or outside of the kingdom. This removed
 a longstanding bar against the acquisition of Thai nationality at birth to children
 of Thai mothers and non-Thai fathers. However,  eons who obtain Thai national-
 ity at birth, whether in Thailand or abroad and whose fat hers (not mothers) are
 not Thai citizens, must declare their intended nationaity within 1 year of their 20th
 birthday.
 Though no Thai law specifically addresses violence within the faMily, the Crimi-
 nal Code's provisions on assault and abuse make both wife beating and child abuse
 a crime. A report released this year, however, states that 50 percent of Thai women
 living in slums have suffered beatings at the hands of their husbands. Reliable data
 on the overall extent of abune of women and children are not available. However,
 those with extensive experience in the field believe family violence is prevalent
 aross all social classes and the number of such cases  ising. Women's rights
 groups have set up a hotine for victims of wife abuse and shelters for abused
 women and children. While Thai governments have denounced physical abuse of
 bre of proing.o, 1,,,, husband has mitained orp hnore aen iohroanin
 
 
 667
 Thai law provides no means to intervene short of criminal prosecution of the abu-
 sive spouse or parent. Rules of evidence often make prosecuting such cases difficult
 espenally when the victims are children. For a combination of these reasons and
 ingrained cultural attitudes, which tend to be tolerant of male prerogatives, police
 are often reluctant to pursue such cases. Within their limited resouee, private
 women's and children's rights groups provide shelter to victims of abuse who come
 to their attention and ably assist them in pursuing legal action. Laws on rape and
 abandonment also provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 Prostitution is acknowledged within Thailand as one of the country's most trou-
 bling social problems. Estimates of the numbers of women and children engaged in
 prostitution vary widely. While a 1990 Public Health Ministry survey placed the
 number at 86,000, most other sources agree the number exceeds 100,000, and some
 place it as high as 1 million. In 1992 a national physicians group estimated the
 number of child prostitutes under 16 alone to be approximately 800,000.
 Women engaged in prostitution typically come from relatively poor rural areas,
 particularly those in the country's northern region. With scant economic opportuni-
 ties in their home villages, many turn to working as prostitutes in urban areas as
 a way to fulfill their familial obligations as well as to obtain the material fruits of
 industrial society. Procurers often advance the parents of young women a substan-
 tial sum   ainst their future earnings, money that frequently goesto pay off debts
 or to builya new house. The women are then obligated to work in a hrothel for a
 fixed period of time in order to pay back the loan. In public discussions of prostitu-
 tion, parents who accept money under such conditions are often described as having
 .sold 'their daughters for such and such a sum.
 It is not known what percentage of these women are being forced into prostitution
 against their will. Human rights monitors believe that the majorityof the women
 who engage in prostitution are not kept under physical constraint. There are, how-
 ever, numerous cases of women and female children being forced or tricked into
 working as prostitutes and being held as virtual captives by brothel operators. Infor-
 mation from well-informed sources confirmed by police arrest reports also describes
 a disturbing recent trend toward increasing trafficking in women from hill tribe mi-
 norities and neighboring countries. Some brothel operators reportedly, favor such
 women because they may be obtained more cheaply, and their inability to speak
 Thai makes them easier to control.
 There have also been a number of well-documented cases in which local networks
 trafficking in women "exported" prostitutes to such countries as Germany and
 JaDeite occasional high profde raids on brothels, overall, laws against prostitution
 have not been enforced. Senior government officials themselves have cited corrup-
 tion as a major factor in police willingness to turn a blind eye to the problem. Reli-
 able sources report police can earn $1204200 per month in protection fees. Prime
 Minister Chuan in November convoked a large assembly of civil servants, police,
 and the military to impress upon them his determination to end child prostitution
 and exploitation of child labor. A number of proposals to attack the problem are now
 receiving new currency. These include increased rural development as a way of at-
 tacking the poverty which drives women and children into prostitution and extend.
 ing compulsory education from 6 to 9 years.
 Human rights groups see as disturbing a recent trend in which police officers sin-
 gle out "teahouse workers" for AIDS testing even though there is no basis in current
 Thai law for doing so. While activists recognize that AIDS is an urgent problem
 which already affects a significant portion of the Thai population, they argue that
 the action is discriminatory in that it tests the woman who contracted the human
 immunodeficiency virus while on the job but not the man who gave it to her. In
 early 1992, the caretaker Government approved consideration of a bill which would
 have decriminalized prostitution by persons over 18 who underwent regular health
 checkups. Faced with fierce opposition from women's rights groups who wanted to
 see health requirements or" sanctions on male customers and stiffer penalties on
 brothel owners and procurers, and from conservative religious groups, the bill was
 never brought to a vote.
 Women are well represented in the labor force and are becoming increasingly so
 in professional positions, particularly those in the commercial sector. They are not
 barred legally from positions traditionally held by men except for a limited number
 of occupations deemed to pose excessive physicalhazard. Government regulations
 require employers to fix the same wages and benefits for similar work whether the
 worker is male or female. Discriminatory practices persist, however. State-owned
 Thai Airways, for example, requires female flir. ht attndants to retire or accept
 transfer to a ground job at age 45. No such requirement exists or male employees.
 Women continue to be concentrated in traditionally lower paid jobs, and there is a
 
 
 668
 
 significant gap between average salaries earned by men and women, although no
 accurate statistics are available on this gap, which appears to be narrowing In
 rural areas, sexual stereotypes are more pronounced with respect to social roles.
 These barriers are being modified as mass communications bring new role models
 to even the most remote communities.
 In 1992 the Constitution was amended to permit deaf and mute persons to vote
 for the first time in history. Also, after a 10-year effort by Thailand's disabled, the
 Government passed the disabled rehabilitation bill which went into effect in May
 1992. It provides a work quota system under which private companies are given tax
 and other incentives to employ the disabled. After criticism that the newly enfran-
 chised disabled were discriminated against by poll workers during the March elec-
 tions, the Local Administration Department ordered the election division to provide
 aid to disabled voters during the September election.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Thailand's basic labor law is the Labor Relations Act
 of 1975, which now applies only to the private sector. Until April 1991, the Act had
 also applied to workers in state-owned enterprises. As amended, the 1975 Act ex-
 tends to private sector employees only the right to form and join unions or employee
 associations of their own choosing without prior authorization; to decide on the con-
 stitutions and rules of these associations and unions; to express their views without
 government or employer interference; to confederate with other unions; to receive
 protection from discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or termination by any out-
 side authority because of union activities; and to have employee representation in
 direct negotiations with employers. However, no law explicitly protects workers from
 discrimination due to their participation in organizing new unions which have not
 yet been officially registered. The 1975 Act specifically withholds from government
 workers the right to form unions. Nonetheless, civil servants may and do form 'em-
 ployee associations," which are influential in determining salary scales, benefits,
 and conditions of employment.
 In April 1991, the military-appointed National Legislative Assembly amended the
 1975 Act to exempt state enterprise workers, and enacted a State Enterprise Labor
 Relations Act (SELRA), which dissolved unions in this sector. In place of unions,
 workers in each state enterprise may form a single "association" after at least 30
 percent of the enterprise's employees have submitted a petition to the Department
 of Labor to register their association. These bodies may submit employee grievances
 to management and negotiate benefits, but not wages. Associations do not have the
 right to confederate or to join private sector federations. A number of associations
 have maintained the affiliations their predecessor unions had with international
 labor organizations.
 The amended Act, like the 1975 Act, denies all state enterprise workers the right
 to strike. In the past, public sector unions circumvented this prohibition by holding
 .extraordinary meetings" which took workers off the job for days at a time. The
 amended Act requires associations to hold general meetings only on weekends and
 holidays. The law requires that a majority of private sector union members approve
 strikes in a secret ballot. Also, the Department of Labor must now certify advisors
 selected by private unions to represent them, which in practice weakens their ability
 to organize and to bargain collectively.
 In November 1991, the International Labor Organization (ILO) strongly criticized
 the SELRA. The ILO faulted it for dissolving unions, transferring their assets, limit-
 ing the number of associations which may be formed in each state enterprise, set-
 ting unusually high minimum membership requirements for associations, denying
 associations the right to affiliate with private sector unions, and completely forbid-
 ding strikes in state enterprises. The ILO recommended that the Government re-
 scind the law.
 The Chuan administration has promised to amend the SELRA. In December the
 Ministry of the Interior began drafting proposed amendments to it. The Minister
 asked state enterprise labor leaders to propose changes they thought necessary. It
 was not clear what amendments the Ministry would propose or when the Cabinet
 would approve the changes for submission to Parliament.
 With respect to the private sector, under the 1975 Act the Government has the
 authority "to restrict the right to strike whenever a strike would affect national se-
 curity or cause severe negative repercussions for the population at large." However,
 the Government seldom uses this provision and did not do so in 1992. Thai labor
 law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more broadly than the
 ILO standard. Since a period of social unrest in the mid-1970's, Thailand has aver-
 aged fewer than 10 strikes a year. However, in the summer of 1992 more than a
 dozen wildcat strikes occurred in nonunionized factories in an industrial area close
 
 
 669
 to Bangkok. Even before the dissolution of state enterprise unions, less than 3 per-
 cent orthe total work force, or about 12 percent of the industrial work force, was
 unionized. Almost 60 percent of the work force is employed in the largely unorga-
 nized agricultural sector. Factors discouraging the growth of organized labor are the
 antiunion sentiment and paternalistic approach of em ployer, the Thai preference
 to avoid face-to-face confrontation, and a provision of Thai labor law ermitting the
 formation of private sector labor unions with as few as 10 members. This provision
 has resulted in a proliferation of small, weak unions--about 700-grouped into 7 na-
 tional federations.
 The only verified incident of violence against Thai unionists solely due to their
 union activities occurred in December, when some military policemen roughed up
 workers at a factory to dissuade them from striking. Also, a number of those killed
 and missing in May were members of unions and state enterprise associations tak-
 ing part in the demonstrations. In addition, one of the laden of the democracy
 movement threatened with arrest by the short-lived Suchinda Government following
 the May shootings was Somsk Kosaisuk, a leading unionist. The June 1991 dis-
 appearance of Thanong Podhiarn remains unsolved (see Section 1.b.).
 ivate unions generally operate indendedently of the Government and other out-
 side organizations. The 1975 Act encourages this polcy by exempting union officials
 from prosecution in puruing the interests of their followers "provided that the ac-
 tivity does not involve politics.3 Unions are free to associate internationally with
 other trade union organizations and they maintain a wide variety of such affili-
 ations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivey.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized for Thai private sector workers under the 1975
 Labr Relations Act which defined the mechianisms for such negotiations and for
 gvernment-assisted conciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. Under the
 i991 SLRA, associations may negotiate working conditions, but not wages, with
 a government-dominated labor relations committee in each enterprise. (The Cabinet
 decides state enterprise wages based on recommendations of the overall State En-
 terprie Labor Relations Committee.) A system of labor courts created In 1_980 exer-
 cises judicial review over most aspects of labor law for the private sector. However,
 when Thai courts determine that a worker has been unjustly dismissed, they usu-
 ally order severance pay compensation rather than reinstatement. Workers may als
 seek redress for their grievances from a tripartite labor relations committee under
 the Ministry of Interior.
 The SE[1 has no explicit prvision allowing public sector employeesto appeal
 to the labor courts. Instead, they may apply to an overall state enterprise labor rela-
 tions committee. There are several special export processing zones (EPZ's) in Thai-
 land, with many mre planned to stimulate the growth of exprt-oriented industry.
 No separate labor legislation applies to EPZ's, where wages and working conditions
 in fact usually exceed national norms. There are some trade unions and a few collec-
 tive bargaining agreements in Thai EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of~ Forced or Compulsory Labor.-As was the case with the former
 constitution, the new one contains prvisions prohibiting forced or compulso  labor
 except in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law. However, the ILO
 continued to criticize legislation which may punish with imprisonment or forced
 labor acts of labor indiseipline, participation In illegal strikes, or propagation of
 Communist ideology.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum_ agefor ea
 ployment has been 13 since it was raised from 12 in January 1990.. The law stil
 permits the employment of children between the ages of 13 and 15 ioi.aigh work,
 although the employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6 a.m.) is proted. Tr the
 Government has estimated that ther   e r100,000 children between 13 and 15 in
 the labor force, but the actual number is probably much greater. Stated government
 policy is to raise the minimum employment ag gradually to the Hal standard of
 15, but no timetable for meeting this standard has been set. The current 5-Year
 Plan, which runs to 1996, provides for an inrease in the inimum requrement for
 schooling from 6 to 9 years by the end of the period.    ...               .
 Child dlabor cntinued to cause considerable domestic and foreign criticism m
 1992. Foreign trade unions and human rights groups have foousedhcavily on the
 exploitation of working children. The first nan Government submittd a draft law
 to the National Legislative Assembly in early 1992, seeking Icreasd penalties for
 violations of child [abor laws, but the Assembly was dissolved before tie law could
 be enacted. In June the ILO, which in 1991 issued a "Special Paragraph" against
 Thailand, welcomed the Government's commitment to eliminate .exploitation and il-
 legal use of child labor but stressed that much mere needs to be done.
 
 
 Complaints against Thailand voiced by international labor and human rights or-
 ganizations frequently allege that Thai standards continue to be low, that enforce-
 ment is inadequate despite recent increases in the number of labor inspectors, and
 that penalties for violations of the law are not severe enough. Police raids have dis-
 covered some children under age 13 working illegally. There are continued reports
 of children over age 13 illegally employed in dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise
 harmful circumstances.
 The Department of Labor division responsible for child labor issues has more than
 doubled its corps of inspectors in the last 2 years In addition, the number of general
 labor inspectors has also more than doubled in the last 2 years. Furthermore, in
 1992 the Department of Labor began a campaign against child labor. This included
 cress-trining of police and other officials in child labor inspection, combined with
 a public awarena campaign and the setting up of a 24-hour child labor 'hotline.'
 These activities resulted in a large increase in insions from less than 100 per
 month to mre than 1,000 a month by late 1992. Prosecutions also rose from 7 in
 the whole of 1991 to 21 in a single month in late 1992. Nonetheless, fully adequate
 enforcement of child labor laws will require even more manpower and funding, and
 more stringent penalties for violatrs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Workt.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gv-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives in 1991 increased the daly legal
 minimum wage. Rates vary by region, but they are minimally adequate to provide
 a worker and his family with a decent standard of living. The unskilled workers
 who pour into Bangkok from the far poorer countyside often are willing to work
 at less than the minimum wage. In riral Thailand, too, many workers are willing
 to work for less than the minimum wage mandated there. The rural minimum wage
 provides workers and their families with a marginally adequate standard of living,
 given the lower cost of living in these areas.
 Government officials report that large groups of laborers --estimated at sout
 one-third of the total-receive less than the legal minimum wage. The Government
 has tasked labor inspectors with enforcing presribed rates more effectively.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire labor force.
 Commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week emplos in indus-
 try 48, and those in "dangerous" work 42. Transportation wohers are restricted to
 no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement of these standards is spotty.
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. In medium-sized and large factories,
 government health and safety standarda are maintained. However, Thaiand's large
 informal sector is subject to minimal inspection, and health and safety standards
 mandated under Thai law are generally little understood by workers and seldom
 upheld by employers.
