 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy that until 1992
 had a history of military coups and powerful bureaucratic and military influences
 
 
 909
 on political life. The King exerts strong informal influence and has the constitu-
 tionally mandated power, to date never used, to veto legislation (requiring two-
 thirds of Parliament to override) or to dissolve the electect House of Representatives.
 The country adopted a new constitution in October. The coalition government, led
 by Prime Minister (Jhuan Leekpai's Democrat Party, was formed in November fol-
 lowing the resignation of prime minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh. The judiciary is
 independent but subject to corruption.
 The security apparatus has wide-ranging legal powers, derived primarily from
 past militarily controlled administrations. Military leaders still have an informal
 but influential-role in internal politics. Since 1992 the armed forces have become
 increasingly professional and increasingly subject to civilian control. The police have
 primary responsibility for internal security and law enforcement. Elements of both
 the armed forces and the Royal Thai Police have a reputation-for corruption. Some
 members of the security forces rommitted serious human rights abuses.
 Thailand is a newly industrializing country with a strong free enterprise system.
 Serious economic decline during the year lowered nationalincome -sharply from its
 1996 level of-approximately $3,000 per capita. The Government generally provides
 protection for individual economic interests, including property rights. A lack of
 transparency in many governmental processes leads in some cases to discriminatory
 commercial treatment for favored firms and institutions. Although industrial and
 service sectors contribute more than half.the gross national product, approximately
 60 percent of the population is rural and agrarian. The Government's efforts to close
 -the economic gap between the urban and rural populations have been -largely inef-
 fective. Rural dissatisfaction with land, rights and tenure was the theme of large
 gatherings organized by the "Assembly of the Poor" in -Bangkok.
 The Government generally respects the.human rights of-its citizens, but some sig-
 nificant problems remain. Police officers killed many criminal suspects while at-
 tempting to apprehend-them, and police and government leaders tacitly appeared
 to endorse excessive violence in the treatment of narcotics trafficking suspects. The
 Government remained reluctantto prosecute vigorously those members of security
 .forces-who were accused of extrajudicial killings. Police occasionally beat suspects.
 An ingrained culture of corruption persists in many parts of the civilian bureaucracy
 and the security forces. Routine demands for bribes undermine the rule of law and
 permit a climate of impunity for various illegal activities, such as income tax eva-
 sion, gambling, traffic ing, goods smuggling, and prostitution. Enforcement of a
 broad range of laws- and regulations by police continues to be noticeably lax.
 Conditions in immigration detention facilities are poor, and the prolonged deten-
 tion of aliens is a problem. The Chavalit government on occasion sought to discour-
 age-free speech, particularly with regard to the reporting of deteriorating economic
 conditions; journalists continue to practice some self-censorship. While the Govern-
 ment generally continued to adhere to its policy of providing asylum to those fleeing
 -persecution from neighboring countries, there were several instances of their invol-
 untary return to Burma and denial of asylum to members of Burmese ethnic minori-
 ties by military and civilian authorities. Legal and societal discrimination against
 women, violence against women and children, prostitution, and illegal and forced
 child labor persist. Societal discrimination against religious and ethnic minorities is
 a problem. The Government imposes restrictions on the movement of tribal people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. However, in a climate of increasingly prolific and violent narcotics traffick-
 ing, some police units continued to use deadly force against some suspects during
 arrest attempts. While there were no cases in which police killed suspects after ap-
 prehension, public statements by several high-ranking police figures implied en-
 dorsement of the use of excessive force. Credible reports indicated that at least 35
 criminal suspects were killed during arrest in the first half of the year, a significant
 number of these were suspected of narcotics trafficking.
 One death occurred under particularly suspicious circumstances: In January a
 handcuffed robbery suspect hung himself in his prison cell. The suspect was found
 in a sitting position with a shoelace tied around his neck.
 The Government prosecutes few police or military officers accused of extrajudicial
 killings. During the year, no police officers were convicted of wrongdoing in deaths
 during arrest. Routine exoneration of police officers contributes to a climate of impu-
 niy that is a significant factor in preventing any major change in police behavior.
 This also discourages relatives of the deceased from pressing or prosecution. Fami-
 lies rarely take advantage of a provision in the law that allows personal suits
 
 
 910
 against police officers for criminal action during arrest. During the initial police in-
 qiry, most police investigations routinely determine that no wrongful action was
 taken on the part of the police; judges generally follow the prosecutors recommenda-
 tions. If pursued by the family, the case is handled by the same office, in some in-
 stances by the same prosecutor, who has already ruled that no criminal action oc-
 curred There is no information to determine how many cases are settled out of
 court. But in cases in which suits are filed, the official charged often compensates
 the family of the deceased, and the suit is waived. However, some lawsuits were
 filed during the year and are under consideration.
 There were no developments in the 1996 killings of environmental protester
 Thong-in Kaew-Wattha and of farmer activist Joon Bhoonkhuntod. There were no
 developments in the unsolved     1995 murder of conservation     activist Winai
 Chantamanao.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 There were no developments in the 1994 disappearance of environmental activist
 Suchada Khamfubutra or the 1991 disappearance of Labor Congress of Thailand
 president Thanong Po-an.
 The number of prodemocracy protesters officially listed as missing following the
 military suppression of demonstrations in May 1992 was reduced to 38 after one in-
 dividual was located alive. Her disappearance had not previously been related to po-
 litical activity. Most, if not all, are presumed by family members and nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's) to be dead.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment.
 However, there were credible reports that police occasionally beat criminal suspects
 in order to coerce confessions. The Government made no visible efforts to prosecute,
 convict, and punish those responsible or those who had committed abuses in past
 years.
 Prison conditions are Spartan but do not in general threaten the life or health
 of inmates. Sleeping accommodations and access to medical care are areas of con-
 cern that require continued attention to meet minimum international standards.
 Some prison guards resort to physical abuse of both Thai and foreign prisoners
 in response to disciplinary problems. Credible sources reported in past years that
 prisoners caught in escape attempts were severely beaten-sometimes to death. Sol-
 itary confinement and heavy leg irons are sometimes used to punish difficult pris-
 oners. Medical care in prisons is inadequate. To care for a total prison population
 of 112,000, the Corrections Department employs only 10 full-time and 11 part-time
 doctors and 4 dentists.
 In April, four Lao women being held in the Rayong district police station were
 raped by male inmates over a 4-day period. Although regulations mandate that pris-
 oners be separated by gender, overcrowding led police to place these women in a
 sub-cell to which male prisoners had access.-The Government responded to this inci-
 dent by transferring three police officers to inactive posts. Three other police Lieu-
 tenant Colonels are facing disciplinary investigation.
 Access to prisoners is not restricted, and the Government permits visits by human
 rights monitors.
 Conditions at Bangkok's Suan Phlu Immigration Detention Center (IDC) were
 poor, as immigration facilities throughout the country were overwhelmed by a sub-
 stantial influx of undocumented workers from the southern border area. Overcrowd-
 ing and shortages of food and water were severe, especially when the IDC's popu-
 lation nearly doubled to 2,600. Conditions in provincial detention centers are signifi-
 cantly worse, and many detainees transferred to Bangkok arrived in a debilitated
 state. The Government responded by allocating funds for six additional provincial
 facilities, each with a capacity of roughly 300 detainees. Immigration detention fa-
 cilities are not administered by the Department of Corrections and are not subject
 to many of the regulations that govern the regular prison system. Some IDC detain-
 ees who cannot afford repatriation have been held for several years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-With few exceptions, including crimes in
 progress, the law requires that police officers making an arrest have warrants, and
 authorities respect this provision in practice. Arrested persons must be informed of
 the likely charges against them immediately after arrest. Police must submit crimi-
 nal cases to prosecutorsjbor the filing of charges in court within 48 hours of arrest.
 While detainees have a right to have a lawyer present during questioning, they are
 often not informed of this right. Foreign prisoners are often forced to sign confes-
 sions and stand trial without benefit of a translator.
 There is a functioning bail system. The only legal basis for detention by the police
 without specific charges for Iong periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Ac-
 tivities Act, which was not invoked during the year.
 
 
 As of October, there were 125,069 prison inmates, of which 10,713 were held in
 special prisons for those accused of narcotics violations. Apprximately 21 percent
 of the total prison population were pretrial detainees. Pretrial detainees are not
 usually segrgted from the general prison population.
 Of the 12 Burmese activists held in the Special Detention Center in 1996, four
 were released. Eight remain in custody for violating the regulations of the
 Ratehaburi Refugee Camp. The longest-held of the eight has been detained since
 June 1994. None of the eight has a scheduled trial.
 Exile is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and, although generally regarded as independent, the judiciary has a reputa-
 tion for venality.
 The civilian judicial system has three levels of courts: Courts of first instance
 courts of appeal, and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal
 and civil cases pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during peri-
 ods of martial law. There is no right to appeal military court decisions. ]Islamic
 (Shari'a) courts provide due process and hear only civil cases concerning members
 of the Muslim minority.
 The Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence. Access to courts or
 administrative bodies to seek redress is provided for and practiced.
 There is no trial by jury. Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a single judge,
 and more serious cases require two or more judges. While most trials are public,
 the court may order a trial closed. This is done most often in cases touching on na-
 tional security or the royal family. Career civil service judges preside over the
 courts. Judicial appointments and structures are not subject to parliamentary re-
 view.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including access to a lawyer of their choosing. A government program provides free
 legal advice to the poor, but indigent defendants are not automatically provided
 with counsel at public expense. Most free legal aid comes from private groups, in-
 cluding the Thai Lawyers' Association and the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 There are no known political prisoners aside from one Muslim mullah, Sorayut
 Sakunnasantisat, who is serving an unusually lengthy criminal sentence of 12 years'
 imprisonment for leading a 1990 political protest in Pattani. He was convicted of
 offenses against the monarchy and violating national security.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 in most instances requires police to obtain a warrant prior to a search. Warrants
 are issued by the police with prior Ministry of Interior or provincial governor ap-
 proval and are not subject to judicial review. Police at times endorsed blank search
 warrants or used legitimate warrants to begin intrusive searches outside the stated
 evidentiary domain. In February a police task force searched houses in Bangkok's
 Klong Toey area without warrants. This type of operation is permitted under the
 criminal code when it takes place under the supervision of senior officials, but some
 legal sources regarded the action as a violation of civil rights.
 Credible Western sources reported being subject to a warrantless search of their
 premises or person by low-level police officials.
 The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged in "Communist sup-
 pression operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these powers have
 rarely been invoked in recent years and were not invoked in 1997. Security services
 monitor persons espousing extremist or highly controversial views, including foreign
 visitors.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and citizens gen-
 erally enjoy, a large measure of freedom of speech. However, the law prohibits criti-
 cism of the royal family (lese majeste), threats to national security, or speech likely
 to incite disturbances or insult Buddhism. Freedom of the press is also constitu-
 tionally guaranteed.
 In July police forces entered two foreign-operated brokerage firms and searched
 for evidence that those firms had distributed faxes containing inaccurate financial
 information. The police had a warrant alleging that these faxes would undermine
 government stability. This incident received strong press and public criticism and
 was widely interpreted as an unjustified effort by the Government to intimidate
 those who reported adverse economic news.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of the press. However, newspapers and
 periodicals practice some self-censorship, especially with regard to the monarchy
 and national security issues. Nonetheless, strong media criticism of political parties,
 public figures, and the Government is common and vigorous. Journalists are gen-
 
 
 912
 erally free to comment on governmental activities without fear of reprisal. However,
 in August, an explosive device was detonated outside the home of a newspaper exec-
 utive known for his highly critical views of the Government. This bombing was
 widely perceived as an attempt by pro-Government individuals to warn the execu-
 tive to moderate his political commentaries.
 In June the Government established a Media Monitoring Center. Operating under
 the auspices of the Ministry of the Interior, the Center's announced purpose was to
 clarify inaccurate reporting and limit sensationalism in the media. The Center had
 no specific powers and did nothing more than issue occasional warnings to journal-
 ists. It has had little or no influence on journalistic practices, and was disbanded
 after 5 months of operation. However, the Center's formation, combined with restric-
 tions ontemplated by those drafting a proposed onstitution, galvanized journalists
 to organize a long-envisioned Thai Press Council. The goal of this independent and
 self-regulatory body is to promote greater professionaism in journalism by encour-
 aging voluntary adherence to speciic ethic  guidelines.
 .Under the Prting and Advertisement Act of 1941, the Royal Thai Police Special
 Branch issues warnings to publications for various violations such as disturbing the
 peace, interfering wit pub c safety, or offending public morals. It issued 22 such
 warnings in 1996 and 58 through mid-December. The 1941 Act permits police clo-
 sure of newspapers or printing presses in time of war or national emergency, but
 only with a court order.
 Radio and television stations are licensed by the Government and operated under
 the direct or indirect oversight of the Government and the military forces. Radio sta-
 tions must renew their licenses every year, and their signals are broadcast via gov-
 ernment transmitters. They are required by law to broadcast government-produced
 newscasts twice daily, 30 minutes each in the morning and evening.
 Programmers are generally free to determine the content and nature of television
 broadcasts. However, as with the print media, self-censorship exists. Stations occa-
 sionally edit or "black out" portions of programming deemed politically sensitive or
 pornographic. A government internal censorship board exists in the Prime Min-
 ister's office, but it rarely takes action.
 There are three cable television networks, which enjoy almost complete autonomy
 under the indirect oversight of the Mass Communications Authority of Thailand. In
 addition a wholly independent ultra high frequency television station managed by
 a private consortium including the outs poken Nation Multimedia Group began oper-
 ating in 1996.
 Domestic publications continued to p resent a wide range of political and social
 commentary. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and domes-
 tic books normally are not censored and circulate freely. Police have, but generally
 do not exercise, the authority to ban the importation of publications. Some publica-
 tions, mainly pornographic material but also including books written by Com-
 munists, have be en prohibited for many years. In March the Cabinet approved a
 resolution abolishing a regulation banning publication or possession of Communist-
 oriented printed matter, but the resolution has not yet received parliamentary ap-
 proval.
 An antipornography law allows police to restrict or confiscate printed publications
 and other materials deemed obscene; the interpretation given usually covers hard-
 core pornographic materials.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The legal system recognizes
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 Permits are not required for private meetings or gatherings unlessf held on publc
 property; these are routinely granted.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association. Private associations must
 register with the Government; such registration is routinely approved.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is protected by law, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice. The de facto state religion is
 Therevada Buddhism, but other religions are not restricted.
 Religious minorities objected to attempts by some members of the constitution
 drafting committee to declare Buddhism the official state religion, and the assembly
 did not include such a prvision in the Constitution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their resi-
 dence or workplace, and authorities respect this right in practice. Travel is re-
 stricted in certain border areas where foreign or vestigial domestic insurgent groups
 remain active. Longstanding restrictions on the travel and domicile of certain Viet-
 namese aliens who immigrated to Thailand in 1945-46 and Chinese who immi-
 grated between 1953 and 1961 remain in place. In addition, some long-term nonciti-
 
 
 zen residents, including several hundred thousand tribal people, are required to
 seek permission from local authorities or the army for foreign or domestic travel.
 In practice, authorities rarely enforce these restrictive measures, and registered
 resident aliens are able to move freely within the country.
 In September 1996, the Government issued a regulation allowing illegal alien
 workers already in the country to register and obtain work permits for manual labor
 employment in 43 of the 76 provinces. From September 1996 until May, more than
 323,000 of an estimated 700,000 to 1 million aliens regstered, and over 313,000
 were issued work permits. Aliens taking advantage of tis regulation are allowed
 to work and move freely for a 2-year period, after which the Government reserves
 the right to deport them formally.
 Thailand continued to provide first asylum to small numbers of Vietnamese and
 Lao asylum seekers pending their resettlement abroad by third countries. Following
 repatriation of the remaining screened-out (that is, non-refugee) Vietnamese, the
 Sikhiu camp was closed on February 20.
 Refugee status screening continued for more that 1,000 Lao citizens at Na Pho
 Camp. There were no reports that new refugees arrived from either Laos or Viet-
 nam, and no reports that government officials had turned back persons seeking asy-
 lum from those countries.
 As Burmese army activity drove persons into Thailand the Government generally
 followed its policy of providing asylum to new arrivals. iowever, in January, Thai
 security forces were unable to protect Burmese in three camps in Tak Province
 aganst intruding Burmese forces. There were also incidents in February, May, and
 Nvember in which security personnel forced a total of more than 2,000 asylum
 seekers back into Burma. There also were credible reports that civilian authorities
 periodically returned groups of Shan asylum seekers to the border. Immigration au-
 thorities do not acknowledge that the Shan ethnic minority have displaced person
 status. The Government provided asylum to more than 60,000 Cambodians who
 crossed into Sumi  and Tit provinces to escape factional fighting.
 The Government continued to permit the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHOR) to exercise its mandate with regard to Vietnamese and Lao
 camps, as well as in the Safe Area, a camp for ethnic Burman students and dis-
 sidents in the interior of Ratehaburi province. Residents at the latter site had regu-
 lar access to the UNHOR, which concluded that conditions generally met inter-
 national standards for the protection and welfare of asylum seekers. The Govern-
 ment generally continued to restrict access to the Safe Area to those persons from
 Burma to whom the UNHCR accorded "person of concern" status prior to mid-1996.
 Also, the Government barred resettlement abroad of any Burmese except "persons
 of concern" who had been admitted to the Safe Area. The Government restricted the
 UNHCR's activities to the monitoring of the refugee situation but offered NGO's lee-
 way to 'provide food, medical services, housing, and other care. While Burmese out-
 side of the camps were periodically arrested as illegal aliens, the Government did
 not deport any Burmese recognized by the UNHCR as a "person of concern." At
 years end, a number of Burmese dissidents remained in immigration detention cen-
 ters in central Thailand.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose or change their gov-
 ernment through free and fair elections based on universal suffrage. Citizens exer-
 cised this right in November 1996 in an election that was generally viewed as free
 but marred 'by widespread vote-buying, a recurrent problem in Thai elections. The
 Constitution prohibits monks and nuns from voting or seeking office. It includes pro-
 visions to place supervision of elections under an independent Election Commission.
 The Senate completedselection of the live-member Commission in November. It also
 provides for absent    ballots to  adaress the 'oncern of workers   previously
 disenfranchised because they could not afford the time or cost of returning to rural
 villages to vote.
 Tle Constitution and law require that political parties field a minimum number
 of candidates and have at least one member eleadto the House of Representatives
 in order to remain registered as a party. The Supreme Court ordered the dissolution
 of four political parties for failing to meet those criteria in the November 1996 elec-
 While ther are a no legal restriction son their political participation, women are
 generally 'nderrepresented in national politics, especially at senior levels. There
 was essentially no change in the number of women assigned or elected to positions
 of leadership. There are 22 women in the 391-member Parliament, and 21 women
 in the 260-member Senate. There is one woman in the Cabinet.
 
 
 914
 No laws prohibit the political participation of ethnic minorities, but few hold posi-
 tions of authority in national politics. Members of ethnic minorities in the north
 often lack documentation of citizenship, effectively barring their participation in the
 political process (see Section 5). Muslims from the south hold significant elected
 posts in the Government, although they continue to be underrepresentd in local
 and provincial government positions, which are appointed by the central govern-
 ment.
 There are 17 Muslim Parliament members, including the House Speaker; 8 in the
 Senate; and 1 Cabinet member.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestiation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations operate without government restriction. Inter-
 national human rights NGO's generally work freely on controversial issues, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings without official hindrance. The Government
 sometimes criticized these groups for being politically motivated and biased, but did
 not penalize or hinder human rights observers.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal treatment under the law without respect to
 race, sex, religion,    t language, or social status. In practice some discrimina-
 tion exists, and government enforcement of equal protection statutes is uneven.
 Woinen.-Domestic abuse continues to be a serious problem affecting the welfare
 of many women; reliable reports indicate that domestic abuse crosses all social
 classes. One NGO estimates that as many as 50 percent of women living in Bang-
 kok's slum areas are victims of abuse. Police do not enforce laws against such vio-
 lence vigorously, and domestic violence often goes unreported. Under the Criminal
 Code, spousal and child abuse is covered by assault provisions, but rules of evidence
 often make prosecuting such cases difficult. Since 1994 a pilot project operating in
 three Bangkok police stations has provided female teams totaling13 investigators
 to handle and encourage reporting of cases of rape and abuses, Under the law, a
 man cannot be prosecuted for spousal rape.
 Prostitution, although illegal, flourishes and is deeply ingrained. Government and
 NGO estimates of the number of women and children engaged in prostitution vary
 widely because of temporary sex workers and the migratory nature of prostitution.
 The Ministry of Public Health's official estimate of prostitutes is under 70,000, al-
 though some NGO's and government departments use a figure of approximately
 200,000, which is considered more credible. These figures include estimates of chil-
 dren.
 The majority of prostitutes are not kept under physical constraint, but a large
 number labor in debt bondage. Brothel procurers often advance parents a substan-
 tial sum against their daughter s future earnings, often without consent of the
 young woman involved. The women are then obligated to work in a brothel to pay
 back the loan.
 Some women are forced into prostitution, although the number of such cases is
 difficult to determine. Coerced prostitution commonly involves women from bill
 tribes and neighboring countries. Because they cannot speak Thai and are consid-
 ered illegal immigrants, these women are particularly vulnerable to physical abuse,
 confinement, and exploitation. Some women are luredwith promises of jobs as wait-
 resses or domestic helpers, but then forced to work as prostitutes. As illegal immi-
 grants, these women have no rights to legal counsel or health care if arrested. This
 group is also not protected by the amnesty offered to illegal alien workers (see Sec-
 tion 2.d.). The number of Burmese and Cambodian women and children trafficked,
 and in some cases abducted for prostitution, reportedly increased dun  the year.
 Vietnamese and Chinese citizens were also reported y trafficked to Thaiand. heir
 illegal entry was reportedly accomplished with the complicity of local officials. Ac-
 cording to a local NGO, girls between the ages of 12 and 18 are increasingly traf-
 ficked form southern China and Burma to work in the commercial sex industry.
 This trade was highlighted in October when a raid by a child welfare agency discov-
 ered 10 underage Chinese girls working in a Bangkok "short-time" hotel. The NGO
 reported that the girls knew that they were to work as prostitutes and that border
 police and immgration authorities facilitated their illegal entry into the country.
 The Government and NGO's have established vocational training and education pro-
 grams to combat the lure of prostitution. Despite occasional highly publicized raids
 on brothels, the Government harnot effectively enforced laws against prostitution,
 and in many cases, brothels operate with the protection of local government rep-
 resentatives and police. The law prohibits the trafficking of women and children for
 
 
 915
 the purposes of prostitution or slave labor. However, there continue to be credible
 reports of involvement by some corrupt police, military, and Government officials in
 trafficking schemes.
 Women generally have equal legal rights, but inequalities remain in the law. A
 man may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife committed adultery, but a
 woman aces the additional legal burden of proving that her husband has main-
 tained or honored another woman in a manner equal to that of his wife.
 Women represent 47 percent of the economically active population and hold an
 increasing share of professional positions. Government regulations require employ-
 ers to pay equal wages and benefits for equal work regardless of gender. However,
 there is a significant gap between average salaries earned by men and women be-
 cause women are concentrated in traditionally lower paying jobs. In practice women
 also generally receive lower pay for equal work in virtually all sectors of the econ-
 amy. Despite improvements in the Government's performance regarding women's
 rights, many women's rights NGO's remain skeptical about women's prospects to
 enjoy equal opportunities or positions.
 Women generally have access to higher education; currently, more than half the
 university graduates each year are women.
 Children.-The Government has taken steps to promote the rights and welfare of
 children, although child labor and the relatively small compulsory education re-
 qu irement of 6 years remain areas of concern. The Government's Social Welfare
 an for Underprivileged People doubled the budget for children's programs for
 1997-2001, compared with the previous 5-year Plan.
 Child prstitution, including force prostitution and trafficking of children, is a se-
 rious problem (see Section 6.c.). The Government and NGO's estimate that there are
 20,000 to 40,000 prostitutes under the age of 18. In 1996 the Government enacted
 a stronger law against trafficking in, patronizing, or profiting from child prostitutes.
 However, as of year's end, police sources were unable to confirm that anyone had
 been arrested for violation of that law, which provides for up to 6 years' imprison-
 ment of traffickers and patrons. Efforts to curb the trade in children for commercial
 sex appear to have had little success.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 As with domestic violence against women, however, police are often reluctant to in-
 vestigate abuse cases, and rules of evidence make prosecution of child abuse cases
 difficult.
 People With Disabilities.-The law requires that firms hire one disabled person for
 every two hundred other workers, but this has not been enforced. Employers may
 be exempted by contributing to a fund that benefits people with disabilities. Nation-
 wide, there are 7 Government-operated and 10 NGO-operated training centers for
 people with disabilities. There are no laws mandating access to public facilities for
 disabled persons.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent 4 to 5 percent of the country's popu-
 lation but constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces, which border
 Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integate the Muslim commu-
 nity into society through developmental efforts and expanded educational opportuni-
 ties, societal discrimination remains widespread.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Progress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into society is limited. Only half the estimated 500,000 to 600,000 members of hill
 tribes reportedly possess documentation that either identifies them as citizens or
 certifies their eligibility for future citizenship. The remainder lack documentation,
 and thus access to adequate education and health care. As noncitizens they are also
 barred from participating in the political process. Undocumented hill tribe people
 cannot own land and are not protected by labor laws, including minimum wage re-
 quirements. Approximately 45,000 Vietnamese immigrants and 40,000 Chinese im-
 migrants reside in rural provinces and live under a set of laws and regulations that
 restrict their movement, residence, education, and occupation (see Section 2.d.). De-
 spite a strong desire for Thai citizenship, fewer than 100 Vietnamese and 3,000 to
 4,000 Chinese have been able to naturalize in the last 32 years. Children who were
 born in Thailand of these legal permanent resident immigrants may now request
 Thai citizenship through district offices. These requests are routinely granted. Ap-
 proximately 10,000 Thai-born Vietnamese children have acquired citizenship in this
 manner, as have 8,000 Thai-born Chinese children.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law grants freedom of association to private sec-
 tor workers. Workers have the right to form and join unions of their choosing with-
 out prior authorization; to decide on the constitutions and rules of these associations
 
 
 916
 and unions; to express their views without government or employer interference; to
 confederate with other unions; to receive protection from discrimination, dissolution
 suspension, or termination by any outside authority because of union activities; and
 to have employee representation in direct negotiations with employers. However, no
 law explicitly protects workers from discrimination due to their participation in or-
 ganizing new unions that have not yet been officially registered. Union leaders re-
 port that employers often discriminate against workers seeking to organize unions.
 Workers in the public sector do not have the right to form unions. In state enter-
 prises, the law allows workers in each state enterprise to form a single "association"
 after at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees submit a petition to the Min-
 istry of Labor to register such an association. These associations submit employee
 grievances to management and propose changes in benefits and working conditions
 tma    not negotiate wages. Associations do not have the right to confederate or
 to join private sector federations. Unofficial contacts between public and private sec-
 tor unions continue, however, and the Government has not interfered with these re-
 lationships.
 The law denies all state enterprise workers the right to strike. In the private sec-
 tor, to be considered legal a proposed strike must be approved by a majority of the
 union members in a secret~ballot and be registered beforehand with the Ministry
 of Labor.
 In 1991 the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized labor law amend-
 ments adopted by a military-appointed legislature in March 1991 that dissolved
 state enterprise unions, transferred their assets, limited the number of associations
 that may be formed in each state enterprise, set relatively high minimum member-
 ship requirements for associations, denied associations the right to affiliate with pri-
 vate sector unions, and completely forbade strikes in state enterprises. Although the
 Government has not vigorously enforced these restrictions, it pledged to pass a new
 version of the law that would restore most rights enjoyed by state enterprise work-
 ers prior to the 1991 changes. A draft bill, which failed to become law during the
 1995-96 Banharn government, was resubmitted to Parliament by the Chavalit Gov-
 ernment in December 1996. The bill passed the House but was amended by the Sen-
 ate in August. The Senate version contained elements that diminish labor rights
 and was previously criticized when reviewed by the ILO. The House rejected the
 Senate version of the Bill. At year's end, the bill remained under discussion.
 The Government has the authority to restrict private sector strikes that would
 "affect national security or cause severe negative repercussions for the population
 at large." The Government seldom invokes this provision and did not do so during
 the year. Labor law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more
 broadly than the ILO criteria for such services. No strikes were disapproved during
 the year. The number of legal strikes has averaged fewer than 10 annually for the
 past 10 years.
 More than half the work force is employed in the unorganized agricultural sector.
 Less than 2 percent of the total work force, although nearly 11 percent of industrial
 workers, is unionized. Cultural traditions and unfamiliarity with the concept of in-
 dustrial relations are often cited as the reasons for low rates of labor organization.
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 disappearance o outspoken
 labor leader Thanong Po-an remains unsolved (see Section 1bs).
 There is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were exploited by the
 military forces, politicians, or employers for their own purposes, but private unions
 generally operate independently of the Government and other organizations.
 Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade union organizations,
 and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 recognizes the right of private sector workers to organize and bargain collectively
 and defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-assisted con-
 ciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. In practice, genuine collective bar-
 gaining occurs only in a small fraction of workplaces and in most instances contin-
 ues to be characterized by a lack of sophistication on the part of employee groups
 and autocratic attitudes on the part of employers. Wage increases for most workers
 come as a result of increases in the minimum wage, rather than as a result of collec-
 tive baraining.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labor law for the private sector. These functions are exercised by the
 Central Labor Court. Workers may also seek redress for their grievances from the
 Tripartite Labor Relations Committee. Redress of grievances for state enterprise
 workers is handled by the State Enterprise Labor Relations Committee. Labor lead-
 ers generally did not indicate dissatisfaction with the treatment that their concerns
 
 
 917
 
 received in these forums, although they complained that union leaders dismissed
 unjustly usually are awarded only monetary compensation.
 No separate labor legislation applies in export processing zones, where wages and
 working conditions are often better than national norms because of the preponder-
 ance of Western and Japan-based multinational firms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Government does not specifi-
 cally prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, and such practices occur. The Con-
 stitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except in the case of national emer-
 gency, war, or martial law. These prvisions are generally enforced; however, there
 are reports of sweatshops in the informal, sector that physically restrain workers
 from leaving the premises. There are no estimates of how many such workshops
 exist, but the growing number of illegal aliens from Burma, Cambodia, and Laos
 increases the opportunities for such abuse.
 Although the law prohibits trafficking of women and children for purposes of pros-
 titution, some women and children are forced into prostitution. Burmese, Cam-
 bodian, and Chinese women and children are also reportedly trafficked and, in come
 cases, abducted to Thailand for the purpose of prostitution. Although the Govern-
 ment passed strong antiprostitution legislation n 1996, raising the criminal pen-
 alties for traffickers of women, owners of places of prostitution, and parents who sell
 their children into the sex industry, the authorities have not effectively enforced this
 law. There are credible reports that police, military personnel, and government offi-
 cials are involved in trafficking schemes (see Section 5). Brothel procurers often ad-
 vance parents a substantial sum against their daughter's future earnings, often
 without consent of the young woman involved. The women are then obligated to
 work in a brothel to pay back the loan.
 For several years, the ILO has cited Thailand for violations of Convention 29 on
 forced labor. In 1995 it was the subject of a country "observation," but the ILO de-
 clined to make the country the subject of a specia paragraph. The primary focus
 of ILO criticism is forced child labor, especially child-prostitution-Since the date at
 which -the ILO raised these concerns, the Government has cooperated in establish-
 ing important institutional links, particularly with the International Program on the
 Elimination of Child Labor, to address the problem.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The legal
 minimum age for employment is 13 years. A bill raising the minimum age for em-
 .ployment to 15 years has passed the lower house and is being considered by the
 Senate. Nearly 90 percent of children complete six grades of compulsory education
 at age 12; but only 60 percent of 13-year-olds are enrolled in seventh grade, al-
 though this percentage is increasing. The law permits the employment of children
 between the ages of 13 and 15 only in "light work," where the lifting of heavy loads
 and exposure to toxic materials or dangerous equipment or situations is restricted.
 The employment of children at night (from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m.), or in venues where
 alcohol is served, is prohibited by law. An analysis based on population and school
 enrollment data shows that between 850,000 and 1,480,000 children work in Thai-
 land, mostly on family farms. Between 240,000 and 410,000 (from 2 to 4 percent
 of the 6-to-14 age group) are estimated to be in urban employment at particular
 risk of labor abuse. Most children employed in urban settings work in the service
 sector, primarily at gas stations and restaurants. Child labor is not evident in larger
 foreign or Thai export oriented factories. NGO's have found it difficult to penetrate
 the shophouses which employ children under harsh conditions to make goods for as-
 sembly in small and medium sized factories. Consequently, no comprehensive sur-
 vey of child labor in this sector exists. The Ministry of Labor has increased the num-
 ber of inspectors specifically responsible for child labor issues, although not all offi-
 cers are engaged in full-time inspection work. Enforcement of child labor laws is not
 rigorous and inspectors usually respond only to specific public complaints or exposes
 in newspapers. The inclination when dealing with- violators is to negotiate promises
 of better future behavior, rather than to seek 'prosecution and punishment.
 The Government's attempt to address the problem of child labor by proposing to
 extend compulsory education from 6 to 9 years was not implemented. The Education
 Ministry instead plans to expand facilities in rural areas so that children who wish
 to continue their studies need not leave their localities.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gov-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives agreed in September to increase the
 daily legal minimum wage by 7.6 percent at that time. The increase had not been
 put into effect by year's end, and minimum wage rates now range from $2.72 (128
 Bsht) to $3.34 (157 Baht) per day depending upon the cost of living in various prov-
 inces. This wage is not adequate to provide a decent standard of living for a worker
 and family. With extended family members' fimancial contributions, the minimum
 wage provides the basis for a marginally adequate overall standard of living. How-
 
 
 918
 ever, more than half of workers countrywide receive less than the minimum wage,
 especially in rural provinces. Unskilled migrant workers, as well as illegal aliens,
 often work for wages significantly less than the minimum wage. The minimum wage
 does not apply to undocumented hill tribe people, who are likewise not protected by
 other labor laws. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for ensuring that employers
 adhere to minimum wage requirements. Despite encouragement of employees to re-
 port violations to labor inspectors, the enforcement of minimum wage laws is mixed.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire labor force.
 By regulation, commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week, em-
 ployees mn industry work 48, and those in "dangerous" work such as in the chemical,
 petroleum, mining, or other industries involving heavy machinery, work 42 hours.
 Transportation workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement
 of these standards is weak. There is no 24-hour rest period mandated by law.
 Working conditions vary widely. The rate of injury from industrial accidents has
 remained approximately constant over the last 10 years at 4.5 percent of the total
 workforce.But in the last 6 years, the average rate of work-related deaths was high
 at 25 per 1,000 workers. Occupational diseases are rarely diagnosed or com-
 pensated, and few doctors or clinics specializing in occupational diseases exist. In
 medium-sized and large factories, government health and safety standards are often
 applied, but enforcement of safety standards is lax. In the large informal sector,
 health and safety protections are substandard. Employers are able to ignore safety
 regulations in part because nonunionized workers often do not understand safety
 and health laws and do not report violations. When 188 workers died in the May
 1993 Kader Toy Factory fire near Bangkok, the Government brought suit against
 8 persons, including the managing director. The case began in June 1994 and has
 continued in once-weekly sessions without conclusion. There is no law affording job
 protection to employees who remove themselves from dangerous work situations.
 he Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare promulgates health and safety regulations
 regarding conditions of work. Labor inspectors are responsible for enforcement of
 health and safety regulations; the strictest penalty is 6 months in jail.
 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 small islands scattered over a wide area of
 the South Pacific. Most of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which political life is dominated by the King,
 the nobility, and a few prominent commoners. It is fully independent and a member
 of the Commonwealth of Nations. The judiciary is independent.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 police force. The 430-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 The economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has been offset largely
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and to a lesser degree
 tourism. Remittances continued to diminish.
 The principal human rights abuse remains severe restrictions on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government. A relatively small group of commoners vocally
 challenges the Constitution, arguing for a more representative and accountable gov-
 ernment. Some women suffer from domestic violence, and discrimination within tra-
 ditional society limits the opportunities available to women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other
 such treatment, and there were no reports of such practices. Prison conditions are
 basic, especially as regards food and sanitation, but in accordance with local living
 standards. Church representatives and family members are permitted to visit pris-
 oners. No local nongovernmental organizations attempt human-rights monitoring
 visits, and the permissibility of such visits has not arisen.
 
 
 919
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution proscribes arbitrary ar-
 rest or detention and provides for the right to judicial determination of the legality
 of arrest; these are observed in practice. There is no preventive detention, although
 there are no statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be held prior to
 being charged. The law does not limit access by counsel and family members to de-
 tained persons. There is no forced exile, internal or external.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary, whose top judges have been expatri-
 ates, is independent of the King and the executive branch.
 The Court of Appeals, as the appellate court of last resort, is the highest court.
 The King's Privy Council presides over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobil-
 ity and estate boundaries. The King has the right to commute a death sentence in
 cases of murder or treason. In addition, the court system consists of the Supreme
 Court (which has original jurisdiction over all major cases), the police magistrates'
 courts, a general court, a court martial for the TDS, a court tribunal for the police
 force, and a court of review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial, and the Government honors
 it in practice. A court may not summon anyone without providing the person a writ-
 ten indictment stating the offenses it charges the person committed. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants.
 There were no reports of political prisoners, although some observers allege that
 Parliament's conviction and imprisonment of a parliamentarian and two journalists
 for contempt in September 1996 were politically motivated.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 and in practice, no one may enter or search the home of another or remove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. Neither the
 State nor political organizations intrude arbitrarily into a person's private life.
 Section 2, Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, at times the authorities infringe on these rights.
 Tonga has two weekly newspapers (one of which is government owned) and one
 national magazine. The Government owns the one television station and the one
 radio station. While there is generally little editorializing in the government-owned
 media, opposition opinion appears regularly alongside government statements and
 letters. A privately owned newspaper, Kele'a, openly criticizes the Government with-
 out interference. However, infringements on freedom of the press do occur. The Min-
 ister of Police has on occasion threatened action against the independent media.
 Specific infringements are usually tied to a particular event.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for peaceful
 assembly and association. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and abroad.
 The law places no restrictions on repatriation.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and 33 hereditary nobles dominate political life. They assert author-
 ity largely through control of substantial landholdings and their dominant numbers
 in Parliament. While the Constitution allows the monarch broad powers, many of
 which do not require the legislative branch's endorsement, the King sometimes per-
 mits "the system" to work its will without his guidance. The King appoints the
 Prime Minister and appoints and presides over the Privy Council (called the Cabinet
 when the King is not presiding), which makes major policy decisions. Currently, the
 Cabinet is made up of nine ministers and two governors; it includes both nobles and
 commoners, who serve at the King's pleasure.
 The unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of the Cabinet,
 nine nobles elected by their peers, and nine people's representatives elected by the
 general population. The King appoints the Speaker from among the representatives
 of the nobles.
 
 
 920
 Cabinet members and nobles usually vote as a bloc; however, recent votes related
 to impeachment charges against a commoner member of the Cabinet demonstrated
 that nobles and people's representatives do have the capacity to override the Cabi-
 net's wishes at times.
 In recent years, a number of people both inside and outside the establishment
 have called -for democratic change, usually while emphasizing the importance of
 more government accountability. Very few challenge retention of the monarchy; the
 King is greatly respected. A prodemocracy movement continues to exist, although
 it currently lacks formal structure due to differences of views among its leaders. All
 nine current people's representatives advocate various degrees of democratic reform.
 Proposals for constitutional revision tend to center on popular election of all par-
 liamentarians, with the parliamentarians then selecting their speaker.
 There are no female Members of Parliament, although there have been in the
 past.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no known.barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's) that concern themselves with human rights. Some local NGO's include
 among their interests-human rights problems, although none currently undertake
 investigations of alleged violations. No outside organizations are known to have
 made requests to investigate alleged human rights violations, but at least one pub-
 licly protested the imprisonment of two journalists and a parliamentarian for con-
 tempt in 1996. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations; it does participate
 in some U.N. subsidiary organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. However, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages. These include control over most of the land and a generally privileged sta-
 tus. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to cabinet positions in govern-
 ment and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private sector.
 Women.-Domestic violence is seldom publicized, but it is a problem. Incidents of
 wife beating are generally dealt with in traditional ways within families or by vil-
 lage elders. Abused wives sometimes return to their families if mediation fails.
 Tonga has a male-dominated society, and women generally occupy a subordinate
 role. For a woman to-rise to a position of leadership, she usually needs to have the
 support of the nobility or to possess exceptional talent. The King's mother reigned
 for many years, and a female member of the royal family is one of Tonga's most
 prominent businesspersons. Some female commoners hold senior leadership posi-
 tions in business.
 Some village women, with help from NGO's, are leading local development
 projects.
 The Government has a women's unit within the Prime Minister's office. Although
 some NGO's initially viewed this unit with suspicion, it appears to be functioning
 cooperatively with them. A government-sponsored National Council of Women also
 is making positive contributions.
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State. Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not
 become a source of societal concern.
 People With Disabilities.-No mandated provisions for accessibility to buildings
 and services for the disabled exist. There were no known complaints of discrimina-
 tion in employment, education, or provision of other state services. Education of chil-
 dren-with special needs has been a longstanding priority of the Queen.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 The lack of unions makes the question of the ability of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national bodies moot; however, such a right is neither protected, prohibited, nor lim-
 ited by the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small export en-
 hancement zones.
 
 
 921
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor in-
 cluding forced and bonded labor by children, and it is not practiced.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Child
 labor is not used in the wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting
 it. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and enforces this
 prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 Education has been compulsory since 1882. Although it is sometimes criticized as
 being of poor quality, education is provided for all children through Form 6 (high
 school). Co pliance rates are good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law. Labor laws
 and regulations, enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry, limit
 the workweek to 40 hours. The Ministry of Labor enforces laws and regulations rea-
 sonably well in the wage sector of the economy, particularly on the main island of
 Tongatapu. Enforcement in agriculture and on the outer islands is limited by isola-
 tion.
 Industrial accidents are rare, as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 on industrial safety standards.
