 TAILA D
 Thailandis a constitutionaI monaichy with a stronig executive
 branch, an.elected house of representatives, and. an appointed
 senate. The.16ivilian bureaucracy'and military play  -
 significant roles in political life. The King exerts strong
 informal i   a-luenice.. The Prime Minister and Cabinet are
 subject.:o votes of confidence by the Housebut need not be
 elected Members of Parliament (M.P.'s). The present Prime
 Minister, retired General Chatichai Choonhavan, is an elected
 member of Parliament and heads a five-party coalition
 government. He took office following free national elections
 in July 198.-         -
 Thailand's security services have wide-ranging legally
 authorized powers, partly deriving from past military-
 dominated governments, including powers to limit public
 gatherings and to restrict access to-areas of the country on
 perceived security grounds. While in the past these powers
 have led tp- abuses, they-have been used sparingly in recent
 years. The Government usually takes steps to discipline or
 prosecute security officials found to have committed abuses.
 Credible repprts of physical abuse of detainees by police-
 officers, which appears to occur most often during
 interrogation, continue  Prosecutions In such cases are.
 infrequent, and convictions rare. Vestigial Communist
 insurgent and Muslim separatist groups use terrorism to
 advance their respective aims. Despite steep declines in the
 influence of these groups, sporadic violence continues in a
 few areas, particularly in the south.
 A middle-income developing country with a free enterprise
 economic system, Thailand is currently enjoying rapid economic
 growth. 'The Thai system strongly protects- individual economic
 interests, including property rights. While the industrial
 sector_ is expanding, a majority of'the people are in rural
 areasowhere agriculture is the chief source of livelihood.
 Thai citizens continued to enjoy a wide range of civil and'
 political liberties. Mistreatment of detainees, restrictions
 on freedoms of speech and press, and worker rights were the
 principal areas of human rights abuse in 1990.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Allegations of political killings by government security
 forces are rare. In'predominantly-Muslim areas of sout
 Thailand where separatist groups are active, however, security
 forces have on occasion shot and killed civilians whom they
 claimed to have mistaken for insurgents.
 Small Communist insurgent and Muslim separatist groups
 continued to engage in sporadic violence, including murder, in
 pursuit of their objectives. Their targets included low-level
 officials, teachers, and police and security forces.
 Substantial evidence exists that in the past police in high
 crime areas have summarily executed alleged habitual criminals
 without regard to due process. Newspapers bccasionally quote
 thinly veiled warnings from senior police officials that such
 
 
 1040
 THAILAND
 a "shoot to kill" policy might be revived. In May a press
 report of dubious reliability linked the creation of a special
 crime task force in Chon Buri province with an order to
 execute summarily suspected contract killers. Senior police
 officials denied the story. No substantial evidence 6xists
 that such a policy was in fact implemented, although one:
 criminal suspect-was found shot to death shortly after the
 story's publication.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abduction or kidnaping attributed to
 government forces in 1990. Communist insurgents and Muslim
 separatists sometimes abduct businessmen, teachers, and
 government officials as a political weapon as well as to raise
 funds. There were no reports of disappearance carried out by
 government forces or insurgents during 1590.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although Thailand's criminal code forbids cruel, inhuman, or
 degrading treatment or punishment, there continued to be many
 credible reports of police beatings of prisoners and
 detainees. A Thai human rights organization announced in 1989
 that it had compiled 132 instances of injury and 27 deaths
 between 1983 and 1988 as a result of police brutality, most
 often during interrogations.
 In May an M.P. publicized an accusation by a woman from Nakhon
 Si Thammarat Province that police had brutally beaten her
 husband in order to force him to confess to having killed a
 policeman. The M.P. added that reports of police beating
 suspects were common in the province. In a separate incident,
 another M.P. charged that unidentified persons presumed to be
 plainclothes police had detained and tortured two relatives of
 a suspect in the murder of three foreign diplomats in order to
 force the suspect to surrender. The charge appears credible
 in light of past police behavior in southern Thailand and the
 strong pressure on the police to solve the case.
 In May police in Maha Sarakham province injured a number of
 demonstrators who had blocked a roadway to protest
 environmental damage caused by illegal salt.mining.
 Eyewitnesses and human rights advocates charged the police
 used excessive force against the unarmed demonstrators, who
 had already agreed to disperse. A government-appointed
 investigative committee later agreed the police action was
 "unwarranted," though it claimed the demonstrators had
 provoked the policemen to use force.
 Offending policemen often cover up abuse by buying the silence
 of victims or their families. Nevertheless, charges of police
 misconduct appear regularly in the press, and victims, often
 assisted by human rights activists, have on occasion won
 redress for documented abuses in the courts. Convictions of
 police or security officials for such abuses remain rare, and
 penalties imposed in such cases are often light. In July,
 however, the Mae Sot provincial court sentenced a policeman to
 15 years in prison for raping a Burmese student he had stopped
 for an identification check. Observers universally complain
 that conditions at the Bangkok Immigration Detention Center
 (IDC), located on Soi Suan Phlu, constitute cruel and unusual
 punishment. At the IDC as many as 140 illegal aliens have
 been confined for extended periods, in some cases for many
 
 
 1041
 THAILAND
 years, in a single cell measuring only'60 by 20 feet, with no
 opportunity to-leave the-cell or engage in exercise. In
 recent years, international attention has focused on reports
 of murder and rape of displaced Cambodians living in camps
 along the Thai-Cambodian border. Most of the violence is now
 committed by Khmer against other Khmer. However, 17 violent
 incidents'involving the Thai Displaced Persons Protective Unit
 were reported from January through July 1990, compared with 15
 incidents in thd previous 6 months. Royal Thai army rangers
 repofteily were involved in two violent incidents, but no
 fataliti~s resulted. -In June there was an allegation that
 rangers had murdered 11 Khmer, but no credible evidence was
 produced.
 d: Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western models, and
 suspects' rights are similar to those in Western Europe.
 Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest warrants
 generally/-are required but may be issued bypolice officers,
 who sometitnes abuse the process (see Seciion l.f.). Specific
 charges.must be brought against detainees within a limited
 time period. There is a functioning bail system. Reports'of
 arbitrary arrest are infrequent.
 The only ,legal basis f6r detention without specific charges
 for long periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist
 Activities Act. Currently, no one is being detained under the
 act's provisions. In 1989 the Government released 12 previous
 detainees under the act following passage of an amnesty law.
 Thailand dods not use exile for political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution grants citizens the presumption of innocence
 and access to vourts or administrative bodies to seek
 redress. Suspects can be denied-the right to legal counsel
 during the pretrial or investigative period of their cases,
 but before trial they have access to a lawyer of their own
 choosing,
 The legal system provides for trial by.a panel of judges oni
 the basis of specific charges, usually well documented. The
 courts are relatively independent of external pressures.
 While most trials are public, the courts may order that
 trial be closed to the public. This is most frequently done
 in cases touching-on religious sensitivities  foreign policy
 matters. or the royal family. Persons tried in ordinary
 criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights, including
 the right to counsel both in the trial and appellate stages.
 A serious flaw in prbviding due process rights is the lack of
 appeal from decisions of a military court. Since 1984 the
 jurisdiction of military courts has been limited to cases
 involving military personnel.
 Although a pilot government program to provide free legal
 advice to the poor continues, no law requires the provision of
 legal assistance to indigent defendants at public expense. In
 fact, most free legal aid comes from private groups, including
 the lawyers' association and the women lawyers' association.
 During 1990 three persons remained in prison after having been
 convicted in a 1988 trial of defaming the monarchy (lese
 majeste). In the closed trial, the three were found to have
 been involved in printing and/or distributing defamatory
 leaflets. Two were sentenced to 3 1/2 years and one to 4 1/2
 
 
 1042
 
 THAILAND
 years. During 1990 the Government also filed lese majeste
 charges against five speakers at a June 3 protest rally
 sponsored by Shi'a Muslims in Pattani Province. Some rally
 participants were also charged with other offenses, including
 assault on a police officer. While two of those charged
 remained at large, the Government arrested three suspects,
 holding them without bail on grounds of national security.
 Twenty to 30 persons originally detained under the
 Anti-Communist Activities Act but later convicted'of criminal
 offenses did not come under the terms of the 1989 amnesty and
 remain imprisoned. The Government disputes human right
 advocates' claims that many of these persons are political
 prisoners, pointing out some were convicted of such charges as
 robbery and murder. Human rights groups maintain that at
 least some of these prisoners were tried on trumped up
 charges, but this could not be confirmed.
 Court proceedings continued to move slowly in the case of 14
 members of a self-styled Revolutionary Council arrested in May
 1989 on a charge of sedition. The group had published a
 declaration purporting to dissolve the Parliament and
 establish a revolutionary regime. In October bail for 12 of
 the defendants was revoked because of their suspected
 involvement in protests by a small group of university
 students during which one student immolated himself. As of
 November 6, 11 of the 12 had been rearrested. The Government
 was still considering whether to file new charges against the
 12 as a result of the latter incident.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is essentially an open one in which membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, and the police function
 is seldom abused for security or political purposes. The
 unmonitored exchange of ideas is generally permitted, although
 those espousing "leftist" or controversial views are probably
 watched by the security services. Thai law requires that
 police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. There are allegations that
 officers sometimes endorse warrants in advance and then allow
 their noncommissioned subordinates to apply them as needed.
 Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act allow officials
 involved in specifically designated "Communist suppression
 operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but these
 powers have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution affirms citizens' rights to free speech and a
 free press, but several laws restrict those rights. The
 principal legal restrictions on these freedoms are
 prohibitions on insulting or defaming the King, Queen, heir
 apparent, or regent (lese majeste), advocating a Communist
 system of government; and publishing materials likely to cause
 disturbances, threaten national security, or insult religion.
 In June five Muslims were charged with lese majeste after a
 violent rally in which they allegedly made statements critical
 of the government's Muslim policy and the monarchy. Thai
 citizens enjoy substantial freedom of speech in other
 respects. The Government permits criticism of its policies,
 though prominent critics have on occasion become targets of
 
 
 1043
 
 THAILAND
 vlor6hc by mysterious assailants. Such incidents appear to
 have declined in frequency in recent years.
 The privately owned press practices self-censorship and is
 particularly cautious about criticism of the military or
 monarchy. During much of 1990, it also operated under
 restrictions imposed by the 1941 press law and a decree from
 the martial law era requiring newspapers to be licensed by the
 Government. The decree gives the Government wide latitude to
 issue official warnings or revoke the licenses of publications
 that Drinted stories deemed libelous or harmful to national
 security.  In February the Government closed the Thai-language
 newspaper Naew Na for publishing a false article deemed
 harmfufl to Thai relations with Saudi Arabia. The newspaper's
 publisher appealed the closure order to the civil court and
 r6ceived temporary permission to resume publication. On
 Septe~mber 14, the.Supreme Court upheld the Government's
 revocation of'the newspaper's publication license. On the day
 following the Supreme-Court ruling, however, the newspaper's
 owner launched a new newspaper with the same editorial staff
 as the defynct Naew Na. 'The Government did nothing to prevent
 publication of the new daily.
 During 1990 journalists and'others concerned with press
 freedom mounted a campaign demanding the repeal of the decree
 setting forth the Government's authority-not subject to prior
 judicial review-to withdraw publishing licenses. Despite
 pledging to seek the decree's repeal, however, the- Government
 at first backed a new press bill incorporating the decree's
 key provisions. In October the Government reversed course
 again ny repealing the decree and pledging to withdraw the new
 bill from consideration. Restrictions under the 1941 law
 still apply.
 Radio stations are government licensed and operated by
 government, military, and private entities as commercial
 enterprises. Of five national television networks, two are
 run by the army and three by the Government. Critics charge
 that news coverage on government-operated stations is biased
 in favor of the officials who oversee them. The Government's
 broadcasting administration board in theory reviews all
 television programs prior to broadcast. In practice, however,
 most programs are not prescreened,. and stations present a
 range of viewpoints. Radio stations must carry a
 government-produced newscast four times daily but are free to
 originate other news and commentary. Opinions critical of
 government positions have been broadcast but, in general,
 controversial topics are treated cautiously, if at all.
 Representatives of the Thai film industry complain that the
 Government applies its censorship code to prohibit production
 of films about politically sensitive periods of Thai history
 such as the 1973 student uprising. Thai domestic publications
 continued to present a wide range of political and social
 commentary in 1990. Academic and technical literature
 circulated freely, the former presenting viewpoints ranging
 from the non-Communist left to the ultraright.
 Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign
 and domestic books normally are-not censored and are permitted
 to circulate freely. The 1941 press law empowers the Police
 Director General to prohibit the import of printed matter
 deemed dangerous to public order and morald. The Government
 imposed no new permanent or temporary bans on the import of
 foreign publications during 1990. In 1989 the Government
 
 
 1044
 
 THAILAND
 invoked the law twice, banning the Hong Kong-based South China
 Morning Post for nearly 4 months and the Asian Wall Street
 Journal for a shorter period. Some publications, many of them
 treatises on Chinese communism, remained banned under Interior
 Ministry orders dating from 1977 and 1980, although there is
 no evidence that these bans have been enforced. -
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution ensures the rights of assembly and
 association. In general, politicians, students, labor, and
 other interest groups freely exercise these rights without
 government interference. However, in October the Government
 arrested a total of 20 persons for involvement in
 antigovernment protests during which a university student
 immolated himself. At year's end, court hearings continued to
 determine whether sufficient evidence existed to charge the 20
 under the criminal code for inciting unrest. Eleven of the 20
 detaineees already face sedition charges stemming from a 1989
 case (see Section 1.e.). In November the Army Commander in
 Chief briefly ordered a ban on gatherings of more than 10
 persons in an area of central Bangkok surrounding government
 offices. The ban was apparently aimed at preventing a rally
 by supporters of a Cabinet member whose dismissal had been
 sought by the army. Police made no effort'to enforce the ban
 to prevent rallies by unrelated student and labor groups.
 Although a court upheld the order's legality, the army
 commander revoked it 4 days after it was imposed following
 widespread criticism.
 All associations must register with the Government. The
 Government does not, however, withhold registration in order
 to inhibit freedom of association for any group.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is generally practiced throughout Thailand
 and protected by law and custom. Theravada Buddhism, the de
 facto state religion, has had an abiding and profound influence
 on Thai culture and history, and most Thai practice it. The
 King is required by the Constitution to profess and practice
 the Buddhist faith. Like other private associations,
 religious institutions must register with the Government.
 Religious publishing, regardless of faith, is allowed. There
 are no restrictions on religious ceremonies or instruction,
 nor on conversions from one faith to another, but occasionally
 controversies arise.
 A former Buddhist monk, Phra Potirak, also known as Rak
 Rakpong, the leader of a dissident Buddhist sect, is currently
 standing trial before two different courts on charges brought
 by the Government. In the first case,'Potirak is charged with
 violating the law governing Thailand's Buddhist ecclesiastical
 hierarchy by disobeying a Supreme-Ecclesiastical Council order
 that he give up his status as a monk. The charge carries a
 penalty of-6 months in jail or a $40 fine. The trial began in
 July 1989 and has proceeded slowly, leading to predictions
 that it could take several years to complete. Press coverage
 of the proceedings is limited under a court-imposed gag order.
 In the second trial, which began in January, Potirak and 79 of
 his followers are accused of impertonating Buddhist monks or
 nuns by wearing monastic robes and collecting alms without
 having been legally ordained in accordance with the regulations
 of the Buddhist hierarchy. Potirak also faces 33 counts of
 
 
 1045
 
 THAILAND
 inciting.his followers to commit the above offenses by
 presiding at-unsanctioned ordination ceremonies. If convicted
 he could be sentenced to a'maximum of 33 consecutive 6-month
 terms. All 80 defendants are free on bail. As in the first
 case, the trial is proceeding slowly, with about 100 witnesses
 yet to 'testify.
 Since the charges were filed, members of Potirak's Santi Asoke
 movement have changed their style of dress in order to reduce
 their resemblance to mainstream Buddhist monks. Otherwise,
 the moemeht'has continued to operate normally, despite the
 ongoing trials.
 Under Applicable regulations, missionaries are permitted to
 live and proselytige in Thailand. The Government does
 restrict the number of missionaries and place some
 reitrictions on their activities, but foreign clergy are
 permitted to preach freely. The Church of Jesus Christ of
 Latter-Daf Saints has suffered a relative disadvantage,
 however, as theological differences have prevented it from
 joining one of five Christian umbrella groups recognized by
 the Governinent. Exclusion from the groups has prevented the
 church from acquiring full legal status and such privileges as
 long-term visas for its expatriate religious workers.
 d. Freedom of Movedent Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigratiin, and Repatriation
 Longstanding restrictions on the travel and place of residence
 of certain Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand
 remained-in place in 1990. The right of citizens to change
 their residence or workplace was unabridged. The only
 limitations on travel of persons other than asylum seekers and
 other aliens were'restrictions on entry into certain rural
 areas believed by the Government to be Used as bases by
 Communist insurgents. The Government did not restrict
 emigration or foreign travel, except by government officials.
 Passport applications by single Thai women and children under
 the age of 14 must be approved by the Department of Public
 Welfare. In addition, a 1985 statute criticized by some
 women's rights advocates requires that female passport
 applicants under age 36 sit through a series of interviews
 regarding their employment records and finances. These
 provisions are intended to prevent the export of children for
 sale and women for purposes of prostitution.
 The Government has not revoked citizenship for political
 reasons.
 while not a party to international legal instruments on the
 rights of refugees, Thailand has acted in the spirit of those
 agreements by providing first asylum to over I million people
 from Laos,- Cambodia, and Vietnam since 1975, including about
 320,000 Cambodian displaced persons currently in camps on its
 side of the Thai-Cambodian border.
 Thailand continues to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and
 Lao asylum seekers and to process them in accord with the
 Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) agreed to in Geneva in
 1989. One boat of 10 asylum seekers was pushed off by
 government officials in 1990, although the Government said
 that the refugees expressed a desire to go to Malaysia.
 Attacks by pirates (presumed to be Thai) in'international
 waters of the Gulf of Thailand continued. According to
 statistics of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
 
 
 1046
 
 THAILAND
 28 attacks occurred in the first 7 months of 1990 compared to
 29 in all of 1989. The Thai marine police arrested 25 persons
 in the first 8 months of 1990 and charged them with
 involvement in 11 piracy attacks.
 Lao asylum seekers in Thailand continue to be screened under
 provisions of the CPA to determine their eligibility for
 refugee status. There were isolated reports of pushbacks of
 Lao asylum seekers by Thai government officials in 1990.
 Thailand continues to cooperate with the UNHCR and Laos in a
 trilateral program to manage the voluntary repatriation of
 certain Lao asylum seekers.
 Official Thai policy since April 1, 1989, is that any. Burmese
 asylum seekers in Thailand are illegal immigrants subject to
 deportation. In practice Thailand has administered this
 policy flexibly to ensure the safety of Burmese asylum seekers
 in Thailand. Approximately 4,000 Burmese students fled to the
 Thai-Burma border area following civil unrest in Rangoon in
 1988. Some subsequently returned to Burma, either on their
 own or under a repatriation program organized by Thai and
 Burmese authorities. While approximately 1,000 continue to
 live on the border with ethnic minority insurgent groups
 fighting the Burmese Government, still others have moved to
 Bangkok. The Thai Government has not formally recognized the
 students as asylum seekers, but has permitted them to receive
 assistance from the UNHCR and some voluntary agencies.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution provides Thai citizens the means to change
 their government through national elections which are held at
 least every 4 years. Participation in the political system
 has expanded significantly in recent years, but constitutional
 processes and democratic institutions remain shallowly
 rooted. Traditional political elites, particularly the
 military, retain disproportionate influence, whether out of
 customary respect paid by conservative, largely rural voters
 or the elite's ability to manipulate the electoral process. A
 new elite, based on the wealth generated by rapid economic
 development, has gained an increasing share of political power
 through use of substantial monetary resources in the electoral
 process. The appointed Senate has limited legislative powers
 and is composed largely of active duty and retired military
 officers and government officials. Opposition parties
 regularly present opposing views both within the National
 Assembly and through the mass media. The National Assembly
 almost invariably has dissenting votes on legislation and
 procedural decisions.
 Elections are based on universal suffrage for adults over the
 age of 20, and are required by the Constitution at least once
 every 4 years.
 Women vote in numbers equal to men but remain underrepresented
 in national politics and in high governmental positions.
 Under a 1978 Cabinet decision and Ministry of Interior
 regulations, women are expressly prohibited from serving as
 deputy district officers, a key position in Thailand's highly
 centralized system of local administration. By extension,
 this same rule precludes women from serving in more senior
 positions such as district officer and provincial governor.
 Exclusion from these positions has impeded women from rising
 to senior levels in the powerful Interior Ministry. In June
 
 
 1047
 
 THAILAND
 the"Cabinet rejected a proposal by women's rights advocates to
 drop the prohibition on'women deputy district officers.
 Senior officials, including the.Interior Minister, insisted
 wonien wer6'physically"unable to fulfill the job's
 responsibilities, including crime fighting and disaster relief.
 Female military officers are not permitted to attend the
 military academies and the command and general staff college,
 creating a m'ajor obstacle to their promotion beyond the rank
 of colonel. -Sincd retired senior bureaucrats and military
 officers have been the source of much of Thailand's political
 leadership, these limitations have also been a factor in
 women's underrepresentation in politics.and government.
 Section '4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 *of Human Rights
 In the past, Thailand has responded to specific inquiries on
 human rights matters from Amnesty International and the
 International Commission of Jurists. With occasional
 exceptions, it is generally willing to discuss human rights
 problems with both domestic and international human rights
 organizations. Human rights organizations of all kinds have
 generally been permitted to visit Thailand, meet with
 government officials, afid lobby for corrective action.
 Thai huma-rights organizations have had significant success
 in recent years. They have been credited with successfully
 pressuring the Government to tighten the discipline of police
 and paramilitary forces, and to address abuses in child labor
 practices and in prisons. The number of nongovernmental human
 rights organizations has increased. Local civil and women's
 rights groups, are active on a wide range of issues, including
 combating prostitution and child abuse, seeking improved
 enforcement ok labor laws, promoting women's rights, and
 lobbying for redress in specific cases of-abuse. In August,
 the Government and the U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) jointly
 hosted a 3-day conference in Bangkok on the rights of the'
 child. Attending the conference were public officials and
 private citizens from 12 countries in the region.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on-Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable'progress in integrating its
 minorities, given its limited resources, but some problems
 remain. Fewer than half of the estimated half million members
 of hill tribes are believed to possess documentation as Thai
 citizens. Advocates consistently cite the difficulties faced
 by many hill tribe members in obtaining Thai citizenship as
 the primary obstacle to their successful integration into
 society. In 1990 a government committee continued work on a
 comprehensive plan for improving the living conditions of hill
 tribes. Among the measures under consideration are
 registration of all hill tribe residents and a law easing
 citizenship requirements for members of hill tribes.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 four of Thailand's southernmost provinces bordering Malaysia.
 The Government has targeted development efforts and attempted
 to expand educational opportunities in order to integrate Thai
 Muslims into Thai society. Nonetheless, Mublims remain
 underrepresented in government service, the professions, and
 
 
 1048
 THAILAND
 in higher education, primarily because of the effects of lower
 educational standards and opportunities in the past.
 The community of Vietnamese which fled Indochina in the 1940's
 and 1950's to northeastern Thailand lives under a set of laws
 and regulations restricting its members' movements,
 residences, education, and occupations. Persons who travel
 illegally can be imprisoned. Since 1980 these Vietnamese have
 even been forbidden to buy new cars. While some of these
 restrictions are laxly enforced, the approximately 45,000
 Vietnamese in this category remain worried that their
 situation could change for the worse. Those born in Vietnam
 have no chance of obtaining Thai citizenship under existing
 laws. In May, however, the Cabinet approved a proposal to
 exempt their descendants born in Thailand from a 1975 Cabinet
 resolution requiring all Vietnamese to be repatriated or
 strictly controlled. As a result, the Interior Ministry will
 formulate a new set of regulations intended to ease the way
 for some 20,000 to 34,000 Vietnamese descendants to obtain
 Thai citizenship.
 Women generally have equal legal rights in Thailand, with
 specific guarantees of equality with men in the areas of
 matrimonial property, the right to choose habitation and
 employment, and child custody rights. However, legal
 inequality remains in regard to divorce rights. Whereas a man
 may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife has committed
 adultery, a woman under similar circumstances faces the
 additional legal burden of proving her husband has maintained
 or honored another woman in a manner equal to his wife. Thai
 law also denies Thai nationality to children born of alien
 fathers and Thai mothers, regardless of place of birth,'unless
 the birth is registered as illegitimate. Inequality with
 regard to travel and the ability to advance in the military
 and government are noted in Sections 2.d. and 3.
 Though no Thai law specifically addresses violence within the
 family, the criminal code's provisions on assault and abuse
 effectively make both wife beating and child abuse a crime.
 While the Government has denounced physical abuse of women and
 children, the laws against abuse have not been vigorously
 enforced. Thai law provides no means to intervene short of
 criminal prosecution of the abusive spouse or parent. Rules
 of evidence often make prosecuting such cases difficult,
 especially when the victims are children. For a combination
 of these reasons and ingrained cultural attitudes, Which tend
 to be tolerant of male prerogatives, police are often
 reluctant to pursue such cases. Within their limited
 resources, nongovernment women's and children's rights groups
 provide shelter to victims of abuse who come to their
 attention and ably assist them in pursuing legal action.
 Reliable data on the extent of abuse of women and children are
 not available. However, those with extensive experience in
 the field believe family violence is prevalent across all
 social classes.
 Prostitution is acknowledged within Thailand as one of the
 country's most troubling social problems. Estimates of the
 numbers of women engaged in prostitution vary widely. A
 survey by the Public Health Ministry in January placed the
 number at 86,000. Most other sources agree the number exceeds
 100,000, with some placing it as high as 1,000,000. Estimates
 of the number of child prostitutes show similar variations.
 Women engaged in prostitution typically come from relatively
 poor rural areas, particularly in the country's northern
 
 
 1049
 
 THAILANDo
 region. With scant dconomic opportunities in their home
 vklages, many turn to Worklng as prostitutes in urban areas
 as a way to. fulfill their familial obligations as well as. to
 obtain the material fruits of industrial society. Procurers
 often advance the'parents of young women a substantial sum
 against tlieir future earnings, money that frequently goes to
 pay off debts or to build a new house. The women are then
 obligated to work in a brothel for a fixed period of time in
 order to pay back the loan. In public discussions of
 prostitutiop, parents who accept money under such conditions
 are often described as having "sold" their daughters for such
 and buch a sum. Given the complex array of pressures and
 induceinents that may bear on such decisions, it is difficult
 to be brecise'about what percentage of these women are7 being
 forced.into prostitution against their will. Human rights
 monitors believe that the majority of the women who engage in
 prostitution are not kept under physical constraint. That
 said, there are many well documented cases of women, including
 minors, being forced-or tricked into working as prostitutes
 and b ing held as virtual captives by brothel operators.
 Despite periodic well-publicized raids on brothels, however,
 overall enforcement of the laws against prostitution by-police
 and the courts is practically nonexistent. Corruption is a
 major factor in police willingness-to turn a blind eye.
 Women are well represented in the labor force and are becoming
 increasihgly so in professional positions" particularly those
 in the c6irnercial sector. They are not barred legally from
 positions traditionally held by men except for a limited
 number of occupations-deemed to pose excessive physical
 hazards. Government regulations require employers to fix the
 same wages and benefits for similar work whether the worker is
 male or female. However, women continue to be concentrated in'
 traditionally lower paid jobs, and there is a significant gap
 between average salaries earned by men and women. No acburate
 statistics are available on this gap, which appears to be
 narrowing. In rural areas, sex-stereotypes are more
 pronounced with respect to social roles. These barriers are
 being modified as mass communications bring role models to
 even the most remote mammunities.
 Section 6- Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Labor Relations Act of 1975, Thailand's basic labor law,
 affirms many of the concepts inherent in the internationally
 recognized worker right of-freedom of association. However,
 Thailand has'ratified neither International Labor Organization
 (ILO) Convention 87 on freedom of association nor Convention
 98 on the right to organize and collective bargaining.  The
 1975 Act provides for, among other things, the rights of
 employees'-to form'and join unions or employee associations of
 their own choosing without prior authorization; to decide on
 the constitutions and rules of these associations and unions;
 to express their views without government or employer
 interference; to confederate with ether unions; to receive
 protection from discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or
 termination by any outside authority because of union
 activities; and to have employee representation in direct
 negotiations with employers. However, no law explicitly
 protects workers from discrimination due to their
 participation in organizing new unions which have not yet
 officially registered.
 
 
 1050
 
 THAILAND
 The 1975 Act specifically withholds from government workers
 the right to form unions. Nonetheless, civil servants may and
 do form 'employee associations," which are influential in
 determining salary scales, benefits, and conditions of
 employment. All state enterprise workers, except those at the
 Bank of Thailand and the Airports Authority, may unionize.
 The state enterprise sector is the backbone of the labor
 movement. It accounts for more than half of total union
 membership and has the largest and strongest unions.
 Thai labor law denies the right to strike to all state
 enterprise workers and to all workers in "essential services"
 (defined to include ports, education, transportation, fuel and
 energy, telecommunications, hospitals, and waterworks).
 Nevertheless, strikes do occur in the public sector and are
 usually tolerated by the Government. In June, however, the
 Government removed from office two leaders of the
 Communications Union for an illegal industrial action which
 caused a short interruption in international telephone
 service. In addition, the Government issued arrest warrants
 in January for two state enterprise union leaders for alleged
 involvement in protests by private sector rubber workers. No
 arrests took place.
 The state enterprise sector experienced increased unrest
 during 1990. Work stoppages occurred in the ports in January
 and-February to protest plans to privatize a new deep water
 port near Bangkok. The Government subsequently proposed a
 compromise under which the port would be only partially
 privatized. That decision and a withdrawal of military
 support for the workers caused the controversy to die down.
 In most of the private sector, 24-hour notice to management is
 the only legal requirement for a strike. However, the
 Government has the authority "to restrict the right to strike
 whenever a strike would affect national security or cause
 severe negative repercussions for the population at large."
 The Government seldom uses this provision and did not do so in
 1990.
 Only about 3 percent of the entire labor force, or 12 percent
 of the industrial work force, is unionized. Nearly two-thirds
 of the work force is employed in the largely unorganized
 agricultural sector. Factors discouraging the growth of
 organized labor are the antiunion and paternalistic
 relationship of employers to employees, the avoidance in Thai
 culture of face-to-face confrontation, and a provision of Thai
 labor law permitting the formation of labor unions with as few
 as 10 members, which contributes to a high degree of
 fractionalization at both the union and confederation levels.
 This provision has resulted in a proliferation of small, weak
 unions--more than 65G--grouped into 5 national federations.
 There were no incidents in 1990 of Thai unionists suffering
 violence due to their dnion activities. However, the 1975 Act
 withholds certain protections in cases of "political" activity.
 Thai unions generally operate independently of the Government
 and other outside organizations.
 Unions have maintained relations freely with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the Association of South
 East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Trade Union Congress, and various
 national labor bodies, including those of the United States,
 the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, and Israel. Thai
 unionists have also participated in meetings and seminars
 
 
 1051
 THAILAND
 sponsored by the Communist-controlled World Federation of
 Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to.organize and bargain collectively is recognized
 for most Thai workers under the 1975 Labor Relations Act. The
 law; sets forthprocedures to'assure employee participation in
 the-determination. of working conditions, wages-, and benefits.
 In recent years, such bqrgaining has focused more on benefit
 packages and working conditions -than on wages. *Both labor and
 management usually seek to resolve potential differences
 informally before turning to formal collective bargaining.
 The 19Y5 Act defined the mechanisms for such negotiations and
 for government-assisted conciliation and arbitration in cases
 tnder dispute. The conciliation and arbitration procedures
 -are'mandatory for state enterprises.
 A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial
 review over-most aspects of labor law. Workers may also seek
 redress for their grievances from a tripartite labor relations
 committee under the Ministry of-Interior. The law does not
 fully protect workers against antiunion discrimination and
 retribution. The legal requirement that union leaders work
 full time in the plants or industries which they represent
 tends to make them vulnerable to employer action in cases of
 conflict, especially as they have no explicit protection
 against dismissal for union activities prior to formal
 registration of their union. The Thai. Court Law of 1980
 prohibits "unfair dismissal," but Thai: courts have not been
 uniform in their interpretation of this law. Employers have
 at their disposal significant means to prevent the
 unionization of their enterprises. Even when employees are
 determined to have been fired unjustly, however, labor courts
 seldom order them reinstated. Instead, there was widespread
 reliance on severance pay as compensation to resolve labor
 disputes. Additionally, the common use of "temporary" or
 contract labor has been an effective means of discouraging or
 ,preventing unionization. A government decision in 1989 to
 extend labor law- protection to temporary workers may change
 this situation,but the evidence is not yet'clear.
 'There are several special export processing zones (EPZ's) in
 Thailand, with many more planned to stimulate the growth of
 export-oriented industry. No separate labor legislation
 applies to EPZ's, where wages and working conditions in fact
 usually exceed national norms. There are trade unions and
 collective bargaining in the EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory labor except
 in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law. There
 were no allegations of forced or compulsory labor in 1990
 aside from the question of adult and child prostitution
 discussed in Section 5. Two ILO Committees in 1990 found
 several provisions of Thai law to be inconsistent with ILO
 conventions on forced labor, which Thailand has ratified, and
 expressed doubt whether measures taken by the Government were
 sufficient to curtail the serious situation of child labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 In Jahuary the Government took a major step towards bringing
 its laws. into conformity with international standards by
 
 
 1052
 THAILAND
 raising the minimum employment age from 12 to 13. The
 government policy is to raise the level gradually to the ILO
 standard of 15, although no timetable for subsequent increases
 has been set. The law still permits the employment of
 children between the ages of 13 and 15 in "light work",
 although the employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6
 a.m.) is prohibited. In addition, the Government announced
 its intent to increase compulsory educatiov from 6 to 9 years
 in 1991. Despite changes in the law, child labor continued to
 be cause considerable domestic and foreign criticism in 1990.
 Foreign interest groups have focused heavily on the
 exploitation of working children. Complaints against Thailand
 allege that Thai standards continue to be low, that
 enforcement is inadequate despite recent increases in the
 number of labor inspectors, and that penalties for violations
 of the law are not severe enough. There were no substantial
 new allegations of the employment of children under age 13 in
 1990. There are continued reports of children over age 13
 illegally employed in dangerous, unhealthful, or otherwise
 harmful circumstances. In 1990 several employers found
 violating child labor laws received fines and, in one
 particularly egregious case, a prison term. Occasional fires
 or accidents involving children working or living in factories
 and construction sites have concentrated public attention on
 deficiencies. Thai efforts to remedy these problems are
 hampered more than anything else by inadequate budget
 allocations for inspection and enforcement, as well as fines
 which do not sufficiently deter potential violators. The
 Department of Labor division responsible for child labor
 issues is in the process of tripling its corps of inspectors.
 In addition, large increases in manpower for general labor
 inspection are also occurring. Despite these efforts, fully
 adequate enforcement of child labor laws will require even
 more manpower and funding.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Working conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium and large
 factories, which produce most of Thailand's industrial export
 goods, generally work 8-hour shifts under conditions which
 meet international standards. Thai Government health and
 safety standards are adhered to, wages usually exceed the
 legal minimum, children are not employed, and employees enjoy
 various additional benefits. However, in Thailand's large
 informal sector, which is subject to minimum inspection,
 enforcement, and educational efforts by the Labor Department
 and its inspector corps, health and safety standards mandated
 under the law are generally little understood by workers and
 seldom upheld by employers. Government industrial safety
 programs, although well designed, largely rely on
 informational campaigns and voluntary compliance in
 cooperation with labor inspectors. A further problem is that
 many-of the businesses in violation of the law are
 unregistered, evade taxes, and operate outside the sphere of
 government inspection and regulation.
 The legal minimum wage in the Bangkok area, set by a
 tripartite wage committee consisting of government, employer,
 and worker representatives, was raised in 1990 from $3.12 to
 $3.60. The unskilled workers who pour into Bangkok from the
 far poorer countryside often are willing to work at less than
 the minimum wage. In rural Thailand too, many workers are
 willing to work for less than the minimum wage. Established
 minimum wage levels are adequate to provide workers and their
 families a decent standard of living, given Thailand's level
 
 
 -1053
 THAILAND
 of economic development.- Government officials report that
 large groups of laborers--estimated at about one-third of the
 total--receive less than the legal minimum wage. They .have
 tasked labor inspectors with enforcing prescribed rates more
 effectively.
 On. September 2,-Thailand's first social security law took
 effect. The social security system will Anitially'provide
 death, disability, and maternity benefits. Retirement and
 unemployment benefits will go into effect in 1996. The
 Government has not mandated a uniform 48-hour workweek for the
 entire labor force. Commercial employees work a maximum of 54
 hours per week, employees in industry 48, and those in
 "dangetous" work 42. Transportation workers are restricted to
 no more than 8 hours daily.
 
 
 1054
