 THAILAND
 Several positive developments marked the past year
 in Thailand with respect to human rights issues.
 Parliamentary government was reestablished with elec-
 tions in April. A martial law order permitting deten-
 tion without trial was repealed and prisoners released.
 The government continued emphasis on policies of
 national reconciliation and improving the lot of rural
 poor, and otherwise has generally sustained the rela-
 tively open Thai society's accommodation of individual
 and religious freedoms. The Government has retained
 some restrictions on media content and political gather-
 ings, and an anti-communist law with arbitrary detention
 provisions, but these measures have only been rarely
 used. The following paragraphs report in detail on the
 human rights situation in Thailand.
 National elections were held in April 1979, reestab-
 lishing a limited form of parliamentary government in
 Thailand. Under the Constitution promulgated on
 December 2, 1978, there is a strong Executive led by a
 prime minister and a bicameral legislature composed of
 a 301-member elected Lower House and a 225-member
 Senate approved by the King on the advice of the Prime
 Minister. Neither the Prime Minister nor his Cabinet
 need be elected Members of Parliament. The Prime
 Minister is elected by the House and Senate setting in
 joint session. The powers of the elected House will be
 automatically expanded in 1982 on expiration of several
 constitutional provisions which restrict parliamentary
 actions during an initial four-year period. Access to
 political power continues to be strongly influenced by
 the ruling military circle.
 The 1979 elections were generally considered fair
 and open with approximately half of the country's eligible
 voters casting their ballots. 'Although a law allowing for
 the registration of political parties is still pending,
 all political parties with the exception of the outlawed
 Communists participated in elections. The Social Action
 Party, led by former Prime Minister Khukrit Pramot, won
 the largest number of seats in the Lower House, but well
 below an absolute majority. Prime Minister Kriangsak
 continued in office with the unanimous support of the
 appointed Senate and approximately one-third of the
 elected members of the House.
 Martial law is still in effect. However, the new
 Kriangsak Government has continued emphasis on national
 reconciliation and remained sensitive to human rights
 issues. This year there have been several positive
 developments in addition to holding of elections. Most
 important has been the cancellation of martial law
 Order 22 which allowed the Government to detain persons
 without trial in certain cases. Also notable was the
 elimination of the Prime Minister's power to sentence
 persons without trial.
 
 (537)
 
 
 538
 In terms of governmental powers, the principal remain-
 ing human rights issues relate to the Government's
 conduct of operations against Communist insurgents and
 subversives. The Anti-Communist Act revised in February
 1979, gives government officials wide-ranging special
 powers in combatting the growth of the armed insurgency.
 The Government has used these powers sparingly but there
 have been complaints of abuse of authority affecting
 civilians who are not involved in insurgency.
 Thailand's relatively open society allows full freedom
 of worship as well as considerable freedom of the
 individual and of expression. The Government, however,
 in 1979 decided to retain some restrictions on media
 content, although rarely applying them to date.
 while Thailand's approximately one million Muslims in
 the four southern provinces have sometimes been neglected
 by the Bangkok government, they have been permitted to
 have Muslim judges to administer Islamic laws and usages
 in civil cases involving family and inheritance matters.
 Thai Muslims have not in practice participated equally
 in political life though there has not been overt dis-
 crimination. Top ranking military and civil officials
 in the Muslim areas have usually been Thai Buddhists
 from other parts of the country.
 The refugee influx from Indochina continued in 1979. The
 population in Thai camps was about 141,00Q by Dec. 31*
 Thailand temporarily limite fiEs4ranti-ng of'asylum as
 did other countries in the region. In June about 40 to
 50,000 Khmer refugees were forcibly repatriated and the
 Thai/Kampuchean border closed. Subsequently, however,
 the Thai Government has reversed its policy and is
 working closely with foreign and international organiza-
 tions to provide assistance to refugees on the border and
 to prepare holding centers for, and assistance to, the
 major influx of refugees from Kampuchea which has included
 some 500,000 as of December with the prospect of an addi-
 tional one million or more Khmer who may seek refuge if
 fighting breaks out again. Thai officials grant wide
 access to UN and voluntary organizations and continue
 cooperation on refugee assistance programs.
 Within the holding centers and border concentrations thare
 have been problems involving corruption and inadequacy
 of services that have resulted fron) aotjvStips of
 local officials and irregular Khmer militants.
 The Thai Ministry of Interior has, in some instances,
 neglected to lay down policy guidelines which has given
 some provincial governors too much of a free hand,
 resulting in cases of mistreatment. The implementation
 of national refugee policy resulted in multiple deaths
 in two instances:  (1) the forced repatriation in June
 and (2) the sudden mass transfer of 15,000 Hmong refugees
 from Nong Khai to the ill-prepared Loei camp in late
 summer.
 Attacks on newly arriving refugees by criminal ele-
 ments, particularly vicious in the case of Thai pirate
 assaults on Vietnamese boat refugees, occurred through
 
 * There were an additional 150,000 Khmer in Thai holding
 centers in December.
 
 
 539
 the past year, and the Thai Government asserts it lacks
 the resources to patrol land or sea border areas ade-
 quately.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The Department of State does not believe torture is
 used as an instrument of Government policy. There have
 been, however, allegations of instances of torture in
 rural areas of Thailand which are affected by Communist
 insurgency. The Coordinating Group for Religion in
 Society (CGRS), a Thai human rights group, has alleged
 such mistreatment. Three peasants sentenced to death in
 June 1977 for their involvement in the murder of a
 policeman claimed their confessions were extracted by
 torture. On appeal, the court found that their claims
 were not substantiated, and their sentences were subse-
 quently commuted to life imprisonment by royal pardon
 in Feburary 1979.
 An independent human rights evaluation last year
 prepared by the Congressional Research Service of the
 Library of Congress concluded "...the available evidence
 suggests that the incidents of torture and physical abuse
 have been quite limited except in the period immediately
 following the violence of October 6, 1976". These inci-
 dents occurred during a period of only several days
 prior to the establishment of martial law.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment-
 The Thai Government opposes the use of cruel, inhuman,
 or degrading punishment. Several policemen accused of
 severe mistreatment have been arrested and prosecuted,
 but convictions are difficult to obtain for lack of
 evidence, and human rights groups such as CGRS assert
 that most offenders go unpunished. As in cases of tor-
 ture, a majority of allegations of mistreatment come
 from rural provinces affected.by the Communist insur-
 gency.
 Prior to the May formation of a Cabinet under the
 current Constitution, the Prime Minister had the right
 to order summary executions in extraordinary cases.
 In January and February 1979, seven persons accused of
 kidnapping, rape or murder were executed without court
 trial. However, the transition provisions of the
 Constitution specified that these powers would be termi-
 nated with the appointment of a new Cabinet in May. No
 summary executions have taken place since February.
 Prison conditions in Thailand reflect consequences of
 low government expenditures and limited staff, corrup-
 tion, and a high rate of drug use among prisoners.
 Prisoners are subjected to strict discipline, and are
 subject to punishment for infractions. There is a note-
 worthy rehabilitation program in the prisons which is
 aimed primarily at working class labor skills.
 
 
 540
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Martial law powers allowing for arbitrary arrest and
 imprisonment have been significantly reduced during
 1979. The most important action was a Bill passed in
 August abolishing martial law Order 22 which allowed for
 temporary detention without trial of persons accused of
 nine categories of political and criminal offenses. The
 numbers of persons held under this order, the majority
 charged with criminal offenses, had declined from 800 in
 early 1979 to about 500 by mid-year. An Amnesty Inter-
 national report of May 1978 claiming there were "several
 hundred and possibly as many as a thousand" political
 prisoners in Thailand appeared to refer primarily to the
 number of people detained under this order. All were
 released after the Order was withdrawn. Approximately
 100 were subsequently charged with criminal offenses
 and if their cases are prosecuted, will now be entitled
 to trials with full legal rights.
 On August 15, a civil court acquitted and released from
 prison seven labor organizers who had been arrested and
 detained without bail since 1976 on charges of commu-
 nist activity. The group, led by Suphap Pasa-ong, had
 been listed as prisoners of conscience in the 1978 Amnesty
 International Report.
 At present, the only remaining legal basis for imprison-
 ment without trial is a provision of the anti-Communist
 Act which permits persons accused of Communist activities
 to be detained up to 210 days with the approval of the
 Police Director-General and up to 480 days with the
 permission of a military or criminal court. Accurate
 figures on the number of persons detained under this pro-
 vision are difficult to obtain, but the total appears to
 be less than 10. None is a leading opponent of the cur-
 rent regime. Also under the provisions of the anti-
 communist act, armed communist insurgents who surrender
 to the government or are captured must undergo several
 months of compulsory political training before returning
 to their homes.
 The most publicized detention case involved Udom
 Phakrong and ten other villagers accused of supporting
 Communist insurgents -- this group was acquitted and
 released by Thai courts in November of 1979. The
 defendants claimed they were harassed because of dis-
 putes with local officials, whose opportunities for
 abuse of power is a legitimate concern.
 There is no evidence of clandestine imprisonment. The
 Thai have an evidential legal system although not a
 jury system; cases are heard on the basis of specific --
 usually well documented -- charges which must be brought
 within a limited time period.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Thai citizens enjoy the presumption of innocence and
 have access to courts or administrative bodies for redress.
 They have the right to trial with legal counsel in all
 
 
 541
 cases. However, they can be denied the right to counsel
 during the pre-trial, or investigative period. This limi-
 tation of the right to legal counsel diminishes due pro-
 cess. Defendants have the right to counsel throughout
 the trial and appeal stages.
 Under the provisions of martial law Order 1, certain
 categories of crimes must be tried in military courts.
 On August 21, 1979, the Thai Cabinet reduced the scope
 of military courts by abolishing the military authority
 to try cases involving sexual offenses, offenses consti-
 tuting public danger, or threats to life, limb or property.
 However, military courts are still responsible for trying
 cases involving national security, armed insurgency, kid-
 napping, arson, and sabotage. Persons tried in military
 courts enjoy legal rights including right to counsel, but
 the verdict cannot be appealed. Civilian courts are not
 structurally independent of the executive as they are part
 of the civil service and are administered by the Ministry
 of Justice, but there is a tradition of independence
 built into the legal code and reinforced by the appellate
 system.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 Thai law requires police to have a search warrant before
 entering the owner's home without his consent. However,
 the 1979 amendments to the Anti-Communist Act allow search
 without warrant when officials are involved in designated
 .communist suppression operations". To the best of the
 Department's knowledge, such powers have been used spar-
 ingly, and human rights groups have not made allegations
 of abuse of this particular authority.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education:
 Thailand has a well-developed system of education and
 health care, although the availability of social services
 varies, with the urban middle class benefiting to a
 larger degree than the rural poor. The percentage of
 persons living in absolute poverty continues to decline
 as a result of Thailand's good economic growth, but
 the benefits of growth are not equally distributed.
 The Thai Government recognizes the need to reduce the
 income gap between rural and urban dwellers. It has
 declared 1979 the "Year of the Farmer" and is devoting
 a substantial portion of the Government budget to problems
 of rural development. For fiscal 1980, the percentage of
 the budget to be spent on development is 42 percent, which
 is up slightly from the previous year. Government expendi-
 tures are being shifted away from the city to the rural
 areas, and promises have been made to reform the present
 regressive tax structure. Current development programs
 emphasize local participation and decision-making.
 Thailand has already achieved the goal of near universal
 education at the primary level, excepting the hard-to-reach
 minorities in isolated hill areas.
 
 
 542
 Thailand has an essentially capitalist economy with
 some government monopolies, primarily in the field of
 public utilities. The right to private property is
 protected, and compensation is required when the
 Government acquires private lands.
 Corruption is endemic in Thailand. It involves both
 large scale graft in government financial dealings,
 and public officials' augmentation of their low salaries
 by demanding additional payments for services rendered
 to the public. This pattern hinders the poor's access
 to social services and the responsiveness of the bureau-
 cracy as well as encourages disrespect for the institu-
 tions of government.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Thai citizens enjoy considerable freedom of speech and
 criticism of government policies is permitted. There
 are some restrictions of freedom of speech, for example
 insulting the monarchy or advocating a Communist system
 of government. The Thai press is privately owned but
 operates under restrictions of the Press Act of 1941 and
 Martial Law.Order 42. The latter gives the'government
 power to close newspapers which publish stories judged
 libelous or contrary to national security interests. In
 August, the Cabinet, in a review of Martial Law orders,
 decided not to abolish or amend Order 42, even though
 the Kriangsak Government has used it sparingly. The
 closing of one newspaper for publishing critical personal
 attacks on senior officials, despite its subsequent
 re-opening, served to remind the local press of the
 Government's authority, awareness of which continues to
 be a restraint on local press activity. The Government
 has also placed some restrictions on television coverage
 of international news, requiring foreign satellite news
 broadcasts to be prescreened.
 Martial law restrictions (Order No. 4) prohikiting
 political gatherings of five or more persons were lifted
 during the election campaign. Although the restrictions
 have since been reinstated, politicians, students, and
 organized labor have sponsored large political rallies
 without significant interference from authorities.
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed in law and respected
 in practice.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Aside from long-standing restrictions on the travel
 of Vietnamese nationals in Thailand, the only limitation
 on travel in Thailand are restrictions on entry into cer-
 tain rural areas, believed to be used as bases by Commu-
 nist insurgents. There are no restrictions on foreign
 travel or emigration.
 
 
 543
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Thailand held national elections April 22, 1979 in
 which all political parties except the outlawed Communists
 participated. The elections were generally considered
 fair and open, and the majority of elected representatives
 were members of parties in opposition to the current
 government. The majority of Thais, both men and women,
 over the age of 20 had the right to vote, but there were
 requirements (educational and military service) for
 children of alien parents which primarily affected Thai-
 land's large number of citizens of Chinese descent.
 Under the Kriangsak Government, restrictions on the
 activities of organized labor have been relaxed. It
 has reaffirmed the right of workers in state enterprises
 and private companies to organize, permitted labor unions
 to hold regular meetings, allowed foreign labor assistance
 organizations to sponsor labor seminars, and officially
 recognized the Labor Congress of Thailand, Thailand's
 largest labor federation, and two other similar groups.
 At the same time, the martial law ban on strikes has been
 maintained. Despite this restriction, strikes do occur
 and union leaders are rarely arrested. In cases where
 strikers have been arrested, the maximum punishment has
 been several days imprisonment and/or a small fine.
 Martial law restrictions on labor's political acti-
 vities remain, but were not used to prevent the Labor
 Congress of Thailand from sponsoring a large public rally
 in July to protest Government economic policies, and labor
 leaders frequently speak out on political topics without
 Government interference. There is no labor-based political
 party, and organized labor did not endorse candidates in
 the 1979 elections. Workers are represented on the
 Government Wage Committee, the National Labor Advisory
 Board, and the tripartite Labor Relations Committee, an
 arbitration committee established to resolve labor dis-
 putes in the absence of a right to strike. However,
 Government representative' constitute a majority of these
 boards.
 Women have equal rights under the law in Thailand and
 are well represented in the labor force. However,
 they continue to be under-represented in some professional
 fields, top management, and high government positions.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1977, the Government allowed Amnesty International
 and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to
 inspect the prison conditions of persons (subsequently
 amnestied in 1978) held on charges relating to civil
 disturbances at Thammasat University in 1976. Since
 that time, the Department is not aware of any major
 visits by leading international organizations concerned
 with human rights, although both Amnesty International
 and the International Court of Jurists frequently write
 to responsible Thai officials about specific cases of
 alleged human rights abuse.
 Among domestic groups interested in human rights, the
 Lawyer's Association of Thailand has played a leading
 role in oppositing many martial law restrictions on civil
 liberties, and their opinions have played a role in
 influencing government opinion. Another leading gioup,
 the Coordinating Group for Religion in Society (CGRS),
 has claimed harrassment in the case of three CGRS workers
 who were arrested on charges of Communist activities and
 held for three weeks before bail was granted. The three
 were acquitted of all charges in early 1979, and there
 have been no similar incidents since that time.
 
 
 544
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: THAILAND
 1977     1978     1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTALo..        17.7     10.8     24.5
 LOANS...........           7.5      5.5      8.0
 GRANTS.............        10.2      5.3     16.5
 A.AID  ..................      12.8      7.5     21.6
 LOANS..............         7.5      5.5      8.0
 GRANTS.............         5.3      2.0     13.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         4.9      3.3      2.9
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         4.9      3.3      2.9
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         1.3      1.8      1.0
 OTHER............         3.6      1.5      1.9
 II.MIL. ASSISTv-TOTAL...        47.2     38.6     32.1
 LOANS..............        30.0     29.5     30.0
 GRANTS.............        17.2      9.1      2.1
 A.MAP GRANTS..........        16.0      8.0      1.2
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....        30.0     29.5     30.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         1.2      1.1      0.;
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        64.9     49.4     56.6
 LOANS..............        37.5     35.0     36.0
 GRANTS...........          27.4     14.4     18.6
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS..........        10.8      4.5    108.2
 EX-IN BANK LOANS.......         1.9      4.5     92.0
 ALL OTHER..............   ..     .9      0.0     16.2
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........    209.9    348.6    383.3   2219.0
 IBRO             158.0    243.5    170.2   1416.4
 IFC                3.0      2.1     45.2     83.1
 IDA                0.0     33.1     60.0    125.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD               47.0     65.2     91.9    513.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.1      2.2      6.2     50.5
 OTHER-UN           1.8      2.5      9.8     30.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
