 THAILAND
 Thailand's government is a constitutional monarchy with a
 strong executive branch and a weaker bicameral legislature
 composed of a 347-member elected Lower House and a 243-member
 appointed Senate. The elected house wields less power than
 the bureaucracy and the military, the latter playing a strong
 and often dominant role in Thai political life. The Senate,
 which has few legislative powers, is composed largely of
 active duty or retired military men. The monarchy exerts
 strong informal influence. The Prime Minister and members of
 his Cabinet are subject to votes of confidence, although they
 need not be elected members of Parliament themselves. Free
 national elections for the Lower House were held in July 1986
 with record participation, following which the current Prime
 Minister, General (retired) Prem Tinsulanon, who has held
 office since 1980, formed a four-party coalition government
 supported by roughly two-thirds of the Lower House.
 Thailand is an emerging middle-income developing country with
 a free enterprise economic system in which individual economic
 interests and the right to hold private property are strongly
 protected. Although the industrial sector has expanded
 rapidly in recent years, 70 percent of the Thai people still
 live in the countryside, and agriculture remains the main
 source of livelihood.
 Thailand's security apparatus operates within a
 constitutionally mandated framework, but numerous police,
 civilian, and military agencies share responsibilities, often
 with overlapping jurisdictions and ill-defined mandates. The
 security services, reflecting the strong executive branch
 orientation of the Government, have formidable powers,
 sometimes utilized in a heavy-handed or uneven way.
 Nonetheless, human rights abuses attributable to the security
 services are not sanctioned by the Government and have been
 increasingly less frequent in recent years.
 Communist insurgents, Muslim separatists, and criminal gangs
 operate in rural areas and use terrorism to advance their
 respective aims. In recent years, the Government has made
 steady progress in reducing the influence of these groups,
 particularly of the first two. Communist strength has
 declined markedly due to several factors, including an amnesty
 program for defectors and financial assistance to help them
 reintegrate into society. The Government is also continuing
 efforts to integrate Thailand's Muslim community. Sporadic
 low-level violence in southern Thailand continued to call
 attention to residual Communist and Muslim separatist
 activities in provinces along the Malaysian border.
 Thailand continued to offer sanctuary and assistance to
 Indochinese refugees prior to third-country resettlement.
 During 1986 the human rights record continued without serious
 violations. Autonomous political parties, gatherings, and
 associations are allowed, and freedom from arbitrary detention
 or search is generally safeguarded, notwithstanding some
 rarely enforced restrictive laws still on the books. Although
 it practices some self-censorship, the press is among the
 freest in Asia. Human rights activists in Thailand are able
 to bring issues to the attention of the Government and public
 and to lobby for corrective action.
 
 
 820
 THAILAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of killings, including summary
 executions, in which official government involvement was
 alleged. Nonetheless, senior Thai officials have been quoted
 by newspapers as acknowledging that police execution of
 habitual serious criminals without due process does occur
 occasionally in southern Thailand, an area which regularly
 records the nation's highest crime rates and parts of which
 still retain a "Wild West" atmosphere. In rural areas,
 Communist insurgents and ethnic separatists have continued to
 use violence, including murder, to pursue their respective
 objectives. Their targets have included low-level government
 officials, local entrepreneurs, and security officials.
 In this and past years, a number of journalists died violently
 in rural areas. Such killings have diminished sharply in
 recent years, and local human rights activists regard the
 situation as distinctly improved. The motivations for these
 killings are not entirely clear. Some of the murdered
 journalists had published exposes on corruption or illegal
 activity. Others had apparently engaged in blackmail or
 extortion, and likely were killed in retaliation.
 In the 1986 general election campaign, there were 12
 politically related murders. None of these incidents was
 government sanctioned, however, and they are being
 investigated. Charges of politically motivated election
 intimidation and the number of deaths were fewer than in
 previous national polls.
 b. Disappearance
 Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists have used
 terrorism as a political'weapon, resulting in the
 disappearance of civilians and government officials.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Thai Government has stated its opposition to the use of
 cruel, inhuman, or degrading punishment. According to human
 rights activists in Thailand, abuses of authority, both real
 and alleged, relating to cruel and inhuman punishment or
 treatment have declined steadily over the last several years.
 In 1986 Amnesty International charged that paramilitary
 elements responsible for security at a Cambodian refugee camp
 had tortured three Cambodians who had been accused of robbery
 and murder. The Government denied these charges.
 Prison conditions in Thailand remain poor as a consequence of
 serious overcrowding, low government expenditures, limited
 staff, corruption, and narcotics abuse by prisoners.
 Prisoners are subject to strict regulations, including
 corporal punishment for infractions. Attempted prison escapes
 are suppressed with maximum force, regularly resulting in
 deaths. Prison conditions vary with the prisoner's social
 status as well as with the nature of the offense. Westerners
 generally receive preferential treatment but there is no
 systematic discrimination.
 
 
 821
 THAILAND
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Thailand's criminal and civil codes follow Western European
 models, and the rights of suspects are similar to those in
 Western Europe. Except in cases of crimes in progress, arrest
 warrants generally are required, and specific charges must be
 brought within a limited time period against those detained.
 There is a functioning bail system. Arbitrary arrest is not
 practiced.
 A small number of Communist insurgents and Muslim separatists
 have been detained without trial under previously effective
 martial law provisions, but martial law powers allowing
 arbitrary arrest and imprisonment were reduced significantly
 in 1984. Otherwise, the only legal basis for arrest and
 detention without specific charges for long periods (up to 480
 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities Act. According to
 local human rights groups, those detained under the act have
 not been mistreated.
 Summary exile is not practiced.
 Section 31 of the Constitution prohibits forced or compulsory
 labor except in time of war, during a state of emergency or
 martial law, or to avert imminent "public calamity."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees Thai citizens the presumption of
 innocence as well as access to courts or administrative bodies
 to seek redress. Suspects can be denied the right to legal
 counsel during the pretrial or investigative period of their
 cases but before trial they have access to a lawyer of their
 own choosing. There is a functioning bail system. Summary
 punishment is not practiced.
 The Thai have a legal system in which judges rather than
 juries make findings of fact. Cases are heard on the basis of
 specific charges, usually well-documented, by a panel of
 judges. During the martial law period (October 1976 - August
 1984) military courts had jurisdiction over cases involving
 internal and external national security, Thai relations with
 other nations, and offenses against the royal family and
 public peace. Since 1984, however, military courts are used
 solely in cases involving only military personnel. All other
 cases come under the jurisdiction of civilian courts. The
 alleged plotters of the 1985 coup bid are being tried in
 civilian courts.
 Persons tried in both the military and civilian courts enjoy a
 broad range of legal rights, including the right to counsel
 both in the trial and appellate stages. A civilian court
 decision may be appealed; a military court decision may not.
 Both court systems, however, allow appeal for a royal pardon.
 On December 1, the King granted clemency to Surachai Sae Dan,
 convicted of murdering a police captain, and commuted his
 death sentence to life imprisonment. Moreover, prisoners
 sometimes benefit from periodic royal amnesties. The courts
 are relatively independent of external pressures. There have
 been allegations, however, of both government and private
 influence being brought to bear on certain cases, often those
 involving narcotics.
 A pilot government program to provide free legal advice to the
 poor continues in operation. Most free legal aid, however,
 
 
 822
 THAILAND
 comes from private organizations, including the Lawyers'
 Association and the Women's Lawyers' Association.
 f. Arbitrary interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Thai society is generally an open one where membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, the police function is
 not abused for security or political purposes, and the
 unmonitored exchange of ideas generally is permitted, although
 those espousing leftist or Communist views are probably
 watched by the security services. Thai law requires that
 police possess a search warrant prior to entering a home
 without the owner's consent. There are sometimes allegations
 that officers endorse warrants in advance and then allow their
 subordinate noncommissioned officials to apply them as
 needed. Sections of the Anti-Communist Activities Act allow
 officials.involved in specifically designated "Communist
 suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants,
 but these power. have been used sparingly.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution generally affirms citizens' right to free
 speech and a free press, but there are laws which impose
 restrictions on those rights. The principal legal
 restrictions on these freedoms are prohibitions against
 insulting or defaming the King, Queen, Heir Apparent, or
 Regent (lese majeste), advocating a Communist system of
 government, or publishing materials which threaten national
 security. Two persons were charged with lese majeste in
 Thailand during 1986. One, a Deputy Interior Minister, was
 forced to resign because of political pressure after
 allegations that he committed lese majeste during an election
 campaign rally. The allegations are still under
 investigation. There are less formal prohibitions against
 criticism of religious institutions, ethnic groups, or the
 military.
 Thai citizens enjoy substantial freedom of speech, and the
 Government permits criticism of its policies. International
 publications circulate freely in Thailand, as does a wide
 range of political and social commentary presented by the
 privately owned Thai press. Technical publications and
 pamphlets, including those of academics, circulate freely and
 present viewpoints ranging from the non-Communist left to the
 ultraright. Foreign and domestic books are not censored,
 except in rare instances where publications are critical of
 the Royal Family or the Thai monarchy.
 Television and radio stations are licensed by the Government
 and operated both by government and private entities as
 commercial enterprises. Although the Government's
 Broadcasting Directing Board in theory reviews all television
 programs prior to broadcast, in practice stations present a
 range of viewpoints. Radio stations are required to carry the
 government-produced newscast four times daily, but are free to
 originate other news and commentary. Opinions critical of
 government positions have been broadcast but, in general,
 controversial issues are treated cautiously, if at all. A
 lively exception was a series of television spots allotted for
 the first time to political parties by the Government during
 the 1986 national election campaign. Two political parties
 
 
 823
 THAILAND
 took the unusual step of buying additional television time
 during the campaign.
 The press continues to operate under the restrictions imposed
 by the Press Law of 1941 and remnants of past martial law
 orders. These laws permit the Government to close newspapers
 and revoke the licenses of editors of newspapers which publish
 stories deemed to be libelous or contrary to national security
 interests. The Government infrequently uses its statutory
 power over the press, although awareness of this power
 contributes to self-censorship. Marking a change in the
 pattern of the last 3 years, there were no closures of
 publications in 1986.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Organized labor, politicians, students, and various special
 interest groups hold meetings, seminars, and rallies to
 further their interests or to protest government policies
 without interference from the Government. In several
 provinces, the remaining vestiges of martial law which could
 have been used to restrict assembly have been repealed.
 Private associations are supposed to register with the
 Ministry of Interior. However, withholding of registration
 has not been used to inhibit freedom of association.
 Although organized labor was severely circumscribed during the
 period 1977-79, the right of labor to organize has been
 unrestricted since then. A minimum of only 10 persons can
 form a labor union. Independent labor unions exist in both
 the private enterprise sector and the state enterprise
 sector. Only about 10 percent of the labor force in
 nonagrarian occupations is unionized. This low percentage
 stems from the newness and fragmentation of the labor
 movement, as well as from the economic slowdown of the past
 few years. The labor movement is represented on a tripartite
 committee which makes an annual recommendation on minimum wage
 levels.
 The right to strike is recognized and unrestricted in the
 private sector. State enterprise workers, however, do not
 have the right to strike. Many of them have struck on
 occasion anyway, often without penalty. However, the
 Government has attempted to discourage labor demonstrations
 which have had political connotations. A system of labor
 courts, to which unions elect a third of the judges, serves as
 a frequently used medium for settling labor disputes.
 Labor unions in Thailand maintain unrestricted relations with
 recognized international labor bodies such as the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions,
 International Trade Secretariats, and the Association of
 Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Trade Union Congress, and with
 various national labor bodies, notably those from the United
 States, West Germany, Japan, and Israel.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is practiced throughout Thailand and
 protected by law and custom. Theravada Buddhism, the de facto
 state religion, has had an abiding and profound influence on
 Thai culture and history, and the preponderance of Thai
 practice it. The King is required by the Constitution to
 profess the Buddhist faith and practice Buddhism.
 
 
 824
 THAILAND
 Nonetheless, Thailand is a secular society with church and
 state clearly separate. There are no restrictions on
 religious ceremonies, the teaching of religion, or conversion
 from one religion to another. Missionaries are permitted
 generally to live and proselytize in Thailand, as has been the
 case for more than a century. Foreign clergy may preach
 freely. There is no legal or organized discrimination
 against, or persecution of, those affiliated with minority
 religions, such as Christianity or Islam. Religious
 publishing, regardless of faith, is freely allowed. Like
 private associations, religious institutions are registered by
 the Government. Most senior Thai officials and political
 leaders are at least nominally Buddhist. Muslims living in
 the four southern provinces which have majority Muslim
 populations have the right to have civil law cases decided by
 Muslim judges under Koranic law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from long-standing restrictions on the travel of Chinese
 and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand, the only limitations
 on travel of persons other than refugees are restrictions on
 entry into certain rural areas believed by the Government to
 be used as bases by Communist insurgents. The right of
 citizens to change their residence or workplace is
 unabridged. There are no government restrictions on foreign
 travel or emigration, except for government officials, but
 Thai women and children under the age of 14 must have their
 passport'applications approved by the Department of Public
 Welfare. In addition, a 1985 statute requires that all women
 under age 36 sit. through a series of interviews regarding
 their employment records and finances in connection with
 passport applications. This has been protested by some
 women's rights advocates. These provisions of law, designed
 to prevent the export of children for sale and women for
 purposes of prostitution, have proved difficult to enforce.
 The Government has rarely revoked citizenship.
 Thailand, though not a signatory to international legal
 instruments regarding refugees and their basic rights, has
 acted in the spirit of those agreements in providing asylum to
 about 670,000 refugees from Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam since
 1975, and in permitting the temporary evacuation of around
 250,000 Khmer onto its side of the Thai-Cambodia border. Thai
 policy has been to allow United Nations-coordinated assistance
 to be provided to refugees at first-asylum camps. Displaced
 Khmer are afforded temporary haven at border camps until safe
 repatriation can be arranged. Those in camps run by the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) number
 about 130,000. The Government's program to screen individual
 Laotian arrivals, in place since 1985, continues to function,
 even though the Lao government has so far declined to accept
 back any of its citizens who have been found inadmissible as
 refugees.
 There are occasional reports that individuals and groups,
 especially Hmong highlanders, have been denied access to the
 screening system and compelled to return to Laos. This issue
 is complicated by the fact that some of these would-be
 entrants are Lao resistance elements, rather than simple
 asylum-seekers. Vietnamese coming overland via Cambodia after
 April 1981 have had to remain at the border for. lengthy
 periods until they were allowed to be considered for third
 country resettlement. In October about 3,500 overland
 
 
 825
 THAILAND
 Vietnamese were on the border. Although the Government closed
 Khao I Dang holding center to new refugee arrivals from
 Cambodia in early 1980, another 11,200 Cambodians who
 surreptitiously entered Khao I Dang since then have been given
 full access to the center's facilities. Cambodians caught
 trying to enter Khao I Dang or who violate Thai camp rules
 have been returned to camps for displaced Khmer on the Thai
 side of the border.
 The UNHCR and the major resettlement countries have supported
 the Thai policy of promoting voluntary repatriation when that
 is possible. About 2,900 Lao have returned to their homeland
 under UNHCR supervision following successful bilateral
 Thai/Lao negotiations in September 1980. UNHCR negotiations
 with the Heng Samrin regime concerning the repatriation of
 Khmer refugees remain stalled. The Government of Vietnam has
 been unwilling to discuss repatriation of Vietnamese in
 Thailand. The vast majority of Indochinese in Thailand are
 not willing to return to their home countries.
 Since 1979 nearly 84,000 Vietnamese refugees have arrived in
 Thailand after perilous journeys across international waters,
 often in small, unseaworthy boats. Although considerably less
 than the peak years of 1979-81, the number of arrivals in 1986
 averaged about 340 persons per month, slightly higher than the
 monthly average in the previous 2 years. Boat people continue
 to suffer from pirate attacks, equipment breakdowns, and
 navigational problems which cause sickness, starvation, and
 death.
 As its contribution to alleviating criminal attacks against
 Vietnamese boat people, the Government, with financial and
 technical assistance from the UNHCR and 12 donor nations,
 conducts patrols and other law-enforcement activities designed
 to detect, deter, and punish crimes at sea. In the past year,
 these Thai efforts have been increasingly successful, and
 pirate attacks have declined significantly. The Thai
 authorities apply the same asylum, relief, and resettlement
 policies to boat refugees as to all others.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Since the absolute monarchy ended in 1932, the Thai government
 traditionally has been managed by a continuing civilian
 bureaucracy heavily influenced by the military, often with a
 military officer as Prime Minister. Holding key military
 positions in important units in the immediate Bangkok area has
 been the most common avenue to the highest national
 leadership. Governments often have been changed
 extraconstitutionally by generally bloodless military coups.
 However, since 1978, as Thailand has become a more developed,
 complex society, there has been an evolution toward democratic
 change and constitutional process, with free elections
 assuming a larger role. The failed 1985 coup attempt by a
 small military group which lacked general military support was
 a reminder that constitutional processes are still shallowly
 rooted. It is generally assumed that the military has not
 abjured intervention in the political process, but now usually
 acts quietly from behind the scenes. The Government does not
 normally make decisions which the military would strongly
 disapprove. Active duty military officers are prohibited
 constitutionally from holding cabinet posts.
 
 
 826
 THAILAND
 Prime Minister Prem is supported by parties holding somewhat
 more than half the elected seats in the National Assembly.
 The 1986 national elections for the Lower House were open and
 free, and 16 parties fielded a record number of candidates. A
 four-party coalition government subsequently was formed.
 Opposition parties regularly present opposing views both
 within the National Assembly and through the mass media. The
 Thai National Assembly almost invariably has dissenting votes
 on legislation and on procedural decisions.
 The overwhelming majority of adult Thai have the right to
 vote. The Government encourages voter turnout, but does not
 use either direct or indirect pressure to compel voters to
 cast ballots. Actual voter turnout for both national and
 local elections generally exceeds 50 percent, and the 1986
 parliamentary election topped 61 percent of eligible voters--a
 record.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has responded in the past to specific inquiries
 from Amnesty International and the International Commission of
 Jurists. It is generally willing to discuss human rights
 problems with both domestic and international human rights
 organizations. Human rights organizations of all kinds are
 permitted to visit Thailand, meet with appropriate government
 officials, and lobby for corrective action.
 Local civil and women's rights groups, active on a wide range
 of issues including prostitution and enforcement of labor
 laws, have generally devoted most of their efforts to the
 promotion of women's rights and identifying and correcting
 human rights violations. Thai human rights organizations have
 had significant success in recent years. They have, for
 example, successfully encouraged the Government to tighten the
 discipline of police and paramilitary forces fighting the
 Communist insurgency and have brought pressure on the
 Government to alleviate widespread abuses in child labor
 practices. Local representatives of Amnesty International
 appealed the death penalty given to a former Communist
 insurgent during 1986 and are awaiting a decision on a royal
 pardon.
 Thailand has involved itself directly in international human
 rights efforts, but generally has not taken inititatives in
 United Nations forums. It has, however, taken a leading role
 in preparing ASEAN resolutions in regard to Cambodia,
 including human rights violations, which are considered
 annually by the United Nations. Thai representatives were
 among the founding members of the Regional Council on Human
 Rights in Asia, a forum for the exchange of human rights
 information established in February 1982. Thai members of the
 Council helped draft a declaration on human rights to serve as
 the organization's statement of policy and goals.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Thailand has made considerable progress, particularly
 considering its limited resources, in accomplishing the
 integration of its minorities. While Thailand is generally
 regarded as a tolerant and relatively homogeneous society,
 there are ethnic factors which affect social and cultural
 
 
 827
 THAILAND
 aspirations. Although present in Thailand for several
 generations, some hill tribes are not regarded as citizens.
 Ethnic Chinese are spread throughout Thailand, with a
 concentration in Bangkok. Although the Chinese are better
 assimilated and integrated in Thailand than elsewhere in the
 region, there is a tradition of populism directed against the
 trading and financial activities of the Chinese.
 Muslims are a significant minority and represent a majority in
 the southernmost provinces along Thailand's border with
 Malaysia. The Thai government is very aware of their special
 needs and has put much effort into regionally targeted
 development efforts and the creation of educational
 opportunities in order to integrate Thai Muslims into Thai
 society. However, Muslims continue to be underrepresented in
 government service, the professions, and as participants in
 higher education.
 A community of Vietnamese and their offspring living in the
 northeast since 1954 cannot become Thai citizens, and in most
 cases are restricted in movement, education, and employment
 opportunity. It was long expected that they would eventually
 be repatriated to Vietnam. In the meantime, these
 restrictions represent, in part, a conscious Thai policy to
 discourage further emigration from Vietnam, and in part a
 reaction to the judgment that they represent a kind of "fifth
 column" within Thailand as many appear loyal to Communist
 Vietnam.
 The status and role of women has improved steadily over the
 past several years. For the most part, women have equal legal
 rights in Thailand, with specific guarantees of property:and
 divorce rights, and there are no allegations that these rights
 are denied. Women vote in numbers equal to men and
 participate fully in the political process. There are several
 female members of the national legislature. However, women
 generally are underrepresented in national politics and in
 high governmental positions. They are well represented in the
 labor force and are becoming increasingly so in professional
 positions, particularly those in the commercial sector. In
 general,. women are not legally barred from positions
 traditionally held by men. Despite limitations on serving in
 the armed forces, female officers routinely have solid
 careers, reaching the rank of colonel. In rural areas, sex
 stereotypes exist with respect to occupational and social
 roles. These barriers are being modified as mass
 communications bring modern role models to even the most
 remote communities.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Work conditions vary widely in Thailand. Medium and large
 factories, which produce most of Thailand's export goods, work
 8-hour shifts and have working conditions which are reasonable
 by international standards. Where there are deficiencies,
 including child labor abuses and unsafe working conditions,
 they are confined to the sectors of small manufacturing
 enterprises producing lower quality goods for the local
 market, where it is difficult to enforce labor standards. In
 Bangkok and surrounding provinces, where most industry is
 located, the minimum wage is $2.68 per day. This standard has
 been difficult to enforce, however, and many workers receive
 less than the minimum, especially in construction and the
 domestic, nonexport-oriented sectors of the economy.
 
 
 828
 THAILAND
 Thai law prohibits the employment of children under the age
 of 12. Employment of children 12 to 15 years of age is
 permitted for "light work." A recent study sponsored by a
 Thai government agency concludes that the laws governing child
 labor are inadequate by International Labor Organization
 standards and are poorly enforced, and that both children and
 adults work in substandard conditions. Each year the press
 carries reports of child labor abuses, including reports of
 children held as virtual captives by their employers. A
 recent informal survey by a leading newspaper concluded, for
 example, that more than 100,000 children over the age of 11
 are employed in manufacturing, earning an average of $1-$2 per
 day. A major part of the problem is that Thai labor
 protection law is vague, lacks severe punishment for
 offenders, and does not differentiate between adult and child
 workers.
 
 
 829
 U.S.OVgRSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS. - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: THAILAND
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.         41.9     41.8     37.8
 LOANS ..............    .. .18.1    12.5      3.5
 GRANTS ................   23.8     29.3     34.3
 A.AID ...... ..............   35.9     35.9     31.1
 LOANS ..............    ... 18.1    12.5      3.5
 GRANTS ................   17.8     23.4     27.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         9.1      8.0      5.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0.     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV I WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER SCON. ASSIST,..         6.0      5.9      6.7
 LOANS ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     6.3      5.9      6.7
 PEACE CORPS ......        3.0      3.2      3.1
 NARCOTICS ........        3.0      2.7      3.6
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..       101.2    102.3     87.5
 LOANS ..............   ... 94.0     95.0     80.5
 GRANTS ...............     7.2      7.3      7.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        5.0      5.0      4.8
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....       94.0     95.0     80.5
 C.INTL IL.ED.TRNG ....        2.2      2.3      2.2
 ).TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & 4L....      143.1    144.1    125.3
 LOANS ..............  .... 112.1   107.5     84.0
 GRANTS ................   31.0     36.6     41.3
 OTIER  US  LOANS ..........     16.3      3.0      0.0
 EK-IN BANK LOANS ........      16.3      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1954     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   290.4    481.4    437.0   6220.1
 IBQD             152.6    112.5     93.0   3675.0
 IFC               57.7      0.6    332.9    565.2
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    125.1
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03               75.0    364.1     11.1   1730.9
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.6      4.2      0.0     75.0
 OT4ER-UN           3.5      0.0      0.0     49.3
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 830
