 THAILAND
 Thailand is a democratically governed constitutional monarchy with an independ-
 ent judiciary that has a history of frequent military coups and powerful military-
 bureaucratic influence over political life. The King exerts strong informal influence
 on carefully selected issues. In May Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai dissolved Par-
 liament and called for new elections when it appeared that his government would
 not survive a no-confidence vote. After democratic elections in July, the Chuan ad-
 ministration was replaced by a coalition government headed by Prime Minister
 Banharn Silpa-Archa.
 The security apparatus has wide-ranging legal powers, largely derived from past
 militarily controlled administrations. Military leaders still have an informal but in-
 fluential role in internal politics. Since 1992 the military influence in politics has
 been substantially reduced, however, and the current military leadership has evi-
 denced a growing acceptance of permanent civilian rule. The police have primary
 responsibility for internal security and law enforcement. With the exception of the
 Narcotics Suppression Bureau, the Royal Thai police has a reputation for corrup-
 tion. Some police officers continue to commit serious human rights abuses without
 punishment.
 Thailand, a newly industrializing country with a flourishing free enterprise sys-
 tem, continues to enjoy remarkable economic growth. The political system generally
 provides strong protection for individual economic interests, including property
 rights. Although the industrial and services sectors are expanding rapidly, more
 than half the population is rural and agrarian. Despite the Governments efforts to
 close the economic gap between urban and rural areas, Thailand continues to suffer
 from a large and growing disparity in income distribution.
 While the Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, some
 significant problems remain. While not routine, police brutality continued to be a
 serious problem. Credible reports indicate that some police tortured and beat sus-
 pects, obtained coerced confessions through the use of physical abuse, and played
 an active role in facilitating the trade in prostitution. There were credible reports
 that some officers summarily executed suspects. The Government prosecuted few po-
 lice officers accused of abuse or extrajudicial killings- none have been convicted. The
 Government dropped charges against all but one o? the current and former senior
 police officials accused of complicity in the 1994 deaths of the wife and child of a
 key witness in a 6-year-old case involving the theft of gems from a Saudi prince.
 In August the subcommittee responsible for the disciplinary investigation rec-
 ommended that the active duty official accused be reinstated to the police force at
 his former rank. Enforcement of a broad range of laws and regulations by police
 continues to be noticeably lax.
 In general the Government continued to uphold freedom of assembly and freedom
 of the press, although the new Government was criticized for attempts to restrict
 press activity. While the Banhar Government continued measures aimed at ad-
 dressing the problem of trafficking in women, children, and minorities for the pr-
 poses of prostitution begun under the Chuan administration, progress was slow.
 al and societal discrimination against women, violence against women and chil-
 dren, and illegal child labor persist. Discrimination against ethnic minorities is a
 problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra dicial Killing.-There was one political killing in
 1995. In July Prawian Boonnak, leader of the Assembly of Small-Scale Farmers of
 the Northeast and a candidate in the July 2 elections, was shot and killed by a lone
 gunman. At year's end, the case was under investigation, but it is widely believed
 that he was targeted because of his environmental activism and his recent success-
 ful efforts to shut down rock-grinding plants that were owned by supporters of his
 principal opponent in the election.
 
 
 The Government, legal organizations, reputable nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's), and the press continued to report, credibly, that some police officers sum-
 marily executed criminal suspects, particularly in areas outside the capital. The Po-
 lice Information Center's statistics for 1994 listed a total of 22 extrajudicial killings,
 with an additional 24 suspects killed during arrest. The Legal Information Center
 also reported that a total of 359 people died while in police or Department of Correc-
 tions custody in 1994. It is difficult to gauge accurately what percentage of these
 deaths could reasonably have been avoided. Complete statistics on the number of
 suspects killed by police in 1995 were unavailable.
 Only one of the senior police officials charged with complicity in the 1994 murder
 of the wife and child of a key witness in a 6-year-old case concerning jewelry and
 gemstones stolen by a Thai employee of a Saudi prince remained in jail at year's
 end. The Government dropped the charges against all the other high-level officers.
 No police officers have yet been convicted in this case, although many junior-level
 officers remain under active investigation for their roles in the affair. The 7 police-
 men, who admitted in 1994 to robbing and murdering 13 Asian tourists in Bangkok
 (2 others survived the assaults), had not been sentenced at year's end. Their cases
 were still pending before provincial courts, and all seven were incarcerated.
 The courts rarely convict police officers involved in summary execution cases, in
 part because witnesses are often intimidated or bribed to withhold evidence. The re-
 suiting climate of impunity is the single largest factor militating against any signifi-
 cant change in police behavior. The law allows personal suits against police officers
 for criminal actions taken while making an arrest. However, due to flaws in the
 legal process and ingrained cultural attitudes, victims or their families rarely file
 suits against the police. During the initial police inquiy, most police investigations
 routinely determine that no wrongful action was taken on the part of the police;
 judges generally follow the prosecutor's recommendations. If pursued by the family,
 the case is handled by the same office, in some instances by the same prosecutor,
 who has already ruledthat no criminal action occurred. There is no information to
 determine how many ases are settled out of court, but in cases in which suits are
 filed, the Government often compensates the family of the deceased, and the suit
 is dro p ped.
 b. Diappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 The whereabouts of environmental activist Suchad     a      butra, who dis-
 appeared in December 1994, remained unknown. There were several theories con-
 cerning her disap      ce, but at th        e year both the police and NGO's
 believed that her iappearane was connected to her activist stance, and polie con-
 tinued to investigate the case.
 Local investigations continued into the whereabouts of the remaining 39
 prodemocracy protesters listed as missing following the military's suppression of
 demonstrations in 1992. However, many family members and NGO's suspect that
 most of the missing are dead. An amnesty decree issued during the last days of the
 SSuchinda Government in May 1992, and reaffilrmd by subsequent governments, ef-
 fectively protects military leaders and protesters accused of criminal activities dur-
 ing the May 1992 events from criminal prosecution. In June the Bangkok civil court
 ruled that the amnesty barred the families of the victims from seeking redress in
 the civil courts. Attorneys for the plaintiffs stated their intention to appeal the rul-
 ing and, if necessary, take the case to the Supreme Court. The Royal Thai Army's
 white paper on the May 1992 events was not released, despite continued pressure
 from activist groups andvthe families of those killed.
 Labor Congress of Thailand (LCT) President Thanong Po-an's 1991 disappearance
 remained unresolved. His wife and family presume he is dead. Most observers be-
 lieve Thanong was kidnaped and killed because of his criticism of the February 1991
 military coup d'etat.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code forbids cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and in most cases police d not resort to physical abuse or violence. However, there
 continued to be credible reports that police sometimes beat and tortured prisoners
 and detainees. Criminal suspects regularly complain of police attempts to secure
 confessions or evidence through the use of torture such as electric shocks. Several
 times in 1995, senior police officials publicly acknowledged that torture is occasion-
 ally carried out in police custody, with the implicit backing of some senior police offi-
 cers. The Government has instituted a human rights instruction course to try to ad-
 dress police brutality but made no visible efforts to convict and appropriately punish
 those who commit these abuses. There were also reports of instances of police in
 volvement in the trafficking in women and children or the purposes of prostitution
 (see Section 5).
 
 
 Prison conditions are Spartan, but do not in general threaten the life or health
 of inmates. However, some prison guards resort to physical abuse of both Thai and
 foreign prisoners in response to disciplinary problems. Solitary confinement and
 heavy leg irons are sometimeq used to punish difficult prisoners. Medical care in
 prisons is inadequate. For a total prison population of 100,000, the Corrections De-
 partment employs only 14 doctors and 5 dentists. In general, access to prisoners is
 not restricted.
 Conditions at the Suan Phlu Immigration Detention Center (IDC), which gen-
 erally holds between 2 000 and 3,000 detained illegal immigrants, are extremely
 poor. Serious overcrowding, lack of medical care, inability to exercise, and physical
 abuse are recurrent problems. Reliable international observers charge that both au-
 thorities and detainees sexually abuse female detainees. Immigration detention fa-
 cilities are not administered by the Department of Corrections and are not subject
 to many of the regulations found in the regular prison system. Nationals of coun-
 tries that will not accept deportees because of uncertainties over citizenship face an
 extended stay in the IDC. While the law requires that prosecutors formally charge
 criminal suspects in court within 91 days of their detention, some IDC detainees
 have been held for several years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Except in cases of crimes in progress the
 law generally requires arrest warrants. Arrested persons must be informed o? the
 likely charges against them immediately after arrest. Police have the authority to
 extend the detention period to 7 days to complete an investigation. After 7 days, the
 olice must present the case to the public prosecutor to determine if the case should
 be pursued. While detainees have a right to have a lawyer present during question-
 ing, they are often not informed of this right. Foreign prisoners are often forced to
 sign confessions without knowing what is in them.
 There is a functioning bail system, but judges have considerable discretion in de-
 termining eigiblity forbaiL The only lega basis for detention by the police without
 specificchargs for Iong periods (up to 480 days) is the Anti-Communist Activities
 Act. One person was detained under that Act's prvisions in 1995, the first since
 1984 (see Scion   .e.).
 As of July, there were 109,537 prison inmates in Thailand. Of that number,
 10,146 were persons appealing their sentences, and 13,638 were pretrial detainees.
 These two groups are not usually segregated from the general prison population, al-
 though sometimes an effort is made to confine those facing narcotics charges in a
 separate facility.
 Exil is not used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an indepndent judi-
 ciary and, although generally regarded as independent, the judiciary has a reputa-
 tion for venality.
 The civilian judicial system has three levels of courts: courts of first instance,
 courts of appeal, and the Supreme Court. A separate military court hears criminal
 and civil cases pertaining to military personnel as well as those brought during peri-
 ods of martial aw. A serious flaw in providing due process rights is the lack of ap-
 peal from decisions of a military court. Islamic (Shari'a) courts provide due process
 and hear only civil cases concerning members of the Muslim minority.
 The Constitution provides for presumption of innocence, but in practice defend-
 ants are frequently presumed guilty. Access to courts or administrative bodies to
 seek redress is provided for and practiced.
 There is no trial by jury. Trials for misdemeanors are decided by a single judge,
 and more serious cases require two or more judges. While most trials are public,
 the court may order a trial closed. This is most often done in cases touching on na-
 tional security or the royal family. Career civil service judges preside over the
 courts. Judicial appointments and structures are not subject to parliamentary re-
 view.
 Defendants tried in ordinary criminal courts enjoy a broad range of legal rights,
 including access to a lawyer of their choosing. A government program provides free
 legal advice to the poor, but indigent defendants are not automatically provided
 with counsel at public expense. Most free legal aid comes from private groups, in-
 cluding the Thai Lawyers' Association and the Thai Women Lawyers' Association.
 The widely publicized lese majeste trial against prominent social critic Sulak
 Siwarak that began in 1993 after his return from self-exile was concluded in June.
 The court acquitted Sulak on all counts.
 Well-informed legal sources estimate that there are at most four political pris-
 oners in Thailand. Political affiliation and questionable evidence may have affected
 the ability of these prisoners to receive a fair trial or fair punishment. Muslim
 groups continue to claim 16 political prisoners are held on criminal charges because
 of their political views. In August one man was charged under the Anti-Communist
 
 
 724
 Activities Act. He was driving a gasoline truck through a restricted area of northern
 Thailand at the time of his arrest.
 f. Arbitrar Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 requires police to obtain a warrant prior to a search. Warrants are issued by the
 police with prior Ministry of Interior or provincial governor approval and are not
 sub'ect to judicial review. There were some credible reports that officers sometimes
 enorse warrants in advance and then allow their noncommissioned subordinates to
 appl them as needed. The Anti-Communist Activities Act allows officials engaged
 in "mmunist suppression operations" to conduct searches without warrants, but
 these powers rarely have been invoked in recent years and were not invoked in
 1995.
 Thai society is essentially open; membership in political organizations is vol-
 untary, and the unmnitoredexchange of ideas is generally permitted. However, se-
 curity services monitor persons espousing leftist or controversial views, including
 foreign visitors.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for, and citizens gen-
 erally enjoy, a substantial measure of freedom of speech. However, the law prohibits
 criticism of the royal family (lese majeste), threats to national security, or speaking
 in a manner likely to incite disturbances or insult Buddhism.
 Newspapers and periodicals practice some self-censorship, especially with regard
 to the monarchy and national security issues. However, strong media criticism of
 political parties, personalities, and the Government is common and robust. Journal-
 ists are generally free to comment on government activities without fear of reprisal,
 although  there were credible reports of occasional harassment or bribing of journal-
 ists by individual politicians. Also, journalists are reluctant to criticize the judiciary
 out of fear that they will not be treated fairly by judges during libel proceedings.
 Radio and television stations are government licensed and operated primarily by
 the Government and the military. Radio stations are required by law to broadcast
 government-produced newscasts four times daily. Parliament approved a bill to
 abolish the order requiring these broadcasts in October of 1994, but it was not
 passed into law because of the dissolution of the Chuan Government. The bill is ex-
 pected to be reintroduced in early 1996. On November 22, the Prime Minister re-
 quested that the Ministry of Defense intervene to assure that army-owned radio sta-
 tions do not air broadcasts critical of the current Government.
 Although progammers are generally free to determine the content and nature of
 television broadcasts, a government internal censorship board commonly edits or
 "blacks out" portions cf programming deemed politically sensitive or pornoraphic.
 Self-censorship is more prevalent in privately operated stations because their li-
 censes must be renewed every few years.
 Thailand also has three cable television stations, which enjoy almost complete au-
 tonomy. The Government recently awarded a 30-year contract for an ultra high fre-
 quency station to a consortium of 10 private companies, including the outspoken Na-
 tion Publishing Group. The station, to be called Independent Television, will begin
 free, direct broadcasting in 1996.
 Thai domestic publications continued to present a wide range of political and so-
 cial commentary. Unless critical of the royal family or the monarchy, foreign and
 domestic books normally are not censored and circulate freely. The 1941 Press Law
 empowers the Police Director General to prohibit the import of printed matter
 deemed dangerous to public order and morals. The list mainly consists of porno-
 graphic material, but it also still includes books written by Communists.
 Academic and technical research is conducted freely.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The legal system recognizes
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government respects this right in practice.
 Private associations must register with the Government, but permits are not re-
 quired for private meetings or gatherings unless held on public property.
 c. Feedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is protected by law and generally re-
 spected in practice. The de facto state religion is Theravada Buddhism, but other
 religions are not restricted.
 embers of minority religious movements occasionally are subjected to legal ac-
 tion. The trials of dissident Buddhist leader Phra Potirak and his followers for alleg-
 edly violating the law governing the Buddhist ecclesiastical hierarchy and imper-
 sonating Buddhist monks or nuns continued. Phra Potirak and his followers remain
 free on bail and continue their religious activities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The right of citizens to change their residence or workplace was un-
 abridged. Travel was restricted in certain border areas where foreign or vestigial do-
 
 
 725
 mestic insurgent groups remain active. Longstanding restrictions on the travel and
 place of residence of certain Chinese and Vietnamese aliens living in Thailand re-
 mained in place. In addition, some long-term noncitizen residents of Thailand, in-
 cluding several hundred thousand tribaIpeople, must seek permission from local au-
 thorities or the army for foreign or domestic travel (see Section 5).
 Several regulations intended and used to help reduce trafficking in women and
 children for purposes of prostitution could be used to infringe on the right of women
 and children to travel freely. One statute (rarely used), dating to the last century,
 requires a woman to obtain her husband's permission before traveling outside Thai-
 land. Also, female passport applicants under age 36 must sit through a series of
 interviews regarding their em-ployment records and finances. Passport applications
 by ingleThai women and children under the age of 14 must also be approved by
 te Deparment of Public Welfare.
 The 6-overnment has not revoked citizenship for political reasons.
 Thailand continued to provide first asylum to Vietnamese and Lao asylum seekers
 and to process them in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA)
 agreed to in Geneva in 1989. There were no reports of any pushbacks of Vietnamese
 or Lao asylum seekers, and no credible reports of forced repatriation. The Govern-
 ment announced that all Lao camps were officially closed, though it continued to
 work with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in administering the
 camps at Napho.
 Uider Thai law, most Burmese (and other non-Indochinese) asylum seekers are
 considered illegal immigrants subject to deportation, but Thailand continued to per-
 mit Burmese asylum seekers to remain in camps along the Thai-Burma border and
 near Bangkok. Vhile Burmese outside of camps were arrested periodically and sent
 to border areas not controlled by the Burmese Government, the Government did not
 deport any Burmese recognized by the UNHCR as a "person of concern." At year's
 end, a number of Burmese dissidents, detained as illegal immigrants, remained in
 immigration detention centers in central Thailand.
 Residents of the "safe area" first asylum  camp for Burmese dissidents in
 Ratchaburi province had regular access to the UNHCR, which concluded that condi-
 tions at the safe area meet broadly accepted international standards for the protec-
 tion and welfare of asylum seekers. The safe area is open to all Burmese persons
 of concern, whether or not they previously registered with the Thai Government. By
 year's end, over 400 Burmese persons of concern resided there, and the camp is ex-
 panding facilities, including housing.
 Over 100,000 ethnic minority Burmese and almost 2,000 Burmese students and
 dissidents continued to reside in some 30 camps in Thailand along the Thai-Burma
 border. Several camps were forced to evacuate because of cross-border attacks from
 Burma, and the Government announced plans to consolidate some camps. Thailand
 continued to permit voluntary agencies and the UNHCR to provide food, medical,
 and sanitation assistance along the border.
 The Thais allowed Karen refugees refuge following the fall of Karen strongholds
 at Manerplaw and Kawmoora in February. In later months, troops from inside
 Burma, including some affiliated with the dissident Karen faction, the Democratic
 Karen Buddhist Army, attacked and burned several Karen refugee camps within
 Thailand, kidnaping some Karen Christian leaders. There were several violent inci-
 dents along the border in 1995. In March a truck carrying NGO-provided rice to
 Karen refugees was attacked by unknown assailants and the driver was killed. On
 May 3, three Thai border  lice were killed, which prompted the Thai army to inter-
 vene militarily, strafing Karen Buddhist Army positions. The number of security in-
 cidents decreased during the rainy season, but resumed late in the year. Ostensibly
 for security reasons, the Government announced plans to consolidate Karen refugees
 from 20 separate camps to 7, including one camp of over 20,000 at Mae La. The
 Government also began consideration of consolidating Karenni camps, though at
 year's end no action had been taken to do so. Farther south, Mon leaders continued
 negotiations with the Burmese Government over repatriation plans, and Mon refu-
 gees may start returning home as early as January 1996. Outstanding issues in-
 cluded whether repatriations would be voluntary, whether assistance for repatriates
 would be for 6 or 12 months, and whether NGO's could provide long-term develop-
 ment aid to the Mon. In the east, Thailand accepted small numbers of new arrivals
 fleeing fighting in Cambodia.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 For the first time in Thailand's history, there was a peaceful transition from one
 democratically elected government to another in July, demonstrating that demo-
 cratic institutions are gaining strength. An important step toward decentralization
 
 
 726
 was the first ever election for seats on the "tambon" (subdistrict) councils in May.
 The military's role in politics has significantly declined since the 1992 elections, and
 the Thai military now seems increasingly supportive of civilian government and de-
 mocracy.
 While there are no legal restrictions on political participation, women are gen-
 erally underrepresented in national politics, especially at the senior levels. Also, the
 army still prohibits women from becoming generals and women are not allowed to
 attend military academies or the army General Staff College. However the number
 of women inlocal and national politics has continued to increase. Where is one
 woman in the Banharn Government who has a cabinet portfolio that of deputy Min-
 ister of the Interior. The current contingent of 24 female Members of Parliament-
 out of an elected total of 391-is a considerable increase over the 15 present in the
 previous administration, and ranks as the largest in Thai history to date.
 No laws prohibit the participation of ethnic minorities, but few hold positions of
 authority in national politics or the civil service. Ethnic minorities in the north often
 lack documentation of Thai citizenship, effectively barring their participation in the
 political process (see Section 5). Muslims from southern Thailand hold significant
 posts in the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Loal human rights organizations operate without government restriction. Inter-
 national human rights NGO's generally work freely in Thailand on controversial is-
 sues. Although the Government sometimes criticizes these groups for being politi-
 cally motivated and biased, it generally has neither penalized nor suppressed
 human rights observers.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal treatment under the law irrespective of race,
 sex, religion, disability, language, or social status. In practice, some discrimination
 exists and enforcement of equal protection statutes is uneven.
 Women.-Reliable statistics indicate that domestic abuse crosses all social classes.
 One NGO estimates that as many as 50 percent of women in Bangkok's slum areas
 are victims of abuse. Police do not enforce laws against such violence vigorously, and
 domestic violence often goes unreported. Under the Criminal Code, spousal and
 child abuse is covered under assault provisions, but rules of evidence often make
 prosecuting such cases difficult. Beginning in 1994, police began to use a female
 team to handle rape and abuse cases to encourage more victims to report these
 abuses.
 Prostitution, although illegal, flourishes and is deeply ingrained. Estimates of the
 numbers of women and children engaged in prostitution vary widely because of tem-
 poray sex workers and the migratory nature of prostitution. Reliable NGO's gen-
 erally believe the Government's accounting of 100,000 prostitutes in Thailand is low;
 most estimate the number closer to 250,000.
 Prostitution exposes women to a number of human rights abuses, as well as a
 high risk of contracting AIDS. Some women are forced into prostitution, although
 the number of such cases is difficult to determine. Incidents of coerced prostitution
 most commonly involve non-Thai women from hill tribes or neighboring countries
 and the number of such women entering Thailand to work as prostitutes continued
 to rise. Because they cannot speak Thai, and are considered illegal immigrants,
 these women are paricularly vulnerable to physical abuse, confinement, and exploi-
 tation. Some women are lured with promises of jobs as waitresses or domestics, but
 are then forced to work as prostitutes. As illegal immigrants, such women have no
 right to legal counsel or health care if arrested.
 Human rights monitors believe that the majority who engage in prostitution are
 not kept under physical constraint but labor in debt bondage. Brothel procurers
 often advance parents a substantial sum against their daughter's future earnings,
 often without the consent of the young woman involved. The women are then obli-
 gated to work in a brothel in order to pay back the loan.
 The Government and NGO's have set up vocational training and education pro-
 grams to combat the lure of prostitution for young Thai women and their families,
 and the Government has plans to expand these programs in the near future. De-
 spite occasional high-profile raids on brothels, however, it has failed to enforce effec-
 tively laws against prostitution, and, in many cases, brothels pay off local govern-
 ment representatives and police. There continue to be credible reports of corrupt po-
 lice involvement in trafficking schemes and of police assisting brothel owners in
 tracking down and returning women who have escaped from their establishments.
 
 
 727
 Under the current Penal Code, prostitutes are considered criminals, whereas
 brothel owners, procurers, and clients are not subject to criminal statutes. In August
 the Cabinet approved draft legislation that would further criminalize those involved
 in the trafficrng of women and children for the purpose of prostitution or slave
 labor, clients of child prostitutes would also be subject to criminal prosecution under
 the legislation. At year's end, the draft legislation was under consideration by Par-
 liament's Committee on Women Youth, and the Elderly.
 Women generally have equal legal rights but inequalities remain in domestic law.
 Whereas a man may sue for divorce on the grounds that his wife has committed
 adultery, a woman faces the additional legal burden of proving her husband has
 maintained or honored another woman in a manner equal to his wife. Women face
 more stringent passport requirements than men (see Section 2.d.).
 Statistics compiled by the Government and NGO's concerned with women s issues
 note that women represent 47 percent of the economically active population and
 their numbers have increased in professional positions. Government regulations re-
 quire employers to pay the same wages and benefits for similar work regardless of
 sex. There is a signficant gap between average salaries earned by men and women
 as a result of the concentration of women in traditionally lower paying jobs.
 NGO's concerned with the status of women have pressed the Government to abol-
 ish discriminatoiy practices within the civil service. Constitutional amendments
 passed in early 1995 included a new provision, Article 24, stipulating the equality
 of men and women, and the Government has said that its forthcoming Eighth Na-
 tional Economic and Social Development Plan would be particularly concerned with
 the role of women in Thailand's developing economy.
 Children.-Although the Government continued to demonstrate its commitment to
 improve the health and welfare of children through education and health programs,
 the Government was less successful in implementing policies to tackle more difficult
 issues like child prostitution. While the Government claims to be committed to
 eliminating child prostitution, it has failed to enforce the current limited laws
 against child prostitution. In 1995 the Government approved draft legislation that
 would revise the Criminal Code to toughen the laws regarding abuse of children
 under 18 years of age, and which includes especially severe penalties for violations
 perpetrated against children under 15. Early in 1995, the police engaged in a num-
 er of hily publicized raids on bars and nightclubs in search of underage sex
 workers. There are no reliable statistics on the number of children involved in the
 sex industy but recent surveys indicate that nearly half of the women involved in
 prostitution began working before the age of 18.
 Children are frequent victims of the AIDS epidemic. There are indications that
 the demand for child prostitutes may be growing as patrons believe that younger
 women are less likely to be infected with HIV. There is a small, but rapidly growing,
 number of babies born to HIV-infected mothers. In August the Ministry of Public
 Health's rural health division reported that there were 10,000 lIV-infected infants
 in the northern part of the country alone. Those who are not infected themselves
 may be orphaned while still in childhood, and are often discriminated against as an
 extension of the social stigma directed against their parents.
 The Criminal Code provides for the protection of children from abuse, and laws
 on rape and abandonment provide for harsher penalties when the victim is a child.
 As in the case of domestic violence against women, police are often reluctant to pur-
 sue abuse cases, and rules of evidence make prosecution of child abuse cases dif-
 ficult.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government again took few steps to implement
 provisions in the Disabled Rehabilitation Law that established a quota system and
 employer incentives for hiring the disabled. Another regulation requiring factories
 to hire 1 disabled person for every 200 nondisabled employees was aso not enforced.
 There are no laws mandating access to public facilities for disabled persons.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims represent a significant minority within Thailand
 as a whole and constitute the majority in the four southernmost provinces that bor-
 der Malaysia. Although the Government has attempted to integrate the Muslim
 community into Thai society through dvelopmental efforts and expanded edu-
 cational opportunities, societal discrimination remains widespread.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Progress in integrating ethnic minorities
 into Thai society is limited. Only half of the estimated 500,000 to 800,000 members
 of hill tribes reportedly possess documentation which either lists them as citizens
 or which places them on the record as being eligible for future citizenship. The rest
 lack documentation, and thus access to adequate education and health care.
 Noncitizens are also barred from participating in the political process. Undocu-
 mented hill tribe people cannot own land and are not subject to labor laws, includ-
 ing minimum wage requirements. In 1995 the Cabinet approved a proposal which
 
 
 728
 would confer immigrant alien status upon hill tribe people now resident in Thailand
 and would allow their children to become Thai nationals. It announced plans to form
 a committee to process hill tribe members for legal status, with caseload completion
 estimated in 7 years.
 Approximately 45,000 Vietnamese who fled Indochina in the 1940's and 1950's re-
 side in northeastern Thailand and live under a set of laws and regulations restrict-
 inag their movements, residences, education, and occupations. The Government has
 slowly pursued a more lenient policy toward longtime Vietnamese residents in re-
 cent years. There are also approximately 40,000 noncitizen Chinese and their de-
 scendants who live in border areas. Very few of these people have Thai citizenship,
 and the vast maority must seek permission from local authorities in order to travel.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-There were no significant changes in the general
 labor environment, either in terms of new legal initiatives or labor unrest. Labor
 leaders objected to several provisions in the first draft of a new Labor Protection
 Law, and at year's end were working with a parliamentary committee to make ad-
 justments.
 The law grants freedom of association to private sector workers. Workers have the
 right to form and join unions of their own choosing without prior authorization; to
 decide on the constitutions and rules of these associations and unions; to express
 their views without government or employer interference; to confederate with other
 unions; to receive protection from discrimination, dissolution, suspension, or termi-
 nation by any outside authority because of union activities; and to have employee
 representation in direct negotiations with employers. However, no law explicitly pro-
 tects workers from discrimination due to their participation in organizing new
 unions that have not yet been officially registered. Union leaders report that em-
 ployers often discriminate against workers seeking to organize unions.
 Workers in the public sector do not have the right to form unions. In state enter-
 prises, the law allows workers in each state enterprise to form a single "association"
 after at least 30 percent of the enterprise's employees submit a petition to the Min-
 istry of Labor to register such association. These associations submit employee
 grievances to management and propose changes in benefits and working conditions,
 but may not negotiate wages. Associations do not have the right to confederate or
 to join private sector federations. Unofficial contacts between public and private sec-
 tor unions continue, however, and the Government has not interfered with these re-
 lationships.
 The law denies all state enterprise workers the right to strike. In the private sec-
 tor, to be considered legal a proposed strike must be approved by a majority of the
 union members in a secret ballot and be registered beforehand with the Ministry
 of Labor.
 In 1991 the International Labor Organization (ILO) criticized labor law amend-
 ments adopted in March 1991 that dissolved state enterprise unions, transferred
 their assets, limited the number of associations which may be formed in each state
 enterprise, set relatively high minimum membership requirements for associations,
 denied associations the right to aff'liate with private sector unions, and completely
 forbade strikes in state enterprises. The Government has not vigorously enforced
 these restrictions. The restrictions in state enterprise labor law are a continuing
 ILO concern. Successive governments have pledged to p ass a new version of the law
 that would restore for the most part the rights enjoyed by state enterprise workers
 prior to the 1991 changes. The Government elected in July approved a revised law
 n the Cabinet in August, and it passed the first of three readings in Parliament
 later that month. At year's end, the legislation was pending second and third read-
 ie Government has the authority to restrict private sector strikes that would
 "afect national security or cause severe negative repercussions for the population
 at large." The Government seldom invokes this provision and did not do so in 1995.
 Labor law also forbids strikes in "essential services," defined much more broadly
 than the ILO criteria for such services. No strikes were disapproved on those
 grounds in 1995. The number of legal strikes has averaged fewer than 10 annually
 for the past 10 years; although there were 12 in the first 6 months of 1995. The
 Labor Ministry reported 29 illegal strikes during the same period.
 Over half of the work force is employed in the unorganized agricultural sector.
 Less than 2 percent of the total work force, though nearly 11 percent of industrial
 workers, is unionized. Cultural traditions and unfamiliarity with the concept of in-
 dustrial relations are often cited as the reason for low rates of labor organization.
 While violence against labor leaders is rare, the 1991 mysterious disappearance
 of outspoken labor leader Thanong Po-An remains unsolved (see Section 1.b.).
 
 
 729
 There is a legacy of corrupt public sector union leaders who were exploited by the
 militay, politicians, or employers for their own purposes, but private unions gen-
 eraly operate independently of the Government and other outside organizations.
 Unions are free to associate internationally with other trade union organizations,
 and they maintain a wide variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Colletively.-The 1975 Labor Relations Act
 recognizes the right of private sector workers to organize and bargain collectively
 and defines the mechanisms for such negotiations and for government-assisted con-
 ciliation and arbitration in cases under dispute. In practice, genuine collective bar-
 gaining occurs only in a small fraction of workplaces and in moat instances contin-
 ues tobe characterized by a lack of sophistication on the part of employee groups
 and autocratic attitudes on the part of employers. Wage increases for most workers
 come as a result of increases in the minimum wage, rather than as a result of colle-
 tive bargaining.
 The Government sets wages for both civil servants and state enterprise employ-
 ees. A system of labor courts created in 1980 exercises judicial review over most as-
 pects of labr law for the private sector. Workers may also seek redress for their
 grievances from the tripartite Labor Relations Committee. Redress of grievances for
 state enterprise workers is handled by the State Enterprise Labor Relations Com-
 mittee. Labr leaders did not indicate dissatisfaction with the treatment their con-
 cerns receive in these forums, except that union leaders dismissed unjustly usually
 are awarded only monetairy ompensation.
 No separate labor legislation applies to export prcessing zones, where wages and
 working__cnditions often are better than national no  bcause of the preponder-
 ance ofWestern and Japanese-based multinational finrs.
 c. Prohibition of~ Forced or Compulsoy Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsoiy labor, except in the case of national emergency, war, or martial law.
 However, there are reports of sweatshops in the informal sector that physically re-
 strain workers from leaving the premises. There are no estimates of how many such
 workshops exist, but the growing number of illegal aliens, particularly from Burma,
 increases the opportunities for such abuse.
 For several years, the ILO has cited Thailand for violations of Convention 29 on
 forced labor. In 1995 Thailand was the subject of a stern country "observation," but
 the ILO declined to make Thailand the subject of a Special Paragraph. The primary
 focus of the ILO criticis  forced child labor, especially child prostitution. Since
 the IL raised these concerns, the Government has cooperated in setting up impor-
 tant institutional links, particularly with the International Program on the Elimi-
 nation of Child Labor, thelp address the problem.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The legal minimum age for em-
 ployment is 13. Nearly 90 percent of Thai children complete six grades of compul-
 sory education at age 12; only 60 percent of 13 year-olds are enrolled in seventh
 grade, but the number is increasing. The law permits the employment of children
 between the ages of 13 and 15 onyi mlight work, where the lifting of heavy loads
 and exposure to toxic materials or dangerous equipment or situations is restricted.
 The employment of children at night (10 p.m. to 6 am.), or in venues where alcohol
 is served, is prohibited by law. An analysis based on population and school enroll-
 ment data shows that between 850,000 and 1,480,000 children work in Thailand,
 mostly on family farms. Between 240,000 and 410,000 (2 to 4 percent of the 6 to
 14 age group) are estimated to be in urban employment at particular risk of labor
 abuse.
 The Ministry of Labor has increased the number of inspectors specifically respon-
 sible for child labor issues, althouh not all these officers are engaged in full-time
 inspection work. Enforcement of child laborws is not rigorous. The inclination
 when dealing with violators is to negotiate promises of better future behavior, rath-
 er than to seek prosecution and punishment.
 The Government is also addressing the problem of child labor by extending com-
 pulsory education from 6 to 9 years .
 e. Acceptable Conditions   l Work-A tripartite wage committee consisting of gv-
 ernment, employer, and worker representatives increased the daily legal minimum
 wage by 7.5 percent in 1995. Minimum wage rates now vary between $4.72 (118
 baht) and $5.80 (145 baht) per day depending on the cost of living in different prov-
 inces. This wage is not adequate to supper an urban worker and family. With ex-
 tended family member financial contributions, the minimum wage provides the
 basis for a marginally adequate overall standard of living. However, more than half
 of workers countrywide receive less than the minimum wage, especially in the prov-
 inces. Unskilled migrant workers, as well as illegal aliens, often work for less than
 the minimum wage. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for ensuring employers
 
 
 meet minimum wage requirements. Despite encouragement of employees to report
 violations to labor inspectors, enforcement of minimum wage laws is mixed.
 The Government has not mandated a uniform workweek for the entire labor force.
 BT regulation, commercial employees work a maximum of 54 hours per week, em-
 Pyees in industry work 48, and those in "dangerous" work such as in the chemical,
 petroleum, mining or other industries involving heavy machinery, 42. Transpor-
 tation workers are restricted to no more than 8 hours per day. Enforcement of these
 standards is weak. There is no 24-hour rest period mandated by law.
 Working conditions vary widely. In medium-sized and large factories, government
 health and safety standards are often maintained, but lax enforcement of safety
 standards is common. In the large informal sector, the health and safety environ-
 ment is substandard. Employers are able to ignore safety regulations in part be-
 cause nonunionized workers often do not understand safety and health standards
 and do not report violations. When 188 workers lost their lives in the May 1993
 Kader Toy Factory fire near Bangkok, the Government brought suit against eight
 persons, including the managing director. The case commenced in June 1994 and
 continued   rugout 1995 without conclusion. There is no law affording job protec-
 tion to employees who remove themselves from dangerous work situations. The Min-
 istry of Labor promulgates health and safety regulations regarding conditions of
 work. Labor inspectors are responsible for enforcement of health and' safety regula-
 tions; the strictest penalty is 6 months in jail.
