 THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 After some improvement in the earlier part of the year,
 the observance of civil and political rights in 1980 was
 marked by deterioration. The new government installed in
 September promised an easing of political restrictions it
 initiated but so far has placed considerable initial
 stress on "law and order." At the end of 1980, Korea
 remained under martial law with many basic political
 freedoms and rights suspended.
 During the first four and one-half months of 1980 there
 was a marked improvement in the human rights climate.
 Press censorship was relaxed, political activity resumed,
 the political rights of prominent opposition politician
 Kim Dae Jung and many others were restored, and a bi-
 partisan National Assembly committee began work on a new
 constitution. By May, however, impatience of some
 groups with the political reform process, coupled with
 fears of the rising power of the military, led to massive
 student demonstrations in Seoul. The government responded
 on May 17 by declaring full martial law, dissolving the
 National Assembly, detaining some major political leaders,
 imposing strict press censorship, and banning all political
 activity. A student demonstration in Kwangju on May 18,
 and the heavy-handed military response to it, led to a
 virtual insurrection in that city that cost almost two
 hundred lives. Some who were in Kwangju at the time put
 the death toll higher.
 The government has taken harsh actions against many of
 those charged with involvement in the May disturbances.
 Although he was in detention when the Kwangju demonstrations
 escalated into a major incident, Kim Dae Jung has been
 sentenced to death, and 23 co-defendants received prison
 terms. Kim's appeal is before the Supreme Court and 11
 of his co-defendants have already received reduced
 sentences at the appellate level; of these seven were
 released. In a separate trial of persons accused in
 Kwangju, five people received death sentences in a
 court-martial proceeding; 3 for political offenses, 2 for
 murder. Seven defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment
 and 163 others also received prison sentences -- 80 of
 which were suspended -- ranging from five to twenty
 years. On appeal, the two death sentences for murder and
 the one for instigating violence were upheld.  (The other
 death sentences were commuted to life.) The court released
 55 more and reduced the prison terms of 39.
 A sweeping process of "purification" of society, which
 the government launched in June, sharply restricted the
 rights of politicians, journalists, scholars and others.
 By August, the "purification" effort essentially was
 complete and General Chun Doo-Hwan replaced Choi Kyu Hah
 as President. A new constitution written by presidentially
 appointed committee was approved on October 22, in a
 national referendum, and was promulgated October 27.
 Presidential and National Assembly elections are scheduled
 to be held in 1981. President Chun has made a public
 commitment to lift martial law prior to the presidential
 elections in the first half of 1981.
 
 
 60
 The Korean government and society demonstrated continuing
 effectiveness in meeting basic human needs of an economic
 and social nature during 1980. Korea's export-oriented
 economyhowever, has had a very difficult year. Exports
 are below plan, inflation remains high, and a poor rice
 crop poses immediate and critical problems. Nevertheless,
 a high rate of literacy and a cohesive society which
 encourages upward mobility auger improvement. There is
 a relatively good distribution of income and the government
 has formulated housing, taxation and other social policies
 with the aim of helping the poorer levels of the population.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Article 11 (2) of the new constitution states, as did its
 predecessor, that no citizen shall be tortured or compelled
 to testify against himself in criminal cases. Article 11
 (6) extends this guarantee, stipulating that confessions
 determined to have been made involuntarily, under torture,
 intimidation or similar means, cannot be admitted in
 evidence, and that a confession cannot be used for con-
 viction if it is the only evidence against the defendant.
 There is no way of substantiating reports of torture in
 the interrogation of prisoners. Amnesty International in
 its 1980 report states one of Amnesty's main concerns in
 the Republic bf Korea is torture. Furthermore, following
 the military takeover in May there were numerous allegations
 of torture of defendants in cases involving the anti-
 communist law and the national security law. In the
 August court-martial of opposition political leader Kim
 Dae Jung and 23 others, several defendants charged in
 open court that they had been beaten repeatedly to extract
 confessions or accusations against their fellow defendants.
 Evidence allegedly obtained in this way subsequently was
 accepted by the court. Kim stated that, while he was not
 physically harmed during interrogation, he was questioned
 for periods of up to 12 hours without respite, and was
 sometimes questioned while naked.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Prison conditions in the Republic of Korea are spartan,
 and discipline is strict. The International Committee of
 the Red Cross does not have access to prisons. The
 government does not allow interviews with prisoners
 except by their legal counsel and immediate family
 members, and has on some occasions blocked access to
 persons under house arrest. While there have been
 reports of serious physical abuse requiring hospitalization,
 there were no summary executions in 1980 or in other
 recent years.
 A round-up of "hooligans" was part of a "purification
 campaign" launched by the new government in August and
 September. Some 30,000 juveniles and alleged petty
 criminals were picked up by the army and the police in a
 nation-wide program. Many of the detainees were released
 after a few days, but thousands of others wdre forced to
 undergo weeks of rigorous "reeducation" at army posts.
 The "reeducation" process was widely reported, with
 pictures, in the press and on television. In addition to
 ordinary criminal elements, the sweep included large
 numbers of non-conformists who were also subjected to
 reeducation.
 
 
 641
 c.   Disappearances
 Except for brief periods of detention prior to the
 filing of formal charges (see the section below on
 arbitrary arrest), there is no evidence of abduction,
 secret arrest or clandestine detention.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Habeas corpus was not guaranteed under the old constitution,
 and does not exist under martial law. The new constitution,
 Article 11 (4), grants arrested persons the right of
 prompt legal assistance, and under Article 11 (5) they
 have the right to request that the court review the
 legality of the arrest. The new constitution permits
 these protections to be suspended in grave extraordinary
 circumstances, however.
 It is usual Korean police practice to detain suspects
 for several days, or longer in sensitive political
 cases, without informing the detainees' families of
 their detention or whereabouts. Once charges are formally
 filed, families are notified and are permlitted to visit
 prisoners. Kim Dae Jung and his fellow defendants,
 however, were denied family visits from their arrest in
 May until mid-August and were held 7 weeks before formal
 charges were levied.
 Since May 17, 1980 the number of people detained without
 charge for short periods and then either released or
 formally charged, has significantly increased. The
 total numbers of detainees during mid-summer was reportedly
 quite large, but no accurate figures are available. An
 official campaign to expel allegedly incompetent, dishonest,
 and di3loyal officials from the government, politics,
 the press and .academe involved detention for questioning
 of large numbers of people. Most were released within a
 week, and there have been no large scale detentions
 since late August.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Civil and criminal trials are public; those involving
 charges of a political nature are usually open to families,
 and the trial of Kim Dae Jung and his 23 co-defendants
 was open to foreign and domestic press and diplomatic
 observers. Representatives of Amnesty International and
 the International Commission of Jurists were not permitted
 to attend the trial. The new constitution, however,
 permits the closing of trials for "justifiable reasons".
 All sessions of the court-martial trial of the 175 Kwangju
 defendants were conducted in camera although family
 members and some lawyers were present.  Trials on political
 charges, as well as those where the charges involve
 simple martial law violations, were handled by courts-
 martial in 1980. Martial law was in effect all year.
 While courts-martial are completely under military
 control, civil courts are not. The latter have continued
 to handle criminal and civil cases before them with due
 regard for the Korean legal process, and with virtual
 independence from any form of military intervention.
 The new constitution protects in theory many rights of
 the defendants: the right against self-incrimination, ex
 post facto, and double jeopardy; and the right to a
 speedy trial and the presumption of innocence. Although
 all defendants are guaranteed the right to counsel, there
 were persistent charges that this right was abridged in
 1980 in cases involving charges of a political nature.
 The government is said to have discouraged lawyers from
 taking the cases of political defendants. In addition,
 in the Kim Dae Jung case, court-appointed counsel were
 
 
 642
 allowed so little time to prepare a defense prior to the
 trial, and to consult with their clients in the course of
 the trial, that the right to effective counsel in fact
 was abridged seriously. The lawyer who had defended Kim
 previously was jailed without charge prior to the Kim
 trial and remains in detention. In at least one other
 trial involving political charges, court-appointed
 lawyers were not assigned to their clients until the day
 on which the case was heard. Additionally, defendants in
 political trials such as the Kim case frequently have
 been denied the right to call their own witnesses and to
 cross-examine government witnesses. Defendants, including
 those tried in military courts, have the right to appeal
 their convictions up to the Supreme Court. Death sentences
 ultimately are reviewed by the President who has the
 authority to commute sentences or grant pardon. Kim Dae
 Jung has appealed his death sentence and at the end of
 1980, his case was before the Supreme Court.
 Under the new constitution, the Chief Justice is selected
 by the President with the associate justices chosen, in
 turn, by the Chief Justice. In non-political trials, the
 Korean court system is considered relatively independent.
 On August 9, 1980, five of the fifteen justices of the
 Supreme Court resigned. Although no public reasons were
 given, some observers believe at least four had voted
 against sustaining the death sentence accorded Presidential
 assassin Kim Jae Kyu.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Under martial law, search and seizure are permitted
 without warrant, and in fact did occur in 1980 in cases
 where political charges ultimately were filed and in
 cases where the individuals were released without charge
 after a brief period of detention. The new constitution
 requires that a warrant be issued by a judge upon request
 of a prosecutor prior to search and seizure in a residence.
 2.   Government   Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Real GNP increased by an average of ten percent per year
 from 1971 to 1979, enabling the vital economic needs of
 the Korean people increasingly to be satisfied.
 In 1979 per capita GNP stood at $1,597; inflation was
 running at 18.8 percent; and unemployment at 3.7 percent.
 A 2 to 4 percent decline in real GNP is anticipated for
 1980 and inflation has approached 40 percent. Of a total
 population of some 38,197,000, 29 percent live in rural
 areas. The population growth rate is 1.6 percent. The
 average life expectancy in Korea is 63 years and the
 infant mortality rate is 37 per 1,000. Some 98 percent
 of the population is regarded as literate.
 The Korean government has made much progress in meeting
 the economic rights of the people as defined in the
 universal declaration of human rights.
 Article 22 of the new constitution guarantees the right
 of property ownership. The civil codes define in greater
 detail the right to use, take profits from, and dispose
 of property within the scope of the law. The government
 controls land utilization and other property rights for
 the public welfare through zoning laws and similar legislation
 designed to protect the environment or stimulate agricultural
 production. Most economic activity is in the hands of
 private entrepreneurs. The government exercises strong
 central guidance on the direction of major economic
 investment.
 
 
 643
 Article 30 of the new constitution gives all citizens the
 right and the duty to work. Article 31 guarantees the
 right to independent association, collective bargaining
 and collective action. Collective action must be exercised
 in accordance with pertinent provisions of law. Union
 rights of workers employed by all levels of the government,
 in defense industries, nd in enterprises which have a
 serious impact on the nation's economy are limited, and
 workers in government employment are not permitted to
 strike. From 1972 until the beginning of 1980 the right
 -to strike by private sector workers was-also prohibited
 by law although collective bargainiig was encouraged.
 Restructuring of the trade union movement by the government
 in 1980 limited the ability of labor to influence economic
 policy and has weakened its strength in collective bargaining
 by restricting bargaining to local plant levels where
 union expertise is weakest. In August and September,
 1980, 11 of the 17 presidents of national unions were
 forced to resign because of alleged corruption and were
 prohibited from working in their industries for three
 years.
 Korean companies are not well organized to ride out hard
 times and low or non-existent profits. The Korean government
 exerted pressure on companies to avoid layoffs of workers.
 The basic policy of the government, however, is to control
 inflation by tight credit and to restructure industry and
 the labor movement in order to increase the competitiveness
 of Korean exports to the world market. In restructuring
 the labor movement, the government has forced the only
 national union center, the Federation of Korean Trade
 Unions (FKTU), to disband its regional organizations and
 it has-limited the number of officers and professional
 staff both -at national and-factory union level. Both
 measures weaken the bargaining power of labor vis-a-vis
 management. (The government also prohibited the FKTU
 from holding national-level conventions.)
 The Korea- government in recent years has given high
 priority to increasing living standards. Korea has
 relatively little arable land, few natural resources, and
 a large population.
 Income distribution is relatively good. According to the
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in
 1978 the highest 20 percent of households received 46.7
 percent of the income while the lowest 40 percent group
 received 19.6 percent of the income. Moreover, the
 lowest 40 percent income group in Korea is gaining a
 progressively .larger share of income.
 .The rural population has shared not only in the Korean
 economic surge of the 1970's but also in government-
 sponsored modernization programs designed to promote the
 organization of cooperatives and practical self-help
 projects (roads, housing, and water improvement). The
 programs continued through 1980.
 Wages have increased rapidly with economic development
 from a monthly average of $129 in 1976 to $295 in 1979,
 well ahead of the inflation rate. The present economic
 slowdown in an inflationary period has depressed real
 wages in 1980 however. Comparing the first quarter of
 1980 to the same period in 1979, real wages calculated in
 Korean won were down 1.8 percent due to the rapid rate of
 inflation.
 The availability of social services, health and nutrition
 is steadily improving. In 1976 there was one doctor for
 each 2009 persons, in 1979 one for each 1767. Government-
 required medical insurance, financed by a 50 percent
 contribution from the employer and 50 percent from the
 employee, covered some 4 million persons in late 1979,
 11.7 percent of the total population.
 
 
 644
 The Republic of Korea has no national unemployment  nsurance
 or pension plan. Most of this burden is borne by the
 family. Only 48,000 people, the elderly, disabled, and
 orphan children or similarly destitute persons, were
 provided food and accommodation by the government in
 1979.
 The Labor Standards Law, Chapter V, specifically provides
 protection for female and minor workers. No minor under
 age 13 can be employed without a special employment
 certificate and minors under age 18 must have written
 approval of their parent or guardian. Female and minor
 workers are restricted in the amount of overtime they may
 be required to work and prohibited from night work unless
 specifically permitted by the government. The law has
 special provisions for menstrual rest, maternity leave,
 and a nursing hour for mothers with nursing infants. In
 spite of the protection afforded by law, child labor is
 widespread, particularly in family-operated enterprises
 and in some labor-intensive industries.
 Education receives a high priority in government policy.
 The adult literacy rate has steadily increased from 71
 percent in 1960 to 97.5 percent at present. Nearly all
 primary age children are in school; 91 percent of graduating
 elementary school students entered secondary school in
 1979. Entrance into institutions of higher learning is
 very competitive and entails great social prestige in
 Korean society with its strong Confucian traditions.
 In an effort to increase access and make higher education
 more democratic, the South Korean government has announced
 a new policy to increase the capacity of higher education
 facilities. Twice as many students will be admitted to
 higher education institutions through competitive national
 examinations in 1981 than in 1980. A 30 percent attrition
 rate is planned. The government has barred special
 tutoring, both institutional and informal, for high
 school students, a practice that enabled well-to-do
 families to prepare their children for the entrance
 examinations better than those less financially fortunate.
 Article 10 of the new constitution states that all citizens
 shall be equal before the law and that there will be no
 discrimination in political, economic, civic or cultural
 life on account of sex, religion or social status.
 In spite of legal guarantees against discrimination and
 general freedom for Korean women to work in all professions
 and occupations, women do not have full equality. While
 more women have entered the work force in recent years,
 increasing from 566,000 women workers in manufacturing
 industries in 1971 to 1,398,000 in 1979, the average
 monthly salary for women workers in 1979 was only 42.3
 percent of that received by male workers. Inheritance
 laws discriminate in favor of male children.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, press, assembly and religion are
 guaranteed under both the new and the old constitutions.
 With the exception of freedom of religion, all have been
 circumscribed severely under martial law in 1980.
 Criticism of the regime or its policies, actions and
 officials is punishable under martial law. Advance
 censorship by military officers of all periodicals in
 effect since President Park's assassination in October
 1979, became tighter after Emergency Martial Law was
 
 
 645
 imposed on May 17, and has been enforced assiduously.
 Editors are said to be pressured to give space to government-
 furnished articles extolling the "new era." Criticism of
 the government and its leadership and other expressions
 of dissent have disappeared from the press and electronic
 media. Several Japanese news agencies' Seoul bureaus
 were ordered closed in late May and early June, and
 reporters' films have on occasion been confiscated.
 Travel to Korea by U.S. journalists has not been restricted.
 Foreign reporters were permitted to cover the Kim Dae
 Jung trial--although the formal pool reports were edited
 by military censors. The actual stories filed by foreign
 reporters-.were not censored prior to filing. All domestic
 and foreign books require government approval before they
 may be distributed.
 In August the press was subjected to a "purification*
 process in which one hundred seventy-two publications
 were shut down and hundreds of journalists were fired.
 The publications closed included many which the martial
 law authorities judged to be of no social value, but some
 others had a history of dissident or independent political
 views. While many of the 400 journalists who lost their
 jobs held political views unacceptable to the government,
 many others were dismissed for alleged corruption. Nine
 journalists, including the president and other officers
 of-the Korean Journalists Association, were arrested;
 four have been sentenced to prison terms of one to three
 years and the others are awaiting trial. The content of
 television shows has also been affected by the government
 purification program.
 As of January 5, 1981, the government has merged Korea's
 two privately owned news services into one government-
 controlled agency. Some pro-government and independent
 newspapers and broadcasting stations have recently been
 merged, ostensibly-for reason of cost and efficiency but
 these mergers also allow closer government supervision.
 Retired military officers have been installed by the
 government in all newspapers and broadcasting stations as
 building and safety inspectors but are generally believed
 to be there to monitor news content.
 During the period of martial law, except for purely
 social gatherings, all meetings -of. more than four persons
 require a permit. On November 29, 1980, the Korean
 government amended its law which governs assemblies to
 tighten the -restrictions on public gatherings, expand the
 -definition of regulated gatherings, and prescribe harsher
 penalties for violations.
 There is no state or state-favored religion in Korea, and
 traditional religious activities by all faiths take place
 without government interference. Foreign missionary
 activity is extensive--there are some 900 American -missionaries
 in Korea--and proselytizing is not restricted.
 Programs of religious organizations which have a direct
 impact on the social or political life of Korea have
 aroused government suspicion. Some organizations involved
 in such activities have experienced surveillance, harassment,
 and occasional arrests of members. At least one foreign
 missionary establishment has received frequent police
 visits. A Protestant church sponsored private radio
 station has been forbidden to broadcast news or to accept
 advertising. Nevertheless, some socio-political activities
 of Christian churches continue to be allowed.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement within the country and a
 liberal emigration policy. There are some restrictions
 on foreign travel, for balance of payments and for political
 reasons; husband and wife, or all adult members of one
 family, normally are not permitted to leave the country
 at the same time.
 
 
 646
 A total of 638 Vietnamese boat refugees have arrived in
 Korea since 1975 (the figure includes a few births in
 Korea to refugee women), of whom all but 67 have been
 resettled abroad. Refugees awaiting resettlement life in
 a camp in Pusan; they may not settle in Korea permanently.
 The government supports them and sees that materially
 they are well cared for through the Korean Red Cross.
 The time between arrival of refugees in Korea and their
 resettlement abroad has ranged between 6 months and two
 years.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Under martial law most political activity was banned, but
 the government allowed a resumption of limited political
 activity in December 1980, and promised to expand this
 activity prior to National Assembly elections which are
 to take place in the first half of 1981. Until May 17, 1980,
 opposition parties operated openly, and their activities
 were accorded extensive press coverage. Following the
 imposition of full martial law, however, the National
 Assembly was dissolved, as were all existing political
 parties. The new constitution approved October 22 in a
 referendum in which some 95% of the eligible voters
 participated allows the dissolution of a political party
 by the government if its purposes or activities "are
 contrary to the basic democratic order." Moreover,
 disfavored politicans may be banned from election to the
 National Assembly, and in 1980 the provisional assembly,
 appointed to replace the dissolved Assembly, banned more
 than 500 persons from Korean political life.
 Two minorities suffer from lack of citizenship. There
 are about 400 Vietnamese in Korea, unrelated to the boat
 people, mostly ex-wives and children of Korean servicemen
 who served in Vietnam. Their lack of family ties, of
 language and job skills, and of Korean citizenship, make
 their existence precarious. The Korean government takes
 no official cognizance of them.
 A larger group consists of a thousand or more American
 children of American servicemen. Many do not have Korean
 citizenship, and even those who do have often experienced
 difficulties with education, marriage, and employment.
 Foreign charitable organizations and the government
 provide limited assistance to the Amerasian.
 The status of women has improved considerably in recent
 years and the new constitution calls for marriage and
 family life "on the basis of individual dignity and
 equality of the sexes." Women still frequently receive
 lower wages than men for equal work, and their career
 opportunities are limited. Women have good access to the
 educational system at all levels; laws on compulsory
 education are the same for both sexes.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several Korean human rights organizations, including the
 Korean branch of Amnesty International and the human
 rights office of the Korean National Council of Churches,
 investigated allegations of human rights violations early
 in 1980. There have been no such formal investigations
 since martial law was extended on May 17. Several officials
 of local human rights organizations have been detained,
 and at least one has gone on trial on political charges.
 Nevertheless, these organizations continue to function in
 a low key way. The Korean government refused requests
 
 
 647
 from Amnesty International and the International Commission
 of Jurists for permission to send foreign observers to
 the court-martial of Kim Dae Jung and his co-defendants,
 but foreign diplomatic observers were allowed to attend
 all sessions of the trial. Prominent Koreans interested
 in human rights have had the opportunity to meet with
 individuals at the highest level of the Korean government.
 No such meetings between the government and foreign, non-
 governmental human rights groups have been reported in
 1980. The Korean government is not active in international
 and regional human rights organizations other than those
 related to the problems of Southeast Asian refugees.
 
 
 648
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: KOREA9 REPUBLIC OF
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        58.6     41.0     30.9
 LOANS..............        56.3     38.0     28.5
 GRANTS..............        2.3      3.0      2.4
 A.AID ................         0.0      0.6      0.0
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.6      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......        56.3     38.0     28.5
 LOANS,.........           56.3     38.0     28.5
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........       56.3     38.0     28.5
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....        56.3     38.0     28.5
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV 4 WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..         2.3      2.4      2.4
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         2.3      2.4      2.4
 CONTR. TO IFI,,,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         2.3      2.4      2.4
 OTHER.............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..       276.9    238.4    130.5
 LOANS..............      275.0    225.0    129.0
 GRANTS.............        1.9     13.4      1.5
 A.MAP GRANTS.......           0.4     11.6      0.5
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS..,        275.0    225.0    129.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         1.5      1.8      1.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK*.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL.        335.5    279.4    161.4
 LOANS.............. .    331.3    263.0    157.5
 GRANTS.............         4.2     16.4      3.9
 OTHER US LOANS..  ........ .76.3        979.7    322.1
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ......       761.3    7f.6.4   272.7
 ALL OTHER..............       0.0    273.3     49.4
 -o. -- - -- - -- -- - ----- . . .  .. . .. . .. -- ---   ............ ---------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 TOTAL ........ . 541.2    668.0    652.9   4311.7
 IORD             416.1    522.0    419.0   2945.1
 IFC                1.1      4.e      5.5    116.2
 IDA                0.1      0.0      0.0    106.8
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADOB             123.2    140.1    226.6   1100.2
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.7      1.9      1.8     30.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     12.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 649
