The Human Rights Case for Drug Reform
How Drug Criminalization Destroys Lives, Feeds Abuses,
and Subverts the Rule of Law
By Maria McFarland Sánchez-Moreno
Nearly every country in the world plays a part—as producer, consumer, or transit
point—in the multibillion-dollar illicit drug trade that supplies more than 150 million
people every year and keeps on growing.
To combat this trade, many countries over recent decades have launched socalled
“wars on drugs” that entail crackdowns on participants large and small in
the drug business, including harsh penalties for users.
Human Rights Watch has long documented the widespread human rights abuses
resulting from this approach: in the United States, the devastation that disproportionate
prison sentences for drug offenses have wrought on individuals and their
families and disturbing racial disparities in drug law enforcement; in Mexico, the
killings committed in the name of combatting drugs; in Canada, the US, and
Russia, how fear of criminal law enforcement deters people who use drugs from
accessing necessary health services, exposing them to violence, discrimination,
and illness; in Afghanistan and Colombia, how narcotics production has fueled
armed groups opposed or allied to the government; in India, Ukraine, and
Senegal, how cancer patients suffer severe pain due to drug control regulations
that render morphine inaccessible; and in China, Vietnam, and Cambodia, the
“drug rehabilitation centers” where people are subjected to torture, forced labor,
and sexual abuse.
But there was a growing sense within Human Rights Watch that this approach did
not go far enough—that the problem did not lie merely with ill-considered policies
or their abusive execution. Rather, the criminalization of drugs itself seemed to
be inherently problematic. Especially when it came to personal possession and
use, imposing the full force of the criminal justice system to arrest, prosecute,
and incarcerate appeared contrary to the human rights to privacy and personal
autonomy that underlie many rights.
Heavy emphasis on enforcing criminal prohibitions on drug production and distribution
was also dramatically enhancing the profitability of illicit drug markets and
fueling the growth and operations of groups that commit atrocities, corrupt
authorities, and undermine democracy and the rule of law in many countries.
In my own work as Human Rights Watch’s Colombia researcher from 2004 to
2010, it was clear that the illicit drug market was a major factor in the country’s
long-running war involving left-wing guerrilla groups, right-wing paramilitary
groups, and security forces.
Certainly, Colombia’s staggering levels of abuse—massacres, killings, rape,
threats, and kidnappings that displaced more than 3 million people—had roots
that went beyond the drug trade and predated the explosion in the cocaine market
in the 1970s. But most armed groups in Colombia in some way benefitted
from the illicit trade. The paramilitaries, in particular, were among Colombia’s
biggest drug lords. Often, they threatened or killed people living on land they
wanted to control for coca production or as drug transportation corridors. Illicit
drug profits helped pay for their weapons and uniforms, wages for their “soldiers,”
and bribes for public officials to evade justice for their crimes.
So it became increasingly difficult—as we documented the atrocities, called for
justice, and pressed the US to enforce human rights conditions on its assistance
(the US provided Colombia more than US$5 billion in mostly military aid in 2000-
2010)—to ignore that many of the abuses we advocated to end would inevitably
continue in some form unless US and global drug policy itself changed.
My later work on US policy towards such countries as Afghanistan and Mexico,
and on the US criminal justice system, only strengthened my view—which others
at Human Rights Watch shared—that drug criminalization was inherently inconsistent
with human rights.
After much discussion, the organization in 2013 adopted a policy calling on governments
to decriminalize all personal use and possession of drugs. We also
urged them to consider—and eventually adopt—alternative policies on the drug
trade to reduce the enormous human rights costs of current approaches.
Change is urgent, as our research consistently shows.
Medellín: The More Things Change, the More They
Stay the Same
Alex Pulgarín knew a lot about the power that the illicit drug trade gave to criminals—
and the damage it could inflict.
When I interviewed him in 2007, he was a fresh-faced 30-year-old with an easy
smile who looked younger than his age but spoke with the confidence of a seasoned
player in the complicated politics of his city, Medellín, a major hub for
Colombia’s cocaine trade.
As a child in the 1980s, Alex witnessed the bloody “war” the infamous Medellín
cocaine kingpin Pablo Escobar waged against Colombia’s government in a bid to
secure a ban on extraditions to the US. The car bombings, airplane hijackings,
and frequent assassinations that Escobar ordered garnered Medellín the label,
“murder capital of the world.”
So many rejoiced when Colombian security forces, with US backing, killed
Escobar in 1993. But the bloodletting didn’t end there. As the world turned its
attention elsewhere, others discreetly filled his shoes.
One of them was Diego Murillo, also known as “Berna,” a former Escobar rival
who in the 1990s went on to build his own drug trafficking empire in Medellín,
forging close ties with the paramilitaries. As a teenager in a low-income neighborhood,
Alex saw his peers get swept into a seemingly endless cycle of brutality
and death as Berna and others battled for control over the city.
But when I interviewed Alex, city officials were claiming that Medellín had turned
a corner. The government and paramilitaries had announced a “peace deal,” and
hundreds of young men had turned in weapons at “demobilization” ceremonies,
signing up for government stipends. Former paramilitary leaders received reduced
prison sentences. Homicide rates were near their lowest in years.
Among those who supposedly demobilized was Berna. Several of his henchmen
formed the Democracy Corporation, a group with the ostensible mission of working
with the city to help demobilized paramilitaries get education and jobs and
reintegrate into society.
But Alex told a different story. The corporation, he said, was a front for organized
crime, still under Berna’s control. The government’s backing gave the corporation a veneer of legality, allowing it to exert political influence while retaining its ruthless
dominance over much of the city. “Peace with a knife to your throat,” as Alex
called it.
A Democracy Corporation leader, Antonio Lopez (“Job”), had ordered his accomplices
to kill demobilized individuals who disobeyed him—especially “coordinators,”
point people for the demobilized in each neighborhood. Others confirmed
what Alex said: the apparent peace that Medellín was experiencing was not due
to Berna’s demobilization, but rather the result of his monopoly over crime in the
city after he defeated most competing groups. And he was retaining that control
in part through the Democracy Corporation.
While Alex knew many people in the world of local crime, he had taken a different
path. He had become an activist, joined the left-leaning Democratic Pole party,
and won a spot on his neighborhood action council. Respected and well-liked, he
dreamed of running for higher office.
But Alex was now in Job’s sights. A few months earlier, Job had asked him to run
for the Medellín City Council as the Democracy Corporation’s candidate, trying to
capitalize on Alex’s popularity. Alex would get a car, armed guards, and a stipend
if he agreed. He refused.
Instead, he began reporting what he knew to police and prosecutors, recording
his calls with coordinators who were being threatened and sharing them with the
authorities. He spoke during community meetings with international agencies and
the Catholic Church. “Aren’t you afraid you’ll get killed?” I asked when we met. He
brushed off the question.
Two years later, in 2009, it looked like Alex might emerge unscathed. Berna had
been extradited to the US, where he pled guilty to cocaine trafficking charges and
received a 31-year sentence from a federal court in New York City. Job had been
gunned down, reportedly by rivals, in an upscale restaurant near Medellín. And
Alex testified in a trial against another Democracy Corporation member, John
William López, or Memín. Several witnesses were murdered during the trial, but
Memín was convicted of forcibly interfering with elections, conspiracy, and forced
displacement.
But it is hard to escape the grasp of Colombia’s criminal networks. That
December, armed men—Memín associates—accosted Alex on the street and shot
him several times in broad daylight. He died at the scene.
A Resilient and Lucrative Global Market
Profits from the illicit drug trade in Colombia have not only fueled the country’s
conflict but have also enabled criminals to buy off or intimidate public officials.
More than 100 Colombian congress members and countless other officials have
been investigated in recent years for alleged collusion with paramilitaries. In
Medellín, new groups with shadowy leadership structures have replaced Berna’s
organization, much as Berna’s had replaced Escobar’s. Violence—often via
threats and displacement—is pervasive.
These problems extend well beyond Colombia. In many countries illicit drug profits
are an enormous motivator and funding source for groups that commit atrocities,
corrupt authorities, and undermine democracy and the rule of law.
Indeed, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), illicit
drugs constitute the largest income source for transnational crime and may
account for one-fifth of all crime proceeds. The UNODC also estimated the value
of the 2003 global illicit drugs market to be $322 billion at retail—higher than the
gross domestic product of 88 percent of the world’s countries at the time.
Afghanistan, for example, produces around 90 percent of the world’s opium
(along with cannabis). In 2009, the late Richard Holbrooke, then-US special representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, decried how enforcing drug policies—particularly
US efforts to eradicate poppy (a crucial crop for many impoverished
Afghan farmers)—drove people “into the arms of the Taliban.” But that has only
been part of the picture. The illegal opium market has dramatically distorted the
country’s power structure, bankrolling armed groups such as the Taliban and
local warlords responsible for numerous atrocities. It also fuels rampant corruption,
making efforts to apprehend and prosecute those implicated in these crimes
extraordinarily difficult.
Meanwhile, in Mexico the homicide rate has exploded, with at least 80,000 people
killed in the country’s “war on drugs” since 2007 (El Salvador, Honduras, and
Guatemala face similar problems). The US has provided more than $2 billion in
funding to Mexico to combat drugs during that time. Yet the Mexican security
forces deployed in the country’s “war on drugs” have themselve Tougher Enforcement?
The US, Russia, and other countries, with UNODC support, have argued the
answer to the exploding violence and corruption around illicit drug markets is to
vastly expand enforcement. For decades, they have poured billions of dollars into
combatting drugs (some estimate at least $100 billion a year). With varying
degrees of lawfulness they have pursued, surveilled, killed, extradited, prosecuted,
and imprisoned kingpins and low-level dealers alike. They have fumigated
crops, paid farmers to grow other crops, and interdicted shipments.
Yet, as the Global Commission on Drug Policy—a group of former presidents, senior
UN officials, and prominent public figures—stated in its June 2011 report,
these vast expenditures have “clearly failed to effectively curtail supply or consumption.
Apparent victories in eliminating one source or trafficking organization
are negated almost instantly by the emergence of other sources and traffickers.”
Indeed, as pressure increases in one place, the drug trade often shifts accordingly.
My native country, Peru, recently replaced Colombia as the world’s largest producer
of coca, according to UNODC—the same position it occupied in the 1980s.
In turn, “tough” enforcement has created its own nightmare for human rights protection.
Thailand’s 2003 “war on drugs” resulted in some 2,800 extrajudicial
killings by state security forces in its first three months. In Canada, Kazakhstan,
Bangladesh, and Ukraine, police have violently mistreated people who use drugs.
In Tanzania, police and quasi-official vigilante groups brutally beat people who
inject drugs. Russia’s policies have resulted in mass incarceration, often in environments
that pose high risk of HIV transmission, and detention of drug offenders
without trial.
In countries such as Singapore and Malaysia, drug offenders face the death
penalty. Iran imposes a mandatory death sentence for various drug offenses.
Other countries impose grossly disproportionate punishment in drug cases. The
US, for example, has the world’s largest reported incarcerated population (2.2
million people in adult prisons and jails), in significant part due to harsh sentences
for drug offenses. Nearly a quarter of all prisoners—498,600 in 2011—
including nearly half of federal inmates, were serving time for mostly low-level
drug offenses. Some of those convicted, and many of those arrested, have done
nothing more than use drugs, yet they will suffer the consequences of their conviction or arrest record for the rest of their lives. For immigrants, convictions, even
for nonviolent offenses, can mean deportation and separation from their families.
US drug law enforcement is also marred by deep, discriminatory racial disparities.
Although whites and blacks use and sell drugs at comparable rates in the US,
blacks are arrested on drug charges at more than three times the rate of whites
and are imprisoned for drug convictions at ten times the white rate.
The Harms of (Criminalizing) Drug Use
Proponents of criminalization of drug use often argue that it is necessary to protect
individuals’ health and keep people from harming themselves or others.
It is legitimate for governments to address societal harms that may result from
drug abuse. But policymakers too easily attribute social problems—domestic
abuse, unemployment, or violence—to illicit drug use, when causes are more
complex.
Imprisoning people who use drugs does little to protect their health: prisoners
often find that drug treatment—as we found in New York—is not available.
Recidivism of drug offenders is common.
Instead, criminalization often compounds existing harms. Fear of law enforcement
can drive people who use drugs underground, deterring them from accessing
health services and increasing the risk they face of violence, discrimination,
and serious illness, as our research in Canada, the US, and Russia has shown.
Outside Africa, one-third of HIV infections are attributable to contaminated injection
equipment. But police enforcement of drug prohibitions is a barrier to providing
sterile syringes, and incarceration makes it harder to treat and care for those
already living with HIV.
Aggressive laws and enforcement also contribute to the stigmatization and abusive
treatment of people who use drugs. Poor public education around drugs and
their risks means that, in many countries, there is little understanding about the
real harms that may flow from drug abuse, much less how to prevent or treat
them.
The Pitfalls of Involuntary Treatment
While criminalization is deeply problematic, extrajudicial systems of drug control
can also be extremely abusive. Thailand, for example, detains people who use
drugs without trial for extended periods in locked “treatment facilities.” In China,
the 2008 Anti-Drug Law allows officials to detain people who use drugs for up to
six years with no trial or judicial oversight.
In Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, people who use drugs are held in governmentrun
centers where they are often mistreated in the name of “treatment.” In
Vietnam, detainees are used as forced labor to process cashews or manufacture
clothes for export. In Cambodia, they are subjected to brutal punishments, including
torture. In 2013, four years after we first reported on this issue, we found that
individuals held in these drug detention centers are still being beaten, thrashed
with rubber water hoses, forced to stand in septic water pits, and sexually
abused. Lack of due process protections also renders these facilities convenient
places to detain people whom Cambodian authorities consider “undesirable”—
including homeless people and street children—in sporadic crackdowns often
occurring before visits of foreign dignitaries.
A Human Rights Approach to Drug Control
To ensure their drug policies are in line with international human rights standards,
governments should:
• Decriminalize personal use and possession of drugs for personal use.
Laws criminalizing drug use are inconsistent with respect for human autonomy
and privacy rights. Governments may limit these rights if necessary for a
legitimate purpose, such as preventing harm to others. But like other private
behavior that some may view as immoral (such as consensual homosexual
conduct among adults), there is no legitimate basis for criminalization. Nor
is criminalization necessary to protect people who use drugs: Governments
have many non-penal measures to encourage people to make good choices
around drugs, including offering substance abuse treatment and social support.
Governments can also criminalize negligent or dangerous behavior
(such as driving under the influence) to regulate harmful conduct by individuals
who use drugs, without criminalizing drug use itself.
• Reduce criminal regulation of drug production and distribution.
Criminalization of the drug trade carries enormous human rights costs, dramatically
enhancing the profitability of illicit drug markets and fueling the
growth and operations of groups responsible for large-scale violence and
corruption. Finding alternative ways to regulate production and distribution
and cutting into illicit drug profits would allow governments to weaken the
influence of such groups and reduce the various abuses—killings, disproportionate
sentencing, torture, and barriers to access to health care—that governments
often commit in the name of fighting drugs.
• Ground approaches to treatment and care in human rights, avoiding abusive
administrative sanctions and ensuring patients have access to needed
medications.
Governments should close drug detention centers where people are held in
violation of international law and expand access to voluntary, communitybased
drug treatment with the involvement of competent nongovernmental
organizations. They should also ensure that anyone with a legitimate medical
need for controlled medications like morphine or methadone has adequate
access to them.
Many alternatives to current policies have yet to be tested (except with
respect to alcohol). So governments should assess proposed solutions carefully
to reduce the risk they could lead to new problems or human rights
concerns.
Yet, there are some models to consider: Some governments have decriminalized
personal use and possession of illicit drugs or resisted enforcing
certain prohibitions. In Portugal, in conjunction with comprehensive harmreduction
strategies, decriminalization had positive results; rather than substantially
increasing, drug consumption reportedly dropped in some categories—
as did recidivism and HIV infection. Researchers have also developed
theoretical models for potential systems of drug regulation with varying
ways of handling licensing, privatization versus state monopoly control
of supply, taxation, public health education, the protection of children, and
treatment. And some jurisdictions are beginning to put these models into
practice.
A Changing Landscape
The pendulum is starting to swing on drug policy, with Mexico, Guatemala, and
Colombia calling for a review of the global drug control regime. “As long as the
flow of resources from drugs and weapons to criminal organizations [is] not
stopped,” they said in a 2012 joint statement decrying the failure of current prohibitionist
strategies, “they will continue to threaten our societies and governments.”
In a study in 2013 on the effectiveness of current policies, the Organization of
American States opened up a discussion about their costs and outlined, without
endorsing, various possible scenarios for future development—including decriminalization.
In December, Uruguay approved a law legalizing marijuana and establishing a
regulated system of production and distribution for the drug, though a compulsory
treatment bill was also pending at time of writing.
Change is slowly happening in the US, too. Attorney General Eric Holder in 2013
issued guidance for federal prosecutors that would allow US states to legalize
marijuana, noting that a regulated market may further federal priorities of combatting
organized crime. Washington State and Colorado are legalizing the possession,
production, and distribution of marijuana for recreational use; 20 other
states have legalized medical marijuana.
Several UN agencies and special rapporteurs have called for drug detention centers
to close immediately. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) called for
all children to be removed from Cambodia’s centers; still, one in 10 people held
in Cambodia’s centers today is a child.
Indeed, progress has been limited and fragile. Criminalization remains the tool of
choice for drug control in most countries, where there is often little debate around
harsh and counterproductive policies. Meanwhile, the devastating costs of the
current approach—in lives lost to violence, people subjected to long prison terms,
barriers to health, harm to families and communities, and damage to the rule of
law—keep mounting. It is time to chart a new course.
Maria McFarland Sánchez-Moreno is deputy director of the US Division.