The Betrayal of Trust:
Violence against Children
By Jo Becker
Millions of children around the world face violence on a daily basis—in their
homes, in their schools, on the streets, in their workplaces, and in institutions
such as orphanages and juvenile detention centers. Yet addressing these human
rights abuses poses a particular challenge, as the perpetrators of this violence
are often the very individuals who are responsible for children’s care and protection—
parents, guardians, teachers, caregivers, employers, police and security
forces, and others.
Because of the intimate relationship between children and their abusers, many
children never report violence. Many parents and guardians routinely beat children
in the home, but children often are conditioned to believe that such treatment
is “normal.” Schoolgirls submit to sexual coercion from their teachers, fearing
that if they refuse they will be given a failing grade. Child domestic workers
may suffer repeated beatings, knowing that if they complain they may lose not
only their employment, but also a place to live. Street children who are extorted
and beaten by police officers may never report the crimes, because to do so
means approaching the perpetrator’s colleagues.
The child who experiences violence is often victimized twice—first by abuse from
someone that they should be able to trust, and secondly by the failure of authorities
to intervene. To end violence against children, states must take special steps
to address this unique dynamic.
In 2006 the scale and scope of violence against children was brought to international
attention through a comprehensive study conducted by Paulo Pinheiro, an
independent expert to the United Nations secretary-general. The study was
requested by the UN General Assembly in 2001 and was prepared through a global
consultative process including governments, nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), academics, experts, and children themselves. In contrast to previous UN
studies that focused on the impact of armed conflict on children, this study
focused on violence against children in non-conflict situations.
The study found that children are subject to unconscionable violence on a scale
that has rarely been acknowledged: An estimated 150 million girls and 73 million
boys have experienced rape or other sexual violence, most often by members of
their own family. Each year, between 133 million and 175 million children witness
violence in their home. Between 20 and 65 percent of children in most countries
report that they had been verbally or physically bullied in school in the previous
30 days. In at least 30 countries, sentences of whipping or caning are still legally
imposed on children in penal systems.1
The scale of violence is well illustrated by a 2006 government survey of over
12,000 children in India, which found that more than half had been subjected to
sexual abuse, most often by a person known to the child or in a position of “trust
and responsibility,” and that two of every three children had been beaten by their
schoolteachers.2 More typically, however, statistics are simply not known,
demonstrating both the lack of effective monitoring mechanisms for violence
against children, and the low priority that governments have placed on collecting
such information.
Violence against children is often sanctioned by the state, and reinforced by societal
attitudes that violent punishment of children is acceptable. Fewer than 20
states have prohibited all forms of violence against children in their national legislation,
providing legal protection to only 2.4 percent of the world’s children.3 In
most cultures it is still widely accepted that violence is an appropriate form of discipline
of children, and given their immaturity, the only form that they will “understand.”
In the past, similar societal attitudes were used to justify violence against
women, and legislation often allowed corporal punishment of wives, servants,
slaves, and apprentices. Yet evolving norms generally now reject violence against
women as unacceptable. Considering the particular vulnerability of children, it is
ironic that in most parts of the world, violence that would be considered unacceptable
and illegal if directed toward an adult is still condoned if directed toward
a child.
Violence within the Family
Children are most at risk of violence by members of their own family. Fifty to 75
percent of murders of children under age 10 are committed by family members.4
According to epidemiological studies from 21 countries, relatives or step-parents
are responsible for between 14 to 56 percent of sexual abuse of girls.5 Corporal
punishment by parents is also extremely common. In countries as diverse as
Australia, Belize, Italy, Liberia, Peru, South Korea, and the United States, a significant
majority (ranging from 65 to 90 percent) of parents believe that corporal punishment
is acceptable or “necessary.”6
The widespread acceptance of violence against children in the home contributes
to violence in other settings. For example, in 2007 Human Rights Watch found
that parents in Kenya frequently criticized the government’s ban on corporal punishment
in schools. Some parents even brought their children to school and
caned them in front of teachers or asked the teachers to cane them in their presence.
Violence by Teachers
Schools are commonly believed to foster the healthy growth of children, and
teachers are seen not only as educators, but also role models who shape the
character and development of their pupils. However, for many children, their
experience at school is one of fear and insecurity, influenced by bullying by their
peers, sexual violence, or “discipline” imposed by their teachers that may be violent
and at times arbitrary or discriminatory. The UN Study on Violence against
Children found that violence in schools is a major contributor to absenteeism and
drop-out.7
Some teachers demand sexual favors from girls or subject them to rape or other
sexual assault. Yet students may be particularly reluctant about reporting sexual
violence by their teachers. In one survey in Ghana, six percent of girls said that
teachers blackmailed them, threatening to give them lower grades if they refused
sex. Two-thirds of the girls had not reported the incidents, citing shame, advice
from others to tolerate the abuse, or their belief that no action would be taken
against the perpetrators.8 This belief is well-founded: Human Rights Watch investigations
of sexual violence in schools in Zambia and South Africa found that few
teachers were penalized for sexual abuse of their students, and in many
instances schools actively discouraged victims of school-based sexual violence
from alerting anyone outside the school, or accessing the justice system.9
In over 80 countries around the world, corporal punishment in schools is allowed
by law.10 For example, in the United States alone, more than 270,000 students
each year on average are subject to corporal punishment.11 However, even in
countries where it is legally prohibited, corporal punishment is often still practiced.
Kenya prohibited corporal punishment in the schools in 2001, but in 2007,
Human Rights Watch found that caning was still prevalent. In some countries,
over 90 percent of children report being subject to caning, flogging, or other physical
punishment in school.12
Violence by Employers
Much of Human Rights Watch’s recent work on child labor has focused on child
domestic workers, the sector of child labor that involves the largest number of
girls. In millions of households worldwide, girls work as domestic servants, cooking,
cleaning, doing laundry, providing child care, shopping, and performing other
household duties, often for long hours and with no access to education. Their
workplace is hidden from public view, rarely subject to government regulation or
inspection, and often cut off from other workers or services in the community.
The isolation of child domestic workers reinforces their dependence on their
employers and makes them particularly vulnerable to exploitation and abuse.
Human Rights Watch investigations have found that girl domestic workers are
often beaten by their female employers, and subject to sexual abuse by male
members of the family. Girls often feel that they have no choice but to keep silent
because to do otherwise can mean not only joblessness, but homelessness.
During a 2006 investigation of child domestic workers in Guinea, Human Rights
Watch found that nearly all of the 40 girls interviewed had experienced physical
violence from their employers and guardians. They described beatings with
whips, belts, sticks, brooms, and other items. One 14-year-old girl described
working 18-hour days, and said that when she tried to rest, her employer would
often beat her with an electric cord. In tears, the girl said that she wanted to
leave, but she had nowhere else to go.13
Violence by State Authorities
The dependent relationship between children and perpetrators of violence is by
no means limited to schools or to private households. In many cases, children
who are in the custody of the state—in detention facilities, centers for migrant
and asylum-seeking children, or other institutions—are subjected to violence by
the very individuals who are, often by law, responsible for their care and safety.
Each year an unknown number of children leave their home countries and seek
asylum or better economic opportunities in other countries. Many are apprehended
by authorities and placed in detention facilities or special centers while their
cases are being determined. For some children these centers are a nightmare. In
Spain’s Canary Islands, for example, Human Rights Watch found in 2006 that children
in centers for unaccompanied minors were often subject to violence not only
by peers but by staff. In particular, children in one center described a “punishment
cell,” where children were beaten by staff and locked up for several days at
a time.14
For many children, particularly those living and working on the street, police officers
are not protectors, but the primary perpetrators of violence. Police officers
may beat street children for their money, extort from them in exchange for protection,
subject them to street sweeps as “undesirables,” and force girls to submit to
sex to avoid being arrested or taken into custody. In the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Human Rights Watch found in 2006 that police officers approached street
children, often at night, and demanded their money or articles of clothing, threatening
them with their fists, batons, and boots. Police and soldiers raped and sexually
assaulted street girls.15 In Papua New Guinea we found that the vast majority
of children who were arrested were severely beaten or tortured by members of
the police.16
Based on such practices, it is no wonder that many children do not trust the
police to look after their interests and are reluctant to approach the police for protection.
In particular, children who have been victims of police violence feel that
they have no avenues of recourse, as reporting the abuse typically entails
approaching their perpetrator’s fellow officers. As a result, the majority of cases
of police abuse of children go undetected and unreported.
Lack of Complaints Mechanisms
In general, reporting rates related to violence against children are low. In the
Indian study cited above, 70 percent of children who suffered sexual abuse
reportedly told no one about their experience.17 The fear of reprisal is only one
part of the picture. In many situations children simply have no mechanisms of
complaint available to them, nor knowledge of where they might turn for help.
In Rio de Janiero, Brazil, Human Rights Watch found that most juvenile detention
centers had no meaningful complaint mechanism. When complaints were made,
centers usually failed to conduct an investigation, and administrative sanctions
were rarely imposed on perpetrators.18 In Egypt Human Rights Watch found that
the police routinely beat street children during arrest and detention, but under
Egyptian law, only the Public Prosecution Office can initiate criminal investigations
into allegations of police torture or ill-treatment. However, public prosecutors
almost never visit police stations or question detained children about police
abuse.19
Societal Attitudes
The failure to treat violence against children seriously is linked to persistent societal
norms that condone violence against children and to the inferior status that
children have in society generally. Children who make attempts to complain
about violence often find that their accounts are disregarded or discredited. In
South Africa Human Rights Watch found that schoolgirls who reported sexual
abuse by their male classmates or teachers were treated by school officials with
indifference, disbelief, and hostility. In the United States we heard numerous
accounts of teachers and administrators who refused to act to protect lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender students from harassment out of the belief that
they “get what they deserve.” In Indonesia Human Rights Watch found that some
government officials were reluctant to accept our documentation of abuses
against child domestic workers; in some cases this seemed motivated by the fact
that officials employed child domestic workers in their own households.
Although governments have an affirmative duty to protect children, many state
authorities take the attitude that parents and guardians have the right to treat children as they like, and that it is not government’s business to intervene. For
example, in Saudi Arabia in 2006 Human Rights Watch interviewed several social
workers and medical professionals who said it was nearly impossible to get
police to intervene in cases of domestic violence unless the guardian filed the
complaint. Often, however, it was the guardian who was the abuser.
Effective Responses to Violence against Children
The UN Study on Violence against Children features a range of recommendations
to member states outlining steps to prevent violence against children and
respond effectively when it occurs. The recommendations encompass overarching
measures, including legal reform to prohibit all forms of violence against children;
the creation of national action plans to address the issue; developing and
strengthening complaints, investigation, and documentation systems; and public
education campaigns. The study also includes detailed recommendations tied to
the distinct settings considered by the study: the home and family, schools, care
and justice institutions, the workplace, and the community.
However, the extent to which governments are willing to implement the recommendations
remains in doubt. Although the study recommended the legal prohibition
of all forms of violence against children, the 2006 General Assembly was
unable—in its annual resolution on the rights of the child—to agree on wording
calling for a prohibition on all corporal punishment, or even to prohibit the use of
corporal punishment in schools.
Ending violence against children demands concerted efforts and greater attention
from senior levels of government. However, success also depends on tailoring
policies and programs to take into account the intimate relationship between
child victims of violence and their perpetrators.
Legislative prohibitions: Very few governments have adopted legislation that
clearly prohibits all forms of violence in all settings. Many states are particularly
reluctant to legislate the use of “discipline,” including corporal punishment, in
the home, believing it to be a private matter outside the purview of the state.
Legal prohibitions should not automatically be accompanied by criminal prosecutions
against parents except when severe cases so warrant. However, failure to protect children from forms of violence that would be considered illegal assault if
perpetrated against adults discriminates against children and reinforces attitudes
that violence against children is acceptable.
Changing societal attitudes and promoting alternatives: In countries that have
prohibited all violence against children, public education efforts have been effective
in changing attitudes and behavior. For example, Sweden linked legal prohibitions
on all violence against children to comprehensive public education.
National studies subsequently found that between 1980 and 2000, the percentage
of parents who said they had used corporal punishment during the previous
year declined from 51 percent to 8 percent.20 Efforts to eliminate physical punishment
in schools in many countries can be strengthened by helping teachers learn
alternative forms of discipline.
Creating and establishing support systems: Dealing with violence against children
in the context of relationships of trust often requires stronger support systems for
both caregiver and child, rather than punitive mechanisms. Violence against children
by parents and guardians may be the result of poor parenting skills, and a
reaction to stress. Studies have shown that providing families with access to
social workers, trained volunteers, or community-based support centers, particularly
for at-risk families, can serve a significant protective function and help provide
caregivers with skills that can prevent violence in the home. In institutions,
adequate staffing levels and supervision, together with training in child development
and the appropriate treatment of children, can help establish safer, healthier
environments for children.
Ensuring effective complaints mechanisms: Many children feel they have no
avenues to report violence and fear negative repercussions if they make a complaint.
Children need to know whom they can turn to, that their complaint will be
taken seriously, that help is available, and that they will be protected from
reprisals. In schools, institutions, and other facilities with children in their care,
simple and accessible complaints mechanisms are essential. For children who are
outside an institutional setting, including those in the home, foster care, or on
the street, other avenues for complaint can include neighborhood drop-in centers
or toll-free telephone helplines.
Effective oversight: The state should ensure regular independent monitoring of all
institutions caring for children, whether privately-run or operated by the state,
and develop systematic monitoring of children without parental care. For example,
in some contexts, families employing children as domestic workers can be
required to register with local neighborhood associations and allow the associations
access to their employees to discuss their working conditions and treatment.
Addressing impunity: In too many cases, children who have suffered violence are
further victimized by the failure of authorities to hold their perpetrators accountable.
This failure not only betrays the child’s trust, but also puts other children at
risk. Teachers who have sexually assaulted their students continue to teach.
Police officers who have tortured children, even in front of witnesses, remain on
duty. Institution staff who have subjected children to extreme mistreatment and
neglect continue to have children in their care. The failure to hold perpetrators
accountable allows the violence to continue, discourages children from reporting
violence, and reinforces societal attitudes that such violence is acceptable.
Ending impunity demands that authorities investigate complaints thoroughly and
in a timely fashion, treat children as credible witnesses, and when allegations are
supported, take appropriate punitive action, including dismissal and criminal
prosecution when warranted.
Conclusion
Children have the right to be protected from violence, and to rely on the individuals
closest to them to protect their best interests and support their healthy development.
When these individuals abuse their position of responsibility by subjecting
children to violence, the state has an affirmative responsibility to respond.
The intimate relationship between children and many perpetrators of violence creates
unique challenges, but these are not insurmountable. By learning from successful
models, putting in place effective support systems and monitoring mechanisms,
and by refusing to tolerate impunity, states can take effective action to
reduce violence against children and its devastating effects on families, communities,
and society at large.
Jo Becker is children’s rights advocacy director at Human Rights Watch.
1 Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, World Report on Violence against Children (Geneva: United Nations
Secretary-General’s Report on Violence against Children, 2006), pp. 11-12.
2 Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, “Study on Child Abuse:
India 2007,” 2007.
3 Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment against Children, “States with full abolition,”
http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/frame.html (accessed October 16,
2007).
4 Pinheiro, Global Report on Violence against Children, p. 51.
5 Ibid., p. 54.
6 Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, “Nature and Extent of Corporal
Punishment – Prevalence and Attitudinal Research,” June 2007, http://www.endcorporalpunishment.
org/pages/pdfs/prevalence/PrevalenceResearch2007.pdf (accessed October 20,
2007).
7 Pinheiro, Global Report on Violence against Children, p. 130.
8 Ibid., p. 120.
9 See Human Rights Watch, Scared at School: Sexual Violence against Girls in South African
Schools (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2001), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/safrica/;
Suffering in Silence: The Links between Human Rights Abuses and HIV Transmission to Girls
in Zambia (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2003), http://www.hrw.org/reports/2003/zambia/.
10 Global Initiative to End All Corporal Punishment of Children, “On-line Global Table: Legality
of Corporal Punishment,” http://www.endcorporalpunishment.org/pages/frame.html
(accessed October 16, 2007).
11 United States Department of Education, Office for Civil Rights, “Civil Rights Data Collection
2004,” http://vistademo.beyond2020.com/ocr2004rv30/wdsdata.html (accessed October
16, 2007).
12 Pinheiro, World Report on Violence against Children, pp 117-118.
13 See Human Rights Watch, Bottom of the Ladder: Exploitation and Abuse of Girl Domestic
Workers in Guinea , vol. 19, no. 8(C), June 2007, http://hrw.org/reports/2007/guinea0607/.
14 See Human Rights Watch, Unwelcome Responsibilities: Spain’s Failure to Protect the
Rights of Unaccompanied Migrant Children in the Canary Islands, vol. 19, no. 4(D), July 2007,
http://hrw.org/reports/2007/spain0707/.
15 See Human Rights Watch, What Future? Street Children in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, vol. 18, no. 2(A), April 2006, http://hrw.org/reports/2006/drc0406/.
16 See Human Rights Watch, Making Their Own Rules: Police Beatings, Rape, and Torture of
Children in Papua New Guinea , vol. 17, no. 8(C), September 2005,
http://hrw.org/reports/2005/png0905/.
17 Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India, “Study on Child Abuse:
India 2007.”
18 See Human Rights Watch, Brazil – Real Dungeons: Juvenile Detention in the State of Rio de
Janiero, vol. 16, no. 7(B), December 2004, http://hrw.org/reports/2004/brazil1204/.
19 See Human Rights Watch, Charged with Being Children: Egyptian Police Abuse of Children
in Need of Protection, vol. 15, no. 1(E), February 2003,
http://hrw.org/reports/2003/egypt0203/.
20 Pinheiro, World Report on Violence against Children, p. 76.