 THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Most of this year's report on human rights in the
 Republic of Korea deals with conditions which
 obtained during the administration of President
 Park Chung Hee. Since his assassination on
 October 26, 1979, Korean politics has entered a
 period of transition. During the first two months
 of this period, special emergency powers were
 repealed and most political prisoners released,
 but censorship continued and there was strict
 enforcement of martial law measures banning
 political meetings. Political uncertainty was
 introduced by a military power play on December
 12, which saw a group of younger general officers
 oust a number of their seniors and establish
 themselves in key military positions. President
 Choi Kyu Hah, who was elected to succeed President
 Park, has stated his commitment to an orderly,
 constitutional transition under civilian leader-
 ship to a more democratic system and has declared
 his intention to serve only a portion of his term,
 until a new constitution shall have been adopted
 and national elections held for a new government.
 The Yusin constitution of 1972 has been close to
 the heart of the human rights controversy in
 Korea. It expanded presidential powers, provided
 that the president would be elected indirectly,
 permitted him to nominate one-third of the members
 of the National Assembly, and gave him the right
 to take "necessary emergency measures" in times of
 crisis. One such measure, Emergency Measure
 Number 9 (EM-9), prohibited criticism of the
 Constitution or advocacy of its reform and media
 reporting of such activities.
 Those Koreans who actively sought a system which
 afforded wider popular participation in government
 ran afoul of the restrictions of the Yusin consti-
 tution and of Emergency Measure Number 9. Presi-
 dent Choi abrogated EM-9 on December 8 and re-
 leased most political detainees. At year's end,
 work on amendment of the constitution was underway
 in the National Assembly, which had resumed operation
 with active participation by the opposition party
 in mid-November. Martial law provisions announced
 immediately after President Park's death placed
 significant limits on the exercise of political
 and civil- rights.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 The constitution prohibits torture. Several staff
 members of the Christian Academy accused of violating
 
 (473)
 
 
 the Anti-Communism Law stated in open court in
 1979 that they had been tortured into signing
 confessions. Most of the defendants claimed that
 they had been subjected to psychological pressures,
 humiliated, and beaten. One claimed that he had
 been burned by cigarettes on his back, and another
 that his genitals had been harmed. The court
 rejected the allegedly forced confessions as
 evidence. Korean authorities denied the defendants'
 allegations of torture and reported that a doctor
 of the prison system had examined one of the
 defendants who claimed to have been severely
 beaten and burned by cigarettes and had found no
 trace of physical harm.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 On several occasions during the year, there were
 reports of police brutality to prison inmates.
 These reports followed in the wake of demonstra-
 tions or disorders in prisons in Seoul and else-
 where in the country. Korean authorities stated
 that prison officials used only force sufficient
 to restore order in the prisons and that prisoners
 were punished in accordance with existing law.
 However, in the aftermath of an incident at Seoul's
 Sodaemun (West Gate) Prison, two officials were
 demoted.
 Prison conditions in Korea are spartan and dis-
 cipline strict. The ICRC does not have access to
 the prisons. The government does not allow inter-
 views with prisoners except by their legal counsel
 and immediate family members and has from time to
 time blocked access to convicted persons confined
 in their homes.
 In August of 1979, police broke up a sit-in demon-
 stration which women workers of a bankrupt firm
 staged at the headquarters of the opposition
 party. In the process, a number of opposition
 party Assemblymen, party staff members, and
 reporters who were also in the building were
 injured. Police stated that they had to move
 decisively since they had received reports of a
 suicide pact among the girls involved. One of the
 workers died from a fall from the fourth floor of
 the building. The circumstances surrounding her
 fall from the building are unclear.
 On two occasions in November authorities broke up
 political meetings which were held to test martial
 law injunctions. A number of those at the meetings
 were roughly handled as the meetings were dispersed
 and some were reportedly subjected to brutal
 treatment after they had been detained.
 
 
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment'
 The Yusin constitution does not provide for habeas
 corpus, but does provide that a warrant be issued
 in case of arrest, detention, search, or seizure.
 However, under EM-9, the government had authority
 for arrest, detention, search, or seizure without
 warrant. In addition, EM-9 authorized indefinite
 detention without charge, although no such detention
 occurred in 1979 to our knowledge. Temporary house
 arrest and brief detention for questioning were
 used to prevent anti-government activists from
 carrying out demonstrations or engaging in other
 activities which the government considered im-
 proper. On October 27, 1979, in the wake of
 President Park's assassination, martial law was
 declared in all Korean territory except Cheju-do.
 Warrants for arrest, search, and seizure are not
 required under martial law.
 In December 1979, the government lifted EM-9 and
 released all prisoners charged only with violating
 that regulation. Critics of the government claim
 that there are still from twenty to fifty additional
 political prisoners. The government does not
 agree.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials under the Emergency Measures were public, as
 are those under regular law. As far as is known,
 all persons detained under EM-9 in 1979 were charged
 and tried in due course. The constitution-provides
 that all arrested or detained shall have the right
 to prompt assistance of counsel, but some lawyers
 involved in handling cases of a political nature
 claimed that the authorities harassed them from
 time to time, checking, for example, their pro-
 fessional records very carefully in search of
 errors which might open them to disbarment pro-
 ceedings. Although at least two lawyers who were
 active in defending those accused of political
 offenses were disbarred between 1974 and 1976,
 there were no disbarments in 1979. Until the
 repeal of EM-9 in December, it appeared that
 lawyers found EM-9 offenders less accessible for
 conference than common criminals, and that their
 conversations with such clients were more frequently
 monitored.
 In May 1979, the International Commission of
 Jurists dispatched to Korea a two-man mission to
 investigate reports received from 1974 onwards of
 harassment and persecution of defense lawyers for
 actions properly taken in their professional
 capacity on behalf of their clients in politically
 sensitive cases. On the basis of its week of
 interviews with leading dissidents, lawyers,
 ministers, journalists, the families of prisoners,
 and Korean government officials, the mission
 
 
 476
 concluded that the independence of the Korean
 judicial system and the legal profession had been
 seriously undermined and that the system was not
 capable of fairly trying prisoners charged with
 political offenses. The mission's report cited a
 number of weaknesses in the judicial process:
 attorneys of E4-9 prisoners did not have access to
 their clients during the period of interrogation
 prior to formal arrest, after arrest they had
 limited access and their meetings were monitored by
 prison authorities, and the courts routinely denied
 defense motions to call expert witnesses. The
 report cited several specific instances, apparently
 from the period of 1974 to 1976, of the transfer to
 unfavorable posts of judges who had failed to
 decide cases as the government wished. The Com-
 mission also reported on the cases of nine lawyers
 who, between 1974 and 1979, were harassed by the
 government for representing clients in political
 cases and concluded that, contrary to the assertions
 of the Minister of Justice and the President of the
 Bar Association, there was a pattern of harassment
 of the small body of human rights lawyers. The
 report also noted that it is widely accepted in
 legal circles that no defendant in a political
 trial was acquitted of all counts between October
 1972 and the time the survey was made.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The constitution protects citizens from trespass in
 their homes, but EM-9 overrode this protection,
 permitting authorities to enter and search without
 warrant the homes of persons suspected of violating
 that measure. Martial law imposed after President
 Park's assassination also permits authorities to
 enter homes without warrant.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 In the Republic of Korea, economic production is in
 private hands, but the government exercises strong
 central guidance through the mechanism of the Five-
 Year Economic Development Plan, control of the
 banks and allocation of scarce credit, and through
 direct suasion. Under successive economic plans,
 economic growth in general and industrial output in
 particular have increased dramatically, so that the
 country can no longer be viewed as the basically
 agricultural one it was in the early 1960s. Korea
 has also become an active participant in world
 trade.
 The Korean economy has grown at an extraordinary
 rate for more than ten years, and its growth has
 had a positive impact on the lives of people in
 
 
 most sectors of society. Per capita Gross National
 Product, in current prices, has grown from less
 than $200 in 1968 to an estimated $1,624 in 1979.
 Economic growth has generated substantial opportunities
 for employment, higher real incomes over the years,
 and a pattern of more equitable income distribution
 than those in other countries in a similar stage of
 development. A World Bank report in 1976 came to
 this conclusion, which the Department of State
 believes accurate. During the last three years,
 the effects of inflation have nevertheless dis-
 advantaged lower income groups. The income tax
 system is progressive, but is supplemented by a
 substantially larger system of non-progressive
 sales and other taxes.
 The year 1979 was one of economic austerity as the
 government adjusted its programs to fight inflationary
 trends. The austerity program may cut real growth
 from 11.6 percent in 1978 to seven percent or less
 in 1979, with consequent negative effect on employ-
 ment. While the austerity program is expected to
 continue into 1980, it is viewed as temporary, and
 the economy is expected to resume its momentum
 later.
 Rapid economic growth has introduced problems such
 as ecological deterioration, unsettling changes in
 life styles, and strains on institutions involved
 in health care, education and vocational training,
 occupational safety and health, and industrial
 relations. The most recent economic plan has
 addressed a host of these issues, and some progress
 in mitigating the effects of these social problems
 has already been made. Much remains to be done.
 The literacy rate is about 90 percent. Educational
 facilities are widespread, and openings at colleges
 and universities are currently being substantially
 increased. Access to government-supported higher
 education is allocated on a merit basis.
 There is a Medical Protection Plan for destitute or
 needy individuals and a Medical Insurance Program
 covering almost 4 million workers and their depen-
 dants. Industrial accident insurance protects
 workers in certain industries in firms employing as
 few as five workers. Coverage by these various
 social insurance programs was extended dramatically
 from the mid-1970s on.
 Korea is a racially and linguistically homogeneous
 country. The largest minority is the Chinese, who
 number about 30,000. There are also several
 thousand children of mixed race (Amerasians),
 offspring of United States servicemen, who face
 social, economic, and educational discrimination,
 and are not allowed to serve in the military.
 
 
 478
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 EM-9, which was repealed on December 8, prescribed
 prison terms of one to fifteen years for prohibited
 acts such as the dissemination of false rumors,
 criticism of the Constitution or advocacy of its
 reform, media reporting of such activities, and
 unauthorized student political activity. It also
 permitted arrest, detention, search, and seizure
 without warrant, and gave the government authority
 to close down universities, broadcasting stations,
 and newspapers.
 There are other laws which can restrain civil
 liberties. The Anti-Communism Law of 1961 was
 designed to block the activities of Communist
 organizations and has been so used. However, some
 have criticized the government for applying it from
 time to time against persons who are anti-government
 rather than pro-Communist. In addition, two laws
 passed in 1975 make it a criminal offense for
 Koreans to'criticize the government to foreigners
 and provide for surveillance, limitations on
 residence, and preventive detention for former
 "anti-state" prisoners. Martial law declared in
 the last two and a half months of 1979 bars public
 assembly without prior approval of the authorities.
 The press is privately owned and many institutions,
 including political parties, have publications of
 their own, but all are currently subject to some
 restraint. Prior to President Park's death,
 coverage and discussion of controversial issues
 expanded significantly from one year ago, but
 strict censorship since his death has severely
 restricted both factual coverage and commentary.
 Some relaxation of this censorship has begun.
 Religious activities are given wide latitude, and
 no restrictions exist on proselytizing by any sect.
 Many foreign missionaries are active in Korea, and
 most pursue their religious work freely. Mission-
 aries of the Jehovah's Witnesses, however, found
 that, while they could work freely in Korea, new
 missionaries could not obtain entry permits, nor
 could resident missionaries be assured of re-entry
 permits if they left Korea.
 Some modern forms of church social activity led to
 differences of opinion and friction between the
 government and some church officials over the
 appropriate role of religion in matters involving
 social, economic, and political policy. However,
 the government, after investigation in 1979, de-
 termined that church missions to the urban and
 
 
 479
 rural poor are not subversive, although, in the
 government's opinion, the activities of some church
 officials involved in these programs sometimes had
 gone beyond the bounds prescribed by existing law.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement within the country.
 Prior to the repeal of EM-9, however, the govern-
 ment occasionally restricted the freedom of move-
 ment within the country of prominent dissidents.
 In order to prevent demonstrations and other
 activities on certain anniversaries and special
 occasions, police and security officials prevented
 dissidents from leaving their homes or assigned
 personnel to follow them. There are some restric-
 tions on foreign travel for political, security,
 and balance-of-payments reasons. There is a
 liberal emigration policy.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The current (Yusin) constitution grants the Executive
 Branch and the -President in particular great
 authority, and shields key policy decisions from
 partisan politics. There is universal suffrage
 for adults over twenty, but voters cast ballots
 only for the large body of presidential electors
 (who may not have partisan affiliation) and for
 two-thirds of the representatives in the National
 Assembly. The other third of the National Assembly's
 members are nominated by the President. The
 decisive power this gave the ruling parties is
 illustrated by the fact that they were able to
 expel the President of the opposition party from
 the National Assembly because of statements the
 ruling parties considered unacceptable. The
 government of President Choi pledged to work with
 all sectors of public opinion to formulate a less
 restrictive constitution by the end of 1980.
 Trade union organization is permitted, but unions
 may not strike. Collective bargaining contracts
 cover one million workers and result in better
 wages and working conditions for union members
 than for unorganized workers. Working conditions
 for the average Korean wage-earner are improving
 steadily, although there remain pockets of workers
 in smaller, marginal firms where substandard
 conditions and wages persist.
 Women still suffer from lower wages for the same
 work, limited career opportunities, and less than
 full equality before the law. Nevertheless, the
 status of women has evolved considerably as tra-
 ditional society has given way in the face of
 rapid economic growth. Women now have good access
 to the educational system at all levels.
 
 
 480
 4.   Government Attitudes and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Korean government has generally allowed outside
 human rights groups to visit and interview op-
 position figures. Newsmen have freedom of movement
 within South Korea. In the spring of 1979, a
 delegation from the International Commission of
 Jurists visited Korea and met government officials
 and opposition figures. It should be noted, however,
 that, prior to October 26, government security
 agents would frequently interview Koreans after
 they had met with the foreign press or represent-
 atives of foreign non-governmental organizations.
 The agents would quiz the interviewees intensively
 on what they had been asked and what they had
 stated to their interviewers.
 
 
 481
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: KOREAt REPUBLIC OF
 1977     1978      1979
 ---------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          77.4     58.6      40.2
 LOANS........              75.1      56.3     38.0
 GRANTS ..........            2.3      2.3      2.2
 A.AID ..    ...        ... 0       0.0   0.0       0.6
 LOANS..........              0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ............           0.0      0.0       0.6
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)*..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEC....          75.1     56.3      38.0
 LOANS......,......         75.1      56.3     38.0
 GRANTSA.    T......          0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL.o .....           75.1     56.3      38.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANSS...          75.1     56.3      38.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....           0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ......            0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.           0.0      0.0       0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ...            0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,,,           2.3      2.3       1.6
 LOANS.............            0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTSN.        TS.....   2.3       2.3       1.6
 CONTR. TO IFI .             0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS.S..          2.3       2.3      1.6
 OTHER.......           .    0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST-TOTAL.           155.0    276.9    238.4
 LOANS............           152.4    275.0    225.0
 GRANTSN..T......           2.6      1.9      13.4
 A.MAP GRANTS..T.....           1.2      0.4      11.6
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS,,,.         152.4    275.0     225.0
 C.INTL IL.EDTRNG..,            1.4      1.5       I.E
 DoTRAN-EXCESS STOCK...           0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ......            0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & HIL.          232.4    335.5     278.6
 LOANS.........             227.5     331.3    263.0
 GRANTS ..........            4.9      4.2      15.6
 -----------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS.......           151.5    761.3    1163,2
 EX-IN BANK LOANS......           72.9    761.3     889.9
 ALL OTHER.R...    ....         78.6      0.0     273,3
 -----------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978      1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL  ........  548.7   541.2    668.0   3659.9
 IBRD            437.5    416.1    522.0  2529.6
 IFC              16.3      1.1      4.0    113.6
 IDA               0.0      0.1      0.0    107.0
 IOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADO              92.0    123.2    140.1    868.2
 AFDB              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP              0.1      0.7      1.9    28.9
 OTHER-UN          2.8      0.0      0.0     12.t
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
