THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA (South Korea)
The report on South Korea is well-researched and provides a fair assessment of human rights conditions during 1987. In a number of areas, the report's frankness is refreshing. In discussing police use of excessive force against political detainees, for example, the report states that "[s]uch abuses by the police are a pervasive and ingrained problem." Similarly, the report straightforwardly describes limits on freedom of expression on the two major television networks, which are controlled by the government:
Although opposition viewpoints are usually aired, coverage is biased. Opposition positions are often downplayed and distorted.
The 1987 report continues a trend of more accurate reporting on South Korea that began with the report for 1985. Nonetheless, the report still contains a number of omissions, inaccuracies and misleadii^ statements that should be corrected.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, the report again suggests that house arrest in South Korea is authorized by the Social Safety Act (this law has also been referred to as the Public Security Act). This is inaccurate, and mistakenly lends an air of legality to practices in this area. In fact, the Social Safety Act — a preventive detention statute — is to be applied only to people who in the past have been convicted of specified crimes. (We note that a number of human rights organizations have opf>osed this statute because it provides for punishment without trial.) It thus does not provide the authority for officials to act against any citizen, as the report implies. In addition, the Social Safety Act requires official adherence to a number of procedures in imposing restrictions that would constitute house arrest; we have no indication that officials have attempted to comply with these procedures, even when imposing such restrictions on those who could legally be subject to the Act. Finally, a Ministry of Justice official whom we interviewed in late 1986 did not cite the Social Safety Act when
94
South Korea
asked to identify the legal basis for house arrest. Instead, he cited the Policeman's Official Duty Enforcement Act.
Moreover, in discussing the Social Safety Act, the report states that a judicial panel may order preventive detention for two-year terms. In fact, the decision on preventive detention is made by the Ministry of Justice, and is not the subject of a judicial proceeding. Theoretically, a prisoner may appeal a preventive custody order under the Social Safety Act to the high (appeals) court within 30 days of its execution, and the court may nullify an order when it "has violated the [Social Safety] laws and decree," but we are unaware of any such successful appeal. (We note that an October 1987 Constitutional amendment requires that "[n]o person shall be... placed under preventive restrictions... except as provided by law and through lawful procedures." This amendment may affect the constitutionality of the Act's procedures for imposing preventive detention, although this issue has not been settled.)
A number of statements in the report are, in our view, inappropriate or misleading. In the section on torture, the report correctly states that the police use excessive force, and notes that there have been "instances when peaceful demonstrators, including Protestant clergymen and lay believers, were beaten by plainclothes police officers." However, the report then continues: On the other hand, despite universal proclamations by organizers that demonstrations against the Government would be peaceful, students and other protesters frequently engaged in violence, throwing rocks and homemade Molotov cocktails at police.
We do not question the value of describing the nature of protests, since this provides useful background information. But by presenting the information in this manner and sequence, the State Department appears to be excusing police torture in cases involving violent demonstrations.
The report should have discussed concerns about the health effects of the tear gas used to control demonstrations, especially in light of the serious findings on this subject made by the Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights. The group visited South Korea in mid-1987.
Although the section on torture does allude to mistreatment during interrogation and the use of coerced confessions, the section on the denial of fair
95
Critique
public trials states that the protection against self-incrimination has generally been observed. This statement should have been qualified. As we noted in commenting on last year's report, our information suggests that coerced confessions have played a role in court cases. It is true that evidence obtained through torture by pK)lice but later renounced in pretrial interviews with prosecutors has not generally been accepted in court. However, the atmosphere of coercion and intimidation that has attended the pretrial interrogation process has made it extremely difficult for defendants to recant coerced confessions when interviewed by prosecutors.
Last year, we also criticized the State Department for omitting mention of the actions against the United Minjung Movement for Democracy and Unification (UMMDU), a broad-based popular reform movement. Early in the morning of November 12,1986, some 560 police raided the main office of the UMMDU in downtown Seoul. Police entered the office and seized hundreds of items, including anti-government pamphlets and membership lists. Authorities also arrested dozens of UMMDU members. Because these events occurred late in the year, and might not have been noted because of the timing of the compilation of last year's report, we said we would examine the next report to see if a discussion of these events is included. Unfortunately, this year's report contains no such discussion.
In the section on freedom of assembly and association, the report notes the arrest of "workers and student activists accused by the Government of either engaging in violence or clandestinely inciting laborers and attempting to imbue them with 'leftist' ideology." However, the report fails to mention that workers and students were not the only ones arrested in connection with labor issues. For example, a number of officials of the National Coalition for a Democratic Constitution were arrested during labor protests, and discussion of their cases would have been useful. In addition, the report's treatment of abuses of the rights of laborers again omits any discussion of blacklisting of activist workers, which was widely acknowledged to have occurred m 1987.
In describing the political stalemate on electoral reform that existed through the first part of 1987, the report mischaracterizes the position of the
96
South Korea
political opposition. After indicating that the ruling party had proposed a parliamentary system, the report states:
The opposition refused to budge from its demand for direct presidential elections, which, it contended, reflected the will of the majority of the people.
In fact, while opposition leaders indeed favored direct elections (and claimed
that most South Koreans did as well), they called for a national referendum on
this question. The government declined to hold a referendum, and claimed in
February that such a vote would be "clearly unconstitutional." The opposition
disagreed, and argued that the government's position was based upon its fear
of losing a referendum.
97
Critique
