The Right Whose Time Has Come (Again)
Privacy in the Age of Surveillance
By Dinah PoKempner
Technology has invaded the sacred precincts of private life, and unwarranted
exposure has imperiled our security, dignity, and most basic values. The law must
rise to the occasion and protect our rights.
Does this sound familiar?
So argued Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis in their 1890 Harvard Law Review
article announcing “The Right to Privacy.” We are again at such a juncture. The
technological developments they saw as menacing—photography and the rise of
the mass circulation press—appear rather quaint to us now. But the harms to
emotional, psychological, and even physical security from unwanted exposure
seem just as vivid in our digital age.
Our renewed sense of vulnerability comes as almost all aspects of daily social life
migrate online. At the same time, corporations and governments have acquired
frightening abilities to amass and search these endless digital records, giving
them the power to “know” us in extraordinary detail.
In a world where we share our lives on social media and trade immense amounts
of personal information for the ease and convenience of online living, some have
questioned whether privacy is a relevant concept. It is not just relevant, but crucial.
Indeed, privacy is a gateway right that affects our ability to exercise almost every
other right, not least our freedom to speak and associate with those we choose,
make political choices, practice our religious beliefs, seek medical help, access
education, figure out whom we love, and create our family life. It is nothing less
than the shelter in which we work out what we think and who we are; a fulcrum of
our autonomy as individuals.
The importance of privacy, a right we often take for granted, was thrown into
sharp relief in 2013 by the steady stream of revelations from United States government
files released by former National Security Agency (NSA) contractor Edward Snowden, and published in the Guardian and other major newspapers
around the world. These revelations, supported by highly classified documents,
showed the US, the UK, and other governments engaged in global indiscriminate
data interception, largely unchecked by any meaningful legal constraint or oversight,
without regard for the rights of millions of people who were not suspected
of wrongdoing.
The promise of the digital age is the effortless, borderless ability to share information.
That is its threat as well. As the world’s information moves into cyberspace,
surveillance capabilities have grown commensurately. The US now leads
in ability for global data capture, but other nations and actors are likely to catch
up, and some already insist that more data be kept within their reach. In the end,
there will be no safe haven if privacy is seen as a strictly domestic issue, subject
to many carve-outs and lax or non-existent oversight.
Human Rights Watch weighed in repeatedly throughout 2013 on the human rights
implications of Snowden’s revelations of mass surveillance, and the need to protect
whistleblowers. This essay looks at how the law of privacy developed, and
where it needs to reach today so that privacy is globally respected by all governments,
for all people. Global mass surveillance poses a threat to human rights
and democracy, and once again, the law must rise to the challenge.
A Concept Develops: The “Right to be Let Alone”
Many countries have long recognized the values that underlie the legal right to
privacy—honor, reputation, and the sanctity of home and family life. But it was in
the United States that private rights of action to defend privacy crystallized in the
wake of Warren and Brandeis’ call.
Judge Cooley in 1882 described privacy as “the right to be let alone.” Tort law
over the next century allowed people—many of them celebrities or people trying
to avoid celebrity—to obtain remedies against unwanted public disclosure or nonconsensual
exploitation of private information. The developing legal doctrine,
aimed at shielding reputation and honor, quickly conflicted with press freedom
and the public’s right to information—most notably when newspapers sought to
cover issues of general public interest that might include embarrassing information
about public figures.
The law as it developed in the US was deferential to freedom of speech concerns,
in practice allowing media-wide latitude; in Europe, there was greater emphasis
on protecting reputational rights and shielding personal information.
Privacy as a limit on government intrusion gained ground in the wake of World
War II and the rise of modern surveillance states. The Third Reich had relied heavily
on census data to persecute, while many Communist states developed elaborate
surveillance and data collection systems to monitor their populations and
suppress dissent—restrictions that continue today in China, Vietnam, North
Korea, Turkmenistan, and Cuba.
After World War II, the right to privacy made its way into many international
human rights instruments and national constitutions, often phrased as freedom
from interference with “privacy, family, home or correspondence,” and the more
traditional freedom from attacks on “honour and reputation.”
Privacy has never been considered an absolute right. In international law it can
be derogated, or restricted, when a grave public emergency threatens the nation’s
life. Even then, the emergency must be officially proclaimed, and restrictions not
greater than the threat requires, nondiscriminatory, and consistent with international
law, including respect for human rights.
If there is no such emergency, intrusions on privacy, family, home, and correspondence
may not be arbitrary and must be embodied in laws that create clear
expectations as to how and when they will likely be applied. These laws must aim
to protect a legitimate interest in a democratic society, such as public safety or
national security, be necessary and proportional to that end, and subject to judicial
safeguards and remedies. These basic principles are common to most modern
judicial consideration of various aspects of privacy.
Mind the Gap: New Technology and “Reasonable”
Expectations
An important aspect of the law of privacy developed from the regulation of government
search and seizure, generally in the context of criminal investigation. As
the law developed, judicially authorized warrants for official searches became a
common requirement, and some legal systems treated unauthorized searches as a crime. The notion of “correspondence” broadened to include new technologies,
such as telephones, with laws regulating when authorities could use wiretaps.
Yet protecting privacy has often lagged behind technological change. In the 1928
Olmstead case, the Supreme Court held that an unauthorized wiretap introduced
as evidence in a criminal trial did not violate the constitutional right of the people
“to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects.” In 1967, the court
reversed course, determining a person has “reasonable expectation of privacy”
when talking in a public phone booth. This bit of common sense developed into a
doctrine for when to limit government power to conduct warrantless searches.
While the home has generally remained inviolable in US law, what is outside the
home or in public view (trash at the curb, a car backseat) is not.
But even judicial doctrine as to when expectation of privacy is “reasonable” has
often not kept pace with rapid technological shifts or even popular expectations.
Brandeis, later a Supreme Court justice, foresaw this problem in his famous
Olmstead dissent when he predicted: “Ways may someday be developed by
which the Government, without removing papers from secret drawers, can reproduce
them in court, and by which it will be enabled to expose to a jury the most
intimate occurrences of the home.” He added: “Can it be that the Constitution
affords no protection against such invasions of individual security?”
Brandeis’ concern is fully justified in our age of mass data interception. Wiretaps
eventually needed warrants, but surveillance metastasized in the 21st century
under new laws that set lax standards for many types of digital information.
Privacy: Secrecy or Self-Determination?
The “reasonable expectation” doctrine led US law to conclude that many types of
business records were not protected from search without warrant, based on the
rationale that an individual shared the information willingly with a third party and
could not object if it became known.
But the objection has often been raised that sharing some personal information
with a corporation does not mean there is an expectation it will be divulged to the
government; on the contrary, we usually expect some discretion and confidentiality
in our business transactions. Nor is it entirely accurate to say that sharing personal information via business records is entirely “voluntary,” given how many
necessary transactions of modern life require considerable disclosure.
US law has grown to equate “privacy” of communications with “secrecy,” an
approach “ill-suited to the digital age,” in the recent words of Justice Sonia
Sotomayor. The law in Europe took a different path. Germany, which recognizes a
constitutional right of “personality,” or the protection of one’s integrity and
capacity for self-development, led the way. In 1983, its Constitutional Court
annulled the national census law, announcing “informational self-determination”
as a fundamental democratic right.
Key to the European approach was the belief that individuals have a right to
access and correct their data held by various institutions, and ultimately have a
right to determine its use and disposal. An interlocking system of regional guidelines
and standards emerged, albeit subject to national variation in legislation
and application.19 In contrast, US data privacy law is a welter of difficult-to-navigate
state laws or laws governing particular industry sectors that are often
focused on data breach and fraud rather than on informational self-determination.
Still, the European approach is not beyond criticism: it has required businesses
to retain data for significant periods beyond their own needs so the government
may have access, and makes oversight of government access subject to varying
national standards. As data accumulation has moved from centralized storage to
global “cloud” computing that involves more jurisdictions, actors, and laws,
maintaining control over one’s personal data has become more complicated as
well.
Anonymity as the Ultimate Data Protection
One of the surest ways to control personal data—withholding one’s real identity
when communicating—found acceptance more readily in the US than elsewhere,
not least because many of the nation’s founders published revolutionary manifestos
under pseudonyms.
While anonymity has never been considered an absolute or stand-alone right, the
US Supreme Court has long recognized it to be part of speech that is entitled to a
high level of protection, in part, as Justice Stevens wrote in 1995, because it can encourage speech. “Anonymity,” he asserted, “…provides a way for a writer who
may be personally unpopular to ensure that readers will not prejudge her message
simply because they do not like its proponent.”
Anonymity is increasingly precious—and imperilled—amid the growing quantity of
information online and advances in aggregating and searching databases, and is
critical for people to be able to share ideas publicly without fear of retaliation or
persecution.
In April 2013, the UN special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion, Frank LaRue, wrote of the “chilling effect” that restrictions
on anonymity had on the free expression of information and ideas. He pointed
out that when corporate actors exploit real name registration requirements to
amass and mine personal data, they assume a serious responsibility to protect
the privacy and security of such information.
Physical Privacy: Autonomy, Security, and Identity
As the law of search and seizure shows, understanding privacy in the physical
world can influence its application to the virtual world. The strand of law protecting
a person’s intimate bodily attributes and decisions—including whether to
choose marriage, abortion, start a family, or accept medical treatment—describes
privacy as a way to assert one’s physical autonomy and preferred identity, not as
isolation or secrecy. As such, it holds relevance for protecting autonomy and
identity in cyberspace as well.
A key decision related to physical privacy is the 1994 case of Nicholas Toonen v.
Australia. The Human Rights Committee, the treaty body that interprets the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), repudiated
Tasmania’s criminal law of sodomy declaring “it is undisputed that adult consensual
sexual activity in private is covered by the concept of ‘privacy.’” Toonen
rejected the rationale that the law was to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, and
argued it was not a reasonable or proportionate means to that end, and more
likely to drive a vulnerable population underground.
In Goodwin v. U.K., the European Court of Human Rights in 2002 similarly emphasized
the many adversities post-operative transsexuals suffer when they cannot
change the sex on their birth certificate, including denying their right to marry, employment discrimination, and the denial of social benefits. The court focused
on privacy in the sense of “the right to establish details of their identity as individual
human beings” and concluded that transsexuals were entitled to “personal
development and physical and moral security in the full sense enjoyed by others
in society.”
The logic of Toonen and Goodwin informs two recent foci of Human Rights Watch’s
privacy-related work: our call for decriminalizing simple drug use and possession
(see the essay The Human Rights Case for Drug Reform in this volume), and our
push for decriminalizing voluntary sex work by adults.
Both drug use and even voluntary sex work can pose serious risks to health and
safety (including heightened risk for HIV/AIDS), but driving participants into the
shadows is usually highly counterproductive to efforts to treat, mitigate, or prevent
harm. Criminalization in both cases can cause or exacerbate a host of ancillary
human rights violations, including exposure to violence from private actors,
police abuse, discriminatory law enforcement, and vulnerability to blackmail,
control, and abuse by criminals. These severe and common consequences, and
the strong personal interest that people have in making decisions about their
own bodies, mean it is unreasonable and disproportionate for the state to use
criminal punishment to discourage either practice.
These approaches to physical self-determination are directly relevant to online
privacy too. The physical and the virtual world are of course connected; our
offline choices about friends, work, sexual identity, and religious or political
beliefs are reflected in our online data and communications. Unwanted exposure
of our private information can undermine the physical and moral security that the
Goodwin decision emphasized is a key aim of privacy, and prevents us from
developing a personal identity sheltered from coercion—considerations that
underlie the creation of data privacy laws in the first place.
Surveillance’s “Golden Age”
Two important developments have transformed the debate on privacy and ushered
in what some have termed a “golden age of surveillance.”
The first was the shift of almost every aspect of social, economic, and political
relations online, so that disruption to, or surveillance of, online activity can potentially harm or be used to harm almost every human right—whether civil,
political, economic, social, or cultural.
The second development is the enormous advance in our ability to store, search,
collate and analyze data with minimal effort and cost. This has serious implications
for collecting and retaining data, providing enormous incentive to amass
information at a time when much of our lives is exposed through online data.
Moreover, governments like that of the US have devoted considerable resources
to ensuring our data is always accessible, including seeking backdoors into technology
and collection points, and cracking strong encryption.
Concerns about the privacy of online communications and digital information
were strong even before Edward Snowden began disclosing in June 2013 the massive
and global extent of surveillance by the US National Security Agency. But
since then, intense debate has raged as to whether mass surveillance is ever justified,
and whether privacy can actually be effectively protected against governments
and corporations bent on espionage.
Once again, we find that law and the courts have not kept pace.
Legal Loopholes for Surveillance
Though a crime in most legal systems, espionage is not banned in international
law, and most governments practice it to some degree. But as the birthplace of
the Internet, home to major related industries, and with most global online communications
running through its territory or facilities, the US is uniquely placed to
conduct global surveillance. Consequently, it is worth examining the loopholes it
has knit into its legal doctrines that give it a relatively free hand in capturing bulk
data.
The first big loophole is that the US does not extend Constitutional rights to foreigners
abroad, whether protection from “unreasonable” search, privacy, or freedom
of speech (including anonymous speech). Nor does the US recognize extraterritorial
application of its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Instead, US law authorizes warrantless surveillance of foreign
intelligence so long as the secret Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
(FISC) approves measures to “target” collection of “foreign intelligence” information
and “minimize” the incidental collection of the communications of US citizens or residents. While foreigners have no protection against data collection,
there are many exceptions for US persons that allow the government to retain
their data as well—including encrypted communications and attorney-client communications.
Another big loophole is that the US considers “metadata,” or the information
about each message—such as date, time, location, sender, recipient—to be business
records that are disclosed to third parties, and so entitled to a far lower
standard of protection than substantive conversation, under both constitutional
doctrine and section 215 of the PATRIOT Act. This type of data can provide an
incredibly detailed portrait of anyone’s movements, interlocutors, transactions,
and concerns over time.
These two exceptions give enormous scope for bulk surveillance, but the government
has also applied elastic interpretations to the law’s already generous terms.
Orders for “targeting” foreign intelligence do not need to specify particular investigations
or persons, just general objectives; and such “targeted” surveillance
means having just “51% confidence”—a hair better than a coin toss—that the
people whose data is collected are foreigners abroad. The FISC determined that
all metadata records from major US telephone companies such as Verizon could
be “relevant” to intelligence or espionage investigations, an interpretation that
begs the meaning of “relevant.”
Another major loophole to both international and domestic legal obligations is
intelligence sharing arrangements that let states avoid particular legal strictures
on their own data collection activities. This appears to have been the case with
US cooperation with the UK.
The present-day data collection practices of European states, including those collaborating
with the NSA, have yet to be tested under the European Convention on
Human Rights, but the case of Klass v. Germany suggests more demanding scrutiny
could eventuate. There, the European Court of Human Rights emphasized that
for surveillance to respect the right to privacy, there must be “adequate and effective
guarantees against abuse” and that in view of the danger secret surveillance
poses to democracy, states may not, “in the name of the struggle against espionage
and terrorism, adopt whatever measures they deem appropriate.”
The US Congress is percolating with legislative proposals to reform the legal
structure that enables mass surveillance, though none so far would protect the
privacy rights of foreign persons located outside US territory. But a world of globalized
communications and surveillance needs universal standards that are not
too readily evaded or bent. Unless the development of privacy as a legal right
catches up to fill these gaps, the right may well become obsolete.
Global Communications, Global Obligations
What should be done?
Some argue we must simply live with the reality of pervasive online surveillance,
and that public expectation of privacy has eroded. But this is neither accurate nor
dispositive. Our understanding of privacy has in fact grown far beyond “a right to
be left alone” into a right of personal self-determination, embracing the right to
choose whom we share our personal details with and what identity we project to
various communities. When applied to the digital world, privacy gives us some
boundaries against unwanted monitors, and with it the essential freedom for personal
development and independent thought.
While global surveillance will require a complex and global response, the US
bears a particular burden, as a leader in both cyber-technology and mass surveillance,
to rein in the serious overreach Edward Snowden brought to light. Among
the steps Human Rights Watch has emphasized are requiring judicial warrant protection
for metadata, recognizing that privacy is breached when data is collected
(and not just when viewed or used), revamping the FISA court to make it a more
adversarial and transparent body to check the NSA, and protecting whistleblowers
who reveal rights-violating national security practices.
We must also recognize that the duty to protect rights in a world of globalized
communication cannot stop at territorial borders. International law of the twentieth
century assumed that a state’s primary obligation is to ensure rights to all
people in its territory or under its jurisdiction or effective control. This makes
sense, as generally one state cannot secure rights for people abroad without violating
another country’s sovereignty. But there are circumstances when a government
must carry its human rights obligations beyond its national borders—such as when its police or military abroad capture an individual. What about when it
captures the communications of millions of people at home and abroad?
Arguably, collecting and banking mass personal data over time confers such
power to track, analyze, and expose people’s lives that it should be thought of as
a form of “effective control.” Some of us may not care about who sees our
Facebook postings, but the security and human dignity of many people all over
the world depends on the ability to limit who knows about their political preferences,
sexual orientation, religious affiliation, and more.
Intentionally damaging acts, such as blackmailing, drone targeting, and coercion
depend on discovering personal details; even when information is carelessly handled
or misconstrued, terrible harms may result. A state that, without reasonable
cause, appropriates in bulk the communications data of another state’s inhabitants
is damaging their security, autonomy, and exercise of their rights. At minimum,
governments should apply the same legal protections to all persons whose
privacy they breach as they do to their own citizens.
The several bills before the US Congress seek to address some of the abuses
involved in NSA bulk surveillance, though none compel the US to protect the privacy
of foreigners abroad. European governments, quick to condemn NSA excesses,
have failed so far to carry out effective reviews of their own policies of mass
surveillance at home or abroad, including the extent to which they have collaborated
in, or benefitted from, US data collection.
It will take time to move the debate towards recognizing a global duty for states
with extraterritorial surveillance capability to respect the privacy of all within their
reach, but several encouraging signs suggest this will happen. In 2009, for example,
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights and Counter-Terrorism Martin Scheinin
called for developing soft law on data privacy and surveillance. In 2013, Special
Rapporteur LaRue endorsed the need for the Human Rights Committee to update
its General Comment on the right to privacy.
Two sets of principles that civil society expert groups recently issued may provide
a basis for increasing consensus around standards: the Global Principles on
National Security and the Right to Information (“The Tshwane Principles”),
endorsed by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe; and the
International Principles on the Application of Human Rights to Communications Surveillance. These largely collect and restate general principles related to the
right to privacy, transparency, and regulating surveillance in international law.
Most recently, Brazil and Germany in November 2013 introduced a UN General
Assembly resolution that aims to create consensus against privacy abuses in digital
surveillance both at home and abroad. The resolution calls for continuing
reporting on mass surveillance and the right to privacy, including the implications
of extraterritorial surveillance. Mirroring these efforts to articulate new standards
are demands from civil society actors to reform government surveillance practices,
ranging from a statement from major internet companies to a petition
addressed to world leaders by 562 well-known authors in 80 countries. These
developments can strengthen international legal consensus and tip the balance
of power back to individuals.
The year 2013 may well come to be viewed as a watershed when people around
the world stood up to reassert their right to privacy. But this can only happen if
these debates produce global standards and enforceable domestic laws with
teeth. We cannot wait for individuals like Edward Snowden to blow the whistle,
but must demand thorough investigation into the full extent of government and
corporate data collection and analysis. States should commit to transparent and
public review of their practices and laws in order to maximize—not trade off—privacy,
security, and technical innovation that can enhance and further our lives
and rights as human beings.
The right to privacy is not just about leaving people alone; it is about empowering
them to connect, speak, think, and live on their own terms, without arbitrary state
interference. The technological revolution is upon us, and we must do our best to
help the law catch up—again.
Dinah PoKempner is general counsel at Human Rights Watch.