 TIBET
 (This section of the report on China has been prepared pursuant to Section 536
 (b) of Public Law 103-236. The United States recognizes the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion-hereinafter referred to as "Tibet"--to be part of the People's Republic of
 China. Preservation and development of Tibet's unique religious, cultural, and lin-
 guistic heritage and protection of its people's fimdamental human rights continue
 to be of concern.)
 Respect for the Integrity of the Person.-The Chinese Government strictly controls
 access to and information about Tibet. Thus, it is difficult to determine accurately
 the scope of human rights abuses. However, according to credible reports, Chinese
 governmaent authorities continued to commit serious human rights abuses in Tibet,
 including instances of torture, arbitrary arrest, detention without public trial, and
 lengthy detention of Tibetan nationalists for peacefully expressing their political
 views. Tight controls on religion and on other fundamental freedoms continued, and
 intensified during the year. According to the Tibet Information Network (TIN) politi-
 cal protest by and detention of Tibetans is both increasing and spreading through-
 out ethnic Tibetan areas. TIN reports that the number of Tibetans resident outside
 of Lhasa or its seven counties who became political prisoners increased from 104
 during the period from- 1987 to 1992 to 367 during the period from 1993 to 1998,
 a 350 percent increase. For Lhasa counties the increase was 14 percent. Although
 China agreed to discuss human rights issues with representatives of foreign coun-
 tries and international organizations and to allow several official visits to Tibet,
 there has been no progress in transforming this into concrete improvements in
 Tibet. In February the Government issued a white paper describing what it viewed
 as progress in the human rights situation in Tibet.
 Although the authorities permit many traditional religious practices and public
 manifestations of belief, those activities viewed as vehicles for political dissent are
 not tolerated and are promptly and forcibly suppressed. The security clampdown
 throughout China is being felt in Tibet, and Buddhism's "Great Tradition' came
 under increasing attack. Individuals accused of political activism faced ongoing and
 serious persecution during the year. Toward the end of 1998, the Government re-
 newed its campaign to discredit the Dalai Lama and limit the power of religious
 persons and secular leaders sympathetic to him. Beginning in late fall, Tibet's offi-
 cial newspaper renewed its harsh propaganda against the Dalai Lama with articles
 condemning his "separatist activities.' The "patriotit education" of monks and nuns
 continued to be an important part of the campaign, and was extended into mon-
 asteries throughout Tibet. Patriotic education has disrupted religious activities in
 many monasteries and some monks have fled to India to escape the campaigns. Gov-
 ernment control over the monasteries remains tight. The ban on the public display
 of photographs of the Dalai Lama continued, although such pictures were easily
 available in Tibet and some monasteries and many individuals displayed them pri-
 vately. There were reports of imprisonment and abuse or torture of monks and nuns
 accused of political activism, the death of prisoners, and the closure of several mon-
 asteries.
 While there was limited political violence in Tibet during the year, a bomb ex-
 ploded in Lhasa on June 24 outside a public security building. Although official gov-
 ernment reports state that there were no deaths or injuries, it appears that at least
 five persons were hurt. While responsibility for the bombing has not been deter-
 mined, the Government claimed that separatists were responsible. Foreigners, in-
 cluding international NGO personnel, experienced fewer restrictions on access to
 Tibet than in 1997, and several official delegations traveled to Tibet to discuss
 human rights issues. These included the U.N. High Commissioner for Human
 Rights, parliamentarians, a delegation of European Union ambassadors based in
 Beijing, and a delegation of foreign religious leaders. The Government tightly con-
 trolled these visits and delegation members had few opportunities to meet local Ti-
 betans not previously approved by the local authorities.
 Legal safeguards for ethnic Tibetans detained or imprisoned are the same as
 those in the rest of China and are inadequate in design and implementation. Ac-
 cording to information gathered by the TIN, the average judicial sentence currently
 being served is 7.5 years compared with 5.8 years for the overall average since 1987.
 Trials are brief and closed. Lack of independent access to prisoners or prisons makes
 it difficult to assess the extent and severity of abuses and the number of Tibetan
 prisoners. One report put the number of political prisoners in Tibet at 1,083, includ-
 ing 246 women, as of December. The warden of Drapchi prison in Lhasa told a dele-
 gation of foreign religious leaders that there were 100 monks and nuns there, of
 whom 90 percent were incarcerated for "crimes against national security." TIN re-
 ports indicated that the rate at which Tibetan political prisoners are dying under
 
 
 872
 detention or as a demonstrable result of detention shortly after release is increasing.
 An international NGO claimed that a 22-year-old monk, Yeshe Samten, imprisoned
 in 1996 for 2 years for taking part in a pro-Dalai Lama protest, died 6 days after
 his release from prison as result of torture suffered while incarcerated. According
 to TIN, female political prisoners, particularly those held at Lhasa's Drapchi prison,
 are at the greatest risk. The TIN reports that it confirmed six deaths in 1998 com-
 pared with two deaths in the period from 1987 to 1997. Drapchi's male political pris-
 oners have died at a rate of about 1 in 40 in the 1987 to 1998 period. TIN also re-
 ports severe beatings of several nuns serving long prison sentences including
 Ngawang Sangdrol, Ngawang Choezon, and Puntsog Nyidrol. According to credible
 reports, Chadrel Rinpoche, who was accused by the Government of betraying state
 secrets while helping the Dalai Lama choose the incarnation of the 11th Panchen
 Lama, has been held in a secret compound of a Sichuan prison where he has been
 separated from other prisoners, denied all outside contacts, and restricted to his cell,
 since his 1997 sentence to 6 years' imprisonment after a trial that was closed to
 the public.
 An   international  NGO   reported  that Ngawang     Choephel, a   Tibetan
 ethnomusicologist sentenced to 18 years in prison for spying in 1996 was being held
 in a detention center near Shigatse, awaiting the results of an appeal in his case.
 His mother's appeals to be allowed to visit him have so far gone unanswered by the
 authorities.
 There are many credible reports that prisoners are tortured, beaten, and other-
 wise mistreated. Authorities reportedly use beatings, electric shocks, suspension in
 painful positions, and other forms of torture or abuse.
 Western press reports claimed that there were several demonstrations in Tibetan
 prisons during the year, and that the authorities suppressed them with force. Sev-
 eral of these demonstrations were said to have occurred in conjunction with planned
 tprison visits by international delegations. According to several credible reports,
 ere were demonstrations at Drapchi prison in Lhasa in May. Guards are said to
 have fired on a crowd of demonstrating prisoners to disperse the crowd. According
 to credible reports at least 10 and possibly as many as 11 persons were killed, some
 reportedly nuns. The Government denies that there were casualties. There were
 unconfirmed reports of reprisals against prisoners who participated in the dem-
 onstrations.
 According to a reliable source, two Tibetan monks were arrested for preparing a
 letter to UNHCHR Robinson during her visit to China and Tibet in September. One
 of the monks, Ngawang Kyonmed, allegedly was beaten severely. His current where-
 abouts are unknown, as are the whereabouts of the second monk. The letter ex-
 pressed concern about the house arrest of the boy designated as the Panchen Lama
 by the Dalai Lama, and included references to the deaths in Drapchi prison.
 Political prisoners have resisted political reeducation imposed by prison authori-
 ties, particularly demands to denounce the Dalai Lama and accept the Panchen
 Lama appointed by the Government. According to the TIN, punishments meted out
 to uncooperative prisoner leaders have resulted in hunger strikes among female
 prisoners on at least two occasions at Drapchi. According to TIN, officials are resort-
 ing to lengthening periods of solitary confinement to isolate demonstrators. TIN re-
 ports one case of two nuns who were still in solitary confinement in mid-1998 after
 having demonstrated in February 1997.
 Promotion of family planning remains an important goal for the authorities in
 Tibet, but family planning policies permit ethnic Tibetans, as well as other minority
 groups, to have more children than Han Chinese. Urban Tibetans are permitted to
 have two children, and those in rural areas three. In practice, Tibetans working for
 the Government, especially Communist Party members, are pressured to limit
 themselves to one child.
 Freedom of Religion.-The Government maintains tight controls on religious prac-
 tices. While it allows a number of forms of religious activity in Tibet, it does not
 tolerate religious manifestations that advocate Tibetan independence or any expres-
 sion of separatism, which it describes as "splittism." The Government harshly criti-
 cizes the Dalai Lama's political activities and leadership of a government-in-exile.
 The official press continued to criticize vehemently the "Dalai clique" and repeatedly
 described the Dalai Lama as a "criminal" who was determined to split China, in an
 attempt to undermine the credibility of his religious authority. Both central govern-
 ment and local officials often insist that dialog with the Dalai Lama is essentially
 impossible and claim that his actions belie his repeated public assurances that he
 does not advocate independence for Tibet. Nonetheless, the Government reiterated
 on numerous occasions that it has channels of communication with the Dalai Lama.
 During -June both President Jiang Zemin and the Dalai Lama expressed readiness
 
 
 for dialog; however, China later rebuffed efforts by the Dalai Lama to begin such
 a dialog.
 Most Tibetans practice Buddhism to some degree. This holds true for many ethnic
 Tibetan government officials and Communist Party members. Some 1,000 religious
 figures hold positions in local people's congresses and committees of the Chinese
 People's Political Consultative Conference. However, the Government, continues to
 insist that party members and government employees adhere to the party's code of
 atheism. According to reports, there have been instances of Chinese authorities
 threatening to terminate Tibetan government employees whose children are study-
 ingin India if they did not bring the children back to Tibet.
 Buddhist monasteries and proindependence activism are closely associated in
 Tibet. Throughout the year, the Government expanded its patriotic education cam-
 paigns begun in 1996 in three monasteries near Lhasa (Ganden, Sera, and
 Drepung), to include monasteries throughout the Tibet Autonomous Region, and
 widened the campaign into Tibetan areas in other provinces. In one ethnically Ti-
 betan area of Sichuan province, five monks who refused to participate in the cam-
 paign and organized displays of the Dalai Lama's photographs reportedly were ar-
 rested. The campaigns, which have been largely unsuccessful in changing Tibetans'
 attitudes, are aimed at controlling the monasteries and expelling sympathizers of
 Tibetan independence and supporters of the Dalai Lama. According to the Dalai
 Lama, monks are required to be "patriotic" and sign a declaration agreeing to reject
 independence for Tibet; reect the boy selected by the Dalai Lama as the 11th rein-
 carnation of the Panchen Lama; reject and denounce the Dalai Lama; recognize the
 unity of China and Tibet; and not liten to the Voice of America. According to some
 reports, monks who refused to sign were expelled from their monasteries and were
 not permitted to return home to work. Portraits of the boy selected by the Govern-
 ment to be the Panchen Lama were on prominent display in some monasteries, as
 were sets of rules governing religious activity. Resistance to the campaigns was in-
 tense, and the Governmens efforts were deeply resented both by monks and by lay
 Buddhists, some of whom fled Tibet. Approximately 3,000 Tibetans enter Nepal each
 year to escape conditions in Tibet, according to the U.N. High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees.
 According to one NGQ, 15 monks were arrested at the remote Rongpo Rabten
 monastery for staging a proindependence protest during a government-run patriotic
 education campaign. Western p ereports also indicated that the Jonang Kumbum
 monastery, near Lhasa, was closed, also following a patriotic education campaign.
 Also according to NGQ reports, 49 monks over the age of 60 were forced to retire
 from the Youning monastery in Qinghai province. Senior monks play a crucial role
 in the transmission of religious teachings.
 Chinese officials state that Tibet has more than 46,300 Buddhist monks and nuns
 and approximately 1,780 monasteries, temples, and religious sites. This number rep-
 resents only the figures for the Tibet Autonomous Region. There are proportionate
 numbers of monks and nuns in other Tibetan areas of China. However, the Govern-
 ment has moved to curb the proliferation of Tibetan Buddhist monasteries, which
 it charges are a drain on local resources and a conduit for political infiltration by
 the Tibetan exile community. The Government generally imposes strict limits on the
 number of monks in major monasteries; however, these restrictions are not always
 enforced. Following disturbances in the Ganden monastery near Lhasa in May 1996
 and the subsequent campaigns, the number of monks there- reportedly decreased
 from 700 to 500.
 The Government continues to oversee the daily operations of major monasteries.
 Although the Government generally contributes only a small percentage of the mon-
 asteries' operational funds, it retains management control of the monasteries
 through the government-controlled democratic management committees and the
 local religious affairs bureaus. In April 1996, regulations restricted leadership of
 management committees of monasteries to "patriotic and devoted" monks and nuns
 and specified that the Government must approve all members of the committees.
 Despite these government efforts to control monasteries, antigovernment sentiment
 remains strong.
 The Government continued to insist that the boy it selected and enthroned in
 1995 is the Panchen Lamas 11th reincarnation. The boy has appeared publicly in
 Beijing oniy on rare occasions and has not been permitted to visit Tibet in over 2
 years. In February the boy attended a religious ceremony at a monastery in Beijing.
 At all other times      held incommunicado by Chinese authorities. Meanwhile,
 the Government also continued to detain Gendun Choeyki Nyima, who the Dala
 Lama designated the 11th Panchen Lama. The boy's family also was detained. The
 Government refused to provide access to either of the boys or their families, whose
 exact locations were unknown. Local authorities say that both boys are being well
 
 
 874
 cared for and receiving a good education, but the Government has not allowed inter-
 national observers the access necessary to confirm this. The majority of Tibetan
 Buddhists recognize the boy designated by the Dalai Lama as the Panchen Lama.
 Tibetan monks have claimed that they were forced to sign statements pledging alle-
 giance to the boy the Government selected as the reincarnation of the Panchen
 Lama. The party also urged its members to support the "official" Panchen Lama,
 and the Propaganda Department of the Communist Party Committees at both the
 regional and city levels had pictures of the boy printed for use in public and private
 reigous dsplays.
 The Government continued to restore Buddhist sites, many of which were de-
 stroyed during the Cultural Revolution. The Government has contributed significant
 sums towards these restoration efforts, in part to promote the development of tour-
 ism in Tibet. The monasteries continue tohouse and train young monks. Although
 by law monks are prohibited from joining a monastery prior to the age of 16, many
 younger boys in fact enter monastic life.
 In June the European Union issued a report based on the trip of its ambassa-
 dorial delegation to Tibet in early May. The report was highly critical of the Govern-
 ment's control of religious freedom and stated that "the delegation was in no doubt
 that the authorities in the TAR exercise extremely tight control over the principal
 elements of Tibetan religion and culture."
 Economic Development and Protection of Cultural Heritage.-Tibetans, along with
 China's 54 other minority ethnic groups, receive preferential treatment in marriage
 and family planning policies, and, to a lesser extent, in university admissions, and
 in government employment. Seventy-five percent of all government employees in
 Tibet are ethnic Tibetans. Nonetheless, most positions of real power are held by eth-
 nic Han, and most key decisions in Tibet are made by Chinese. Although govern-
 ment regulations stipulate that government and legal documents are to be in Ti-
 betan, in practice written communications by officials and government documents
 very frequently are in Chinese. In the area of private sector employment, discrimi-
 nation against Tibetans is widespread.
 The central Government and other provinces of China heavily subsidize the Ti-
 betan economy, which has grown by an average annual rate of over 10 percent be-
 tween 1989 and 1997. Over 90 percent of Tibet's budget income comes from outside
 sources. Tibet also benefits from a wide variety of favorable economic and tax poli-
 cies. However, these policies have attracted growing numbers of ethnic Han and Hui
 (Muslim) immigrants from other parts of China, who are competing with-and in
 some cases displacing-Tibetan enterprises and labor. Government development
 policies have helped raise the economic living standards of ethnic Tibetans, but
 many benefits of development accrue primarily to Han Chinese. For example, in
 many areas of Lhasa, almost all small businesses are run by Han. Rapid economic
 growth, the expanding tourism industry, and the introduction of more modern cul-
 tural influences also have disrupted traditional living patterns and customs, causing
 environmental problems and threatening traditional Tibetan culture.
 Illiteracy levels are high. The current illiteracy rate for all Tibetans is approxi-
 matoly 40 percent, and in some areas it reaches 80 percent. The Internet has been
 open to the public just since April. There are a limited number of gateways and only
 70 subscribers. Chinese officials have over the past few years downgraded the use
 of Tibetan in education. Primary schools at the village level teach in Tibetan, but
 these schools usually have only two or three grades.
 According to official statistics, approximately 78 percent of eligible children attend
 primary school, but most pupils end their formal education aftr grduating from
 village schools. The Government announced in 1997 that it would abandon efforts
 to keep elementary education entirely in Tibetan and begin teaching Chinese to Ti-
 betan children starting in the first grade. The Government stated that this step was
 taken in order to make Tibetan children more competitive with their Hat counter-
 parts, and provide more educational and employment opportunities in the long run.
 According to local education officials, Tibetan is the main language of instruction
 in 60 percent of middle schools, although there are special classes offering instruc-
 tion in Chinese. NGO's maintain that this figure is high. Most, but not all, of the
 students in these Chinese classes are ethnic Han. Experimental Tibetan middle
 schools, which had been established in the 1980's, and were reportedly successful,
 closed down. Most of those who attend regional high schools continue to receive
 some of their education in Tibetan, but knowledge of Chinese is essential, as most
 classes are in Chinese. Knowledge of Chinese also is necessary to receive a higher
 education. Since the mid-190's, the Government has allocated funds to enable Ti-
 betan secondary students to study in schools elsewhere in China. According to gov-
 enent figures, there are at present 13,000 Tibetan students studying in some 100
 schools in different parts of China.
 
 
 Tibet University is a small university with 1,300 students established to train Ti-
 betan teachers for the local educational system. Ethnic Tibetans resent dispropor-
 tionate Han representation in the student body and faculty. Tibetans, officially said
 to constitute approximately 95 percent of the region's population, make up only 80
 percent of Tibet University's student body, and 30 percent of all university faculty
 in the Tibet Autonomous Region. Although Tibetans are given admission pref-
 erences, Han Chinese students frequently gain admission because they score higher
 on admission exams due to stronger Chinese language skills and educational back-
 g ounds. Authorities reportedly require professors, particularly those from Tibet
 niversity's Tibetan Language Department, which is viewed as a potential source
 of dissent, to attend political education sessions and limit course studies and mate-
 rials in an effort to prevent "separatist' poitical and reigious activity on campus.
 Many ancient texts are banned for poitical reasons. The Tibetan Language Depart-
 ment, which was cosed to new students in the fall of 1997, was reopened in 1998
 after its curriculum had been purged of religious and "separatist" materials.
 The Dalai Lama and Tibetan experts have expressed concern that development
 projects and other central government policies adopted at a 1994 national work con-
 ference on Tibet encourage a massive influx of Han Chinese into Tibet, which has
 the effect of overwhelming Tibet's traditional culture and diluting Tibetan demo-
 graphic dominance. In recent years, in Lhasa and other urban areas, freer move-
 ment of persons throughout China, government-sponsored development, and the
 prospect of economic opportunity in Tibet, have led to a substantialincrease in the
 nrn-Tibetan population (including China's Muslim Hul minority as well as Han Chi-
 nese). An increased number of immigrants from China's large transient population
 seek to take advantage of these new economic opportunities. Most of these migrants
 profess to be temporary residents, but small businesses run by ethnic Han and Hu
 citizens (mostly restaurants and retail shops) are becoming more numerous in al-
 most all Tibetan towns and cities. In Lhasa the Chinese cultural presence is obvious
 and widespread. Buildings are of the Chinese architectural style, the Chinese lan-
 guage is widely spoken, and Chinese characters are used in most commercial and
 official communications. Some observers have estimated that about one-half of the
 population in the city is Han Chinese; elsewhere, the Han percentage of the popu-
 ation is significantly lower. In rural areas, the Han presence is often negligible.
 Chinese officials assert that 95 percent of Tibet's officially registered population is
 Tibetan, with Han and other ethnic groups making up the remaining 5 percent. This
 figure does not include the large number of "temporary" Han residents including
 military and paramilitary troops and their dependents, many of whom have lived
 in Tibet for years.
 China's economic development policies, fueled in Tibet by central government sub-
 sidies, are modernizing parts of Tibetan society and changing traditional Tibetan
 ways of life. Although the Government has made efforts in recent years to restore
 some of the physical structures and other aspects of Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan
 culture damaged or destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, repressive social and
 political controls continue to limit the fundamental freedoms of ethnic Tibetans and
 risks undermining Tibet's unique cultural, religious and linguistic heritage.
