 TIBET
 (This section of the report on China has been prepared pursuant to section 536
 (b) of Public Law 103-236. The United States recogmzes the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion-hereinafter referred to as "TibeV'-to be part of the People's Republic of
 China. Preservation and development of Tibet's unique religious, cultural, and lin-
 guistic heritage and protection of its people's fundamental human rights continue
 to be of concern.)
 Respect for the Integrity of the Person.-Because the Chinese Government strictly
 controls access to and information about Tibet, the scope of human rights abuses
 can not be precisely determined. However, according to credible reports, during 1995
 Chinese government authorities continued to commit widespread human rights
 abuses in Tibet, including instances of torture, arbitrary arrest, detention without
 public trial, long detention of Tibetan nationalists for peacefully expressing their po-
 litical views, and intensified controls on freedom of speech and the press, particu-
 larly for ethnic Tibetans. There were credible reports that Chinese authorities also
 detained foreigners visiting Tibet, searched them, and confiscated materials deemed
 politically sensitive.
 There nave been credible reports that some female detainees in Tibet have been
 tortured and, in some cases, raped. In addition, the representative of the UNHCR
 in Kathmandu has reported that Tibetans who sought asylum in Nepal and were
 forcibly repatriated to Tibet were tortured by Chinese police upon their return. Ref-
 ugees reported to UNHCR officials that they were imprisoned, beaten, and interro-
 gated t   e times a day. Electric cattle prods were used during interrogations of
 adults, but not of minors. The UNHCR concluded, based on the consistency of re-
 ports received, that torture was not a random occurrence by one or two police offi-
 cers, rather it was the result of instructions given to border police.
 The acting Chief Procurator for Tibet reported in June that in 1994 some 164 peo-
 ple (including 137 lamas and nuns) were arrested in 44 counterrevolutionary cases
 involving separatist elements. International human rights organizations reported
 that a 24-year-old Tibetan nun, Gyaltsen Kelsang, died on February 20 at her home
 
 
 on the outskirts of Lhasa. She was reportedly imprisoned for political reasons in
 1993, beaten after imprisonment, and fell ill while performing hard labor. The au-
 thorities reportedly released her from prison on medical grounds when she was near
 death.
 The authorities permit most traditional religious practices. Those seen as a vehi-
 cle for political dissent, however, are not tolerated and are promptly and forcibly
 suppressed. The authorities continue to detain and prosecute monks and nuns who
 have expressed dissenting political views in public. There are reports of politically
 active Tibetan monks and nuns under the age of 16 being detained in a work camp
 in Dui Tesam Zonkhang, west of Lhasa. Minors are allegedly being held there until
 they reach the age of 16 and can be formally charged. Legal safeguards for ethnic
 Tibetans detained or imprisoned mirror those in the rest of China and are inad-
 equate in design and implementation. Lack of independent outside access to pris-
 oners or prisons makes it difficult to assess the extent and severity of abuses and
 the number of Tibetan prisoners.
 According to human rights organizations, small-scale protests occurred in Lhasa,
 Shigatse, Penpo Lhundrup County, Medro Gongkar County, and elsewhere during
 1995, resulting in swift detention for participants. As in past years, many arrests
 coincided with proindependence demonstrations marking the anniversary of the
 failed Tibetan uprising on March 10, 1959. Human rights organizations reported
 that arrests during the first 3 months of 1995 exceeded the total number in 1994.
 Freedom of Religion.-The Government does not tolerate religious manifestations
 that advocate Tibetan independence. The Government condemns the Dalai Lama's
 political activities and his leadership of a "government in exile."
 Tibetan Buddhism and proindependence activism are closely associated in ethnic
 Tibetan areas of China, and relations between Buddhists and secular authorities re-
 mained tense. In mid-May the Dalai Lama announced that a search committee had
 identified the reincarnation of the Panchen Lama, Tibetan Buddhism's second most
 important leader. The Government regarded the announcement as a direct challenge
 toitserUle over.Tibt. Chineeeathoritiesabs equentlykdetainedthe abbot who led
 Spp                        y                ere engaged in the
 selection process. In November Chinese officials publicly rejected the boy identified
 by the Dalai Lama; the boy's current whereabouts and status are unknown. On De-
 cember 8, the Government enthroned a different child as the new Panchen Lama
 at a ceremony overseen by Chinese State Councilor Li Tieying. Official Chinese an-
 nouncements explicitly identified the Dalai Lama as an "enemy of China," and dis-
 missed him as irrelevant to the proceeding. According to reports, 27 people were ar-
 rested between November 27 and December 11 in connection with protests about the
 selection of the Panchen Lama.
 The Government strictly enforces limits on the number of monks in major mon-
 asteries, and in March acknowledged publicly .for the first time that these limits
 exist. Since April authorities have halved the number of monks officially permitted
 at the Jokhang temple in central Iasa. In addition, the Government has moved
 to curb the proliferation of Tibetan Buddhist monasteries, which are seen as a drain
 on local resources and a conduit for political infiltration by the Tibetan exile commu-
 nity. To bolster loyalty to the party, the Government stepped up efforts to ensure
 that party cadres in Tibet, over 70 percent of whom are ethnic Tibetans, adhere to
 the party's code of atheism. The Government defended its authority to confirm the
 reincarnation of the Panchen Lama. The Government continues to oversee the daily
 operations of monasteries. Although the Government generally only contributes a
 small percentage of the monasteries' operational funds, it retains management con-
 trol of-the monasteries through the government-controlled democratic management
 committees and the local religious affairs bureaus.
 At the same time, however, worship in Tibet remains relatively free, as long as
 it is devoid of political content. The Government continued to restore sacred Bud-
 dhist sites, many of which were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. In 1994
 government religious authorities forbade party and government officials from dis-
 playing the Dalai Lama's photograph, including in their homes and removed his
 photos from sale in bazaar shops. However, the authorities still permit open vener-
 ation in monasteries of the Dalai Lama as a religious figure, even as the argument
 over the Panchen Lama continues. Despite government attempts to curb their pro-
 liferation, the monasteries continued to house and train young monks, making pos-
 sible the transmission of Tibetan Buddhist traditions to future generations. In 1994
 the autonomous regional government in Tibet ordered Tibetan officials who have
 children studying in India to bring them back to Tibet, but the actual number of
 students who may have returned as a result of this order is unknown.
 Economic Development and Protection of Cultural Heritage.-Like China's 54
 other minority ethnic groups, Tibetans receive preferential treatment in marriage
 
 
 596
 policy, family planning, university admission, and employment. However, in practice
 discrimination against Tibetans is widespread, especially in the area of employment.
 Chinese government development policies have helped raise the living standards of
 ethnic Tibetans, but have also disrupted traditional living patterns. The Govern-
 ment sought to respond to Tibetan concerns about the preservation of the Tibetan
 language. In Tibetprimary schools at the village level teach in Tibetan. Many pu-
 pils, however, end their formal education after graduating from these schools, which
 usually have only two or three grades. Those who go on to regional primary schools
 and beyond, particularly after junior high school, continue to receive much of their
 education in Mandarin Chinese, although some areas provide instruction in Tibetan
 through junior high school. Efforts to expand Tibetan language instruction are ham-
 peredby lack of materials and competent teachers at higher levels.
 The Dalai Lama continued in 1995 to express concern that development projects
 and other central government policies encourage a massive influx of Han Chinese
 into Tibet, which has the effect of overwhelming Tibet's traditional culture and di-
 luting Tibetan demographic dominance. In recent years, freer movement of people
 throughout China, government-sponsored development, and the prospect of economic
 opportunity in Tibet have led to a substantial increase in the non-Tibetan popu-
 lation (including China's Muslim Hui minority as well as Han Chinese) in Lasa
 and other urban areas. Most of these migrants profess to be temporary residents,
 but small businesses run by ethnic Han and Hui peoples (mostly restaurants and
 retail shops) are becoming more numerous in or near some Tibetan towns and cities.
 Roughly one-third of the population of Lhasa is Han Chinese. Chinese officials as-
 sert that 95 percent of Tibet's officially registered population is Tibetan, with Han
 and other ethnic groups makin up the remainder. Plans for investing 2.3 billion
 yuan about $350 million (2.3 bi-.ion yen) in economic development announced dur-
 ing a July 1994 work conference on Tibet raise the prospect of the transfer to, or
 temporary duty in, Tibet of a substantially greater number of non-Tibetan technical
 personnel in the years ahead. These plans may also increase the number of immi-
 grants from China's large transient population seeking to take advantage of new
 economic opportunities.
 Economic development, fueled by central government subsidies, is modernizing Ti-
 betan society and changing traditional Tibetan ways of life. While the Chinese Gov-
 ernment has made efforts in recent years to restore some of the physical structures
 and other aspects of Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan culture damaged or destroyed
 during the Cultural Revolution, repressive social and political controls continue to
 limit the individual freedoms of ethnic Tibetans.
