 TIBET
 (This section of the report on China has been prepared pursuant to Section 536
 (b) of Public Law 103-236. The United States recogmzes the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion (hereinafter referred to as "Tibet") to be part of the People's Republic of China.
 Preservation and development of Tibet's unique religious, cultura  and linguistic
 heritage and protection of its people's fundamental human rights continue to be of
 concern.)
 Respect for the Integrity of the Person.-Because the Chinese Government strictly
 controls access to and information about Tibet, it is difficult to state precisely the
 scope of human rights abuse there. It is known, however, that during 1994 Chinese
 government authorities continued to commit widespread human rights abuses in
 Tibet, including instances of torture, arbitrary arrest, and detention without public
 trial, long detention of Tibetan nationalists for peacefully expressing their political
 views and rigid controls on freedom of speech and the press, particularly for Tibet-
 ans. There are credible reports that authorities in some instances tortured and
 killed detainees in Tibet. Reports from international human rights organizations in-
 dicate that a Tibetan nun died on June 4 in a prison hospital, reportedly as a result
 of a beating by guards. In May Tibetan officials reported that a former public secu-
 rity official in Tibet was sentenced to 9 years in prison for causing the death of a
 suspect while torturing him to obtain a confession. The United Nations Working
 Group on Arbitrary Detentions has concluded that China is arbitrarily detaining 32
 Tibetans and has called for their release.
 The authorities permit most traditional religious practices except those seen as
 a vehicle for political dissent, which they ruthlessly suppress. They continue to de-
 tain and prosecute monks and nuns who have expressed dissenting political views
 in public. Legal safeguards for Tibetans detained or imprisoned are inadequate in
 design and implementation, and lack of independent outside access to prisoners or
 prisons makes it difficult to assess the extent and severity of abuses and the num-
 ber of Tibetan prisoners.
 According to human rights organizations, small-scale protests were reported to
 have occurred in Lhasa, the capital, and elsewhere during 1994, resulting in swift
 detention for participants. According to credible reports, in January, 11 nuns were
 sentenced to terms of 2 to 7 years' imprisonment for taking part in a
 proindependence demonstration in 1993. Another group of 14 nuns reportedly had
 their prison sentences increased by up to 9 years for singing proindependence songs.
 In May a demonstration by Tibetan shopkeepers protesting tax increases took on
 political overtones, and several dozen Tibetan monks and nuns were detained, ap-
 Farently for raising independence slogans. Police responded without using excessive
 ore, reflecti  better riot control training, no lives were lost. Tibetan political pris-
 oners such as Ngawang Pulchung and Jempel Tsering remained imprisoned in 1994,
 although Yulo DawaTsering and three other Tibetans were released in November.
 Freedom of Relgion.-In Tibet, where Buddhism and Tibetan nationalism are
 closely intertwined, relations between Buddhists and secular authorities continued
 to be tense in 1994. The Government does not tolerate religious manifestations that
 advocate Tibetan independence, and it has prohibited a large traditional festival
 which has in the past been used to encourage separatist sentiment. The Govern-
 ment condemns the Dalai Lama's political activities and his leadership of a "govern-
 ment in exile," but it recognizes him as a major religious figure. Government reli-
 gious authorities in 1994 forbade party and government officials from displaying the
 Dalai Lama's photograph, including in their homes, and removed his photographs
 from sale at bazaar shops. His photos remain in prominent positions in most tem-
 ples in Tibet. The autonomous region government in Tibet also ordered Tibetan offi-
 cials who have children studying in India to bring them back to Tibet immediately.
 In 1994 the Chinese Government continued to take steps to ameliorate damage
 caused in the 1960's and 1970's to Tibet's historic religious buildings and other as-
 pects of its cultural and religious heritage. The Government has expended substan-
 tial sums to reconstruct the most important sacred sites of Tibetan Buddhism. A
 5-year project to restore the Potala Palace (the most important Tibetan Buddhist
 center) in Lhasa was concluded in August 1994 at a cost of $6.4 million. The Gov-
 ernment also provided funding in 1994 for the restoration of two other major reli-
 gious sites in Lhasa, the Jokhang and Ganden monasteries. Ganden had been com-
 pletely destroyed during the Cultural Revolution. Public contributions also helped
 to rebuild these and many smaller monasteries. Although the Government denied
 it, the practice of religion in Tibet continued to be hampered by the limits the Gov-
 ernment imposes on the number of resident monks in several of Tibet's main tem-
 ples. There are 34,000 Buddhist monks and nuns in Tibet, according to official fig-
 
 
 ures, a small number compared to traditional norms. Tibetan Buddhists claim that
 they are restricted in the numbers and training of religious practitioners, even
 though limits on resident monks are not strictly observed in practice. Monks at
 some Tibetan monasteries known for their opposition to Han Chinese domination
 may till face travel restrictions.
 Economic Development and Protection of Cultural Heritage.-Like China's 64
 other minority ethnic groups, Tibetans receive preferential treatment in marriage
 Iiy, family planning, university admission, and employment. Chinese government
 development policies have helped raise the living standards of Tibetans, but also
 have disrupted traditional living patterns. The Government has sought to preserve
 the Tibetan language, but in doing so has encountered the dilemma of how to pre-
 serve the language without limiting educational opportunities. In Tibet primary
 schools at the village level teach in Tibetan. Many pupils end their formal education
 after graduating from these schools, which usually only have two or three grades.
 Thosewho go on to regional primary schools and beyond, particularly after junior
 high school, receive much of Their education in Chinese, athough some areas pro-
 vide instruction in Tibetan through junior high school Efforts to expand Tibetan
 language instruction are hampered by lack of materials and competent teachers at
 h   er levels.
 In July 1994, the Chinese Communist Party and the State Council conducted a
 large-scale work conference on Tibet. The third of its kind since 1980, this work con-
 ference was attended by delegations from the CCP and central government organi-
 zations, as well as provincial representatives and delegates from certain uirban
 areas. The conference focused on setting economic development goals, pledging to in-
 crease economic activity in Tibet by 10 percent a year. The plan included a total
 of $270 million in investment projects, continuing the government policy of provid-
 ing substantial budget subsidies to develop Tibet's backward economy. China a lead-
 ers also made clear that Tibet would continue to receive central government finan-
 cial assistance and would retain "special flexibility" in implementing reform policies
 mandated elsewhere in China. In a speech covered extensively in the Chinese press,
 President Jiang Zemin reiterated Beijing's willingness to "welcome back" the Dalai
 Lama to Tibet, so long as "he abandons advocacy of Tibetan independence and
 ceases activities to split the motherland." Although the work conference approved
 plans to boost economic development in Tibet, it produced no change in the Chinese
 Government's policy toward Tibet.
 The Dalai Lama continued in 1994 to express concern that development projects
 and other central government policies encourage a massive influx oR Han Chinese
 into Tibet, which has the effect of overwhelming Tibet's traditional culture and di-
 luting Tibetan demographic dominance in Tibet. Freer movement of people through-
 out China in recent years, and the prospect of economic opportunity in Tibet has
 led to a substantial increase in the non-Tean population (including China's Mus-
 lim Hui minority as well as Han Chinese) in L     and oher urban areas. Most
 of these migrants profess to be temporay residents, but small businesses run by
 ethnic Han and Iui peoples (mostly restaurants and retail shops) are becoming
 more numerous in or near some Tibetan towns and cities. Roughly one-third of the
 pulationof lasa is Han Chinese. Chinese officials assert that 95 percent of Ti-
 t's officially registered population is Tibetan, with Han and other ethnic groups
 making up the remainder. Increased economic development will likely mean Ye
 transfer to, or temporary duty in, Tibetof a greater number of non-Tibetan technical
 personnel, and may also increase the number of immigrants from China's large
 floating population seeking to take advantage of new economic opportunities.
 Economic development, fueled by central government subsidies, is changing tradi-
 tional Tibetan ways of life. While the Chinese Government has made efforts in re-
 cent years to restore the physical structures and other aspects of Tibetan Buddhism
 and Tibetan culture damaged or destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, repres-
 sive social and political controls continue to limit the individual freedoms of Tibet-
 ans.
