 TIBET
 (This section of the report on China has been prepared pursuant to Section 536
 (b) of Public Law 103-236. The United States recognizes the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion-hereinafter referred to as "Tibet-to be part of the People's Republic of
 hina. Preservation and development of Tibet's unique religious, cultural and lin-
 guistic heritage and protection of its people's fundamental human rights continue
 to be of concern.)
 Respect for the Integrity of the Person.-Because the Chinese Government strictly
 controls access to and information about Tibet, the scope of human rights abuses
 cannot be precisely determined. However, according to credible reports, during 1996
 Chinese government authorities continued to commit widespread human rights
 abuses in Tibet, including instances of death in detention, torture, arbitrary arrest,
 detention without public trial, long detention of Tibetan nationalists for peacefully
 expressing their religious and political views, and intensified controls on religion
 and on freedom of speech and the press, particularly for ethnic Tibetans.
 The authorities permit many traditional religious practices. Those seen as a vehi-
 cle for political dissent, however, are not tolerated and are promptly and forcibly
 suppressed. Individuals accused of political activism faced increased persecution
 during the year, as the Government moved to limit the power of religious persons
 and secular leaders who openly sympathized with the Dalai Lama. In February the
 Government issued orders to close all politically active monasteries, and during the
 year authorities increased repression, imprisonment, and abuse or torture of monks
 and nuns accused of political activism. Aordig to authoritative Chinese press re-
 ports in May Beijing launched a campaign to "limit criminal activity in the guise
 of reigious practice. The crackdown appears to have three goals: To stop acts of
 defiance, to break the political power wielded by lamas, and to remove officials loyal
 to the Dalai Lama.
 There have been reports of bomb blasts in Lhasa. There is no information about
 casualties. Chinese officials claim Tibetan separatist groups are responsible for the
 bombings, which they characterize as "terrorist acts." However, no group has
 claime responsibility.
 During 1996 small-scale protests occurred at the Ganden, Sera, Drepung,
 Jokhang, and Tashilhunpo monasteries, resulting in swift detention for many par-
 ticipants. In April the Government banned photographs of the Dalai Lama in mon-
 
 
 641
 asteries and private homes, extending and widening a 1994 prohibition on the sale
 of the Dalai Lama's photograph in shops and on officials displaying his photograph
 in their homes or offices. Police reportedly conducted house-to-house searches to en-
 foroe the ban. This ban prompted some of the protests in monasteries. In May and
 June, approximately 90 monks openly sympathetic to the Dalai Lama protested and
 were detained at Uiasa's Ganden monastery. During a May incident at Ganden, se-
 curity personnel reportedly shot three monks. One of the monks, 40-year-old
 Kelsang Nyendrak, reportedly died of a bullet wound. According to press reports,
 a Chinese official admitted that monks were arrested but denied the murder.
 Legal safeguards for ethnic Tibetans detained or imprisoned mirror those in the
 rest of China and are inadequate in design and implementation. Lack of independ-
 ent outside access to prisoners or prisons makes it difficult to assess the extent and
 severity of abuses and the number of Tibetan prisoners.
 International human rights organizations reported that a 49-year-old Tibetan
 monk, Kelsang Thutob died in July at Drapchi prison in Lhasa. He was reportedly
 imprisoned in 1989 ana sentenced to 18 years for forming a prodemocracy group and
 distributing antigovernment material that included a 7Tibetan translation of the
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The monk reportedly suffered from high
 blood pressure and other ailments but received no medical care. Tibetan exile
 sources reported that a 19-year-old monk, Sangye Tenphel, also died in Drapchi as
 a result of beatings by prison guards. In September Tenchok Tenphel, a 27-year-
 old monk, died in Sakya detention center, 2 weeks after being detained during a
 ritual dance performance, according to an NGO report. Chinese officials claimed the
 death was suicide, but according to local sources, he died of abuse while in deten-
 tion. His body reportealy was cremated before the family could view it, and no au-
 topsy was performed. Yongdrung, a 27-year-old artist who specialized in painting
 portraits of the Dalai Lama was found in shock in Lhasa in October after having
 en released from 58 days in a detention center, where he was reportedly tortured.
 In July Ngawang Sandrol, who has been in jail since she was 15, reportedly had
 her sentence doubled for protesting a political reeducation campaign aimed at
 monks and nuns.
 There were credible reports that Chinese authorities also detained foreigners vis-
 iting Tibet, searched them, and confiscated materials deemed politically sensitive.
 Ngawang Choephel, a 29-year-old Tibetan ethnomusicologist and former Fulbright
 scholar, was he d in incommunicado detention in Tibet throughout 1996. He is be-
 lieved to have been detained in Shiga in in August 1995 while making a film docu-
 mentary about Tibetan performing arts. In December Ngawang Choephel was sen-
 tenced to 18 years in prison for "espionage" under the State Security Law. A New
 Zealand tourist was detained, interrogated, and forced to make a confession after
 sending a fax to New Zealand that included a reference to what he thought might
 be a bomb explosion in Lhasa.
 reedom of Religion-.-The Government does not tolerate religious manifestations
 that advocate Tibetan independence. The Government condemns the Dalai Lama's
 political activities and his leadership of a "government in exile." The official press
 intensified the rhetoric against him and repeatedly described him as a "criminal"
 determined to "split" China. The Government sought to limit the Dalai Lama's
 international influence by threatening leaders of Britain, Germany, Australia, and
 other nations with serious diplomatic and economic consequences if they met with
 him during his visits to those countries. International leaders generally ignored Chi-
 na's threats and welcomed meetings with the Tibetan Buddhist religious leader and
 Nobel laureate.
 Tibetan Buddhism and proindependence activism are closely associated in Tibet,
 and already tense relations between Buddhists and secular authorities worsened
 during the year in some areas, although nonpolitical forms of worship were toler-
 ated. In May the Government reportedly began a campaign to "register" and "reedu-
 cate" dissident monks at Tibet's three main monasteries, Drepung, Sera, and
 Ganden. Hundreds of officials participated in the campaign, during which monks
 were forced to attend sessions on law, patriotism, and support for national unity
 and were coerced to sign statements criticizing the Dalai Lama. According to re-
 ports, some monks fled their places of worship and feigned illness to avoid attending
 the sessions, but the management committees of the involved monasteries imposed
 deadlines for participation forcing monks to cooperate or be stricken from the roles
 of the monastery.
 Chinese officials claim that some 46,000 Buddhist monks and nuns live in ap-
 proximately 1,400 Tibetan monasteries, and some travelers to Tibet have reported
 seeing increased numbers of monks and nuns. The Government, however, has
 moved to curb the proliferation of Tibetan Buddhist monasteries, which are seen as
 a drain on local resources and a conduit for political infiltration by the Tibetan exile
 
 
 community. In March 1995, the Government acknowledged that it strictly enforces
 limits on the number of monks in major monasteries. In April the Tibetan press re-
 ported that the Tibet Autonomous Region Religious Affairs Bureau had issued regu-
 lations that restricted leadershig of management committees of temples to "patriotic
 and devoted monks and nuns. To bolster loyalty to the party, the Government
 stepped up efforts to ensure that party cadres in Tibet, over 70 percent of whom
 are ethnic Tibetans, adhere to the party's code of atheism.
 In November the official Tibet Daily newspaper called for "large-scale" reform of
 religious policy. "Buddhism must confor to socialism, not socialism to Buddhism
 ** * Some people are seeking to expand the role and influence of religion, without
 recognizing its negative influence." The article published statistics that it said pro-
 vided indications of the negative influence of religion on Tibet's economic develop-
 ment: There were 1,787 temples in Tibet at the beginning of 1996, "exceeding the
 number of towns and cities, while 46,000 mnks and nuns "outnumbered middle
 school students." Temples compete for scarce resources hurting other areas, the arti-
 cle claimed. "We must adopt an offensive strategy to protect the paramount inter-
 ests of the state. * * *"
 The Government continues to oversee the daily operations of monasteries. Al-
 though the Government generally only contributes a small percentage of the mon-
 asteries' operational funds, it retains management ontrol of the monasteries
 through the government-controlled democratic management committees and the
 local religious affairs bureaus.
 The Government continued to insist that a by it selected and enthroned in 1995
 is the Panchen Lama's eleventh reincarnation. The boy appeered publicly on at least
 two occasions, including Chinese National Day in October. At all other times, he
 was held incommunicado by Chinese authorities. Meanwhile, the Government also
 detained the boy selected by the Dalai Lama as the Panchen Lama's reincarnation.
 The boy's family was also detained. The Government refused to provide access by
 unofficial observers to either of the boys or their families, whose exact locations
 were unknown. Tibetan monks have claimed that they were forced to sign state-
 ments pledging allegiance to the boy selected as the reincarnation of the Panchen
 Lama by the Government.
 Buddhist sites, many of which were destroyed during the Cultural Revolution,
 continue to be restored. Despite government attempts to curb their proliferation, the
 monasteries continue to house and train young monks, making possible the trans-
 mission of Tibetan Buddhist traditions to future generations.
 Economic Development and Protection of Cultural Heritage.-Like China's 54
 other minority ethnic groups, Tibetans receive nominal preferential treatment in
 marriage policy, university admission, and employment. However, in practice, dis-
 crimination against Tibetans is widespread, especially in the area of employment.
 In addition, ethnic Han and Hui immigrants from other parts of China, encouraged
 by government policies and new opportunities are competing with-and in some
 cases displacing-Tibetan enterprises and labor. Overall, government development
 policies have helped raise the economic living standards of many ethnic Tibetans.
 However, rapid and ecologically inappropriate growth has also disrupted traditional
 living patterns and thereby threatened traditional Tibetan culture.
 Clunese officials moved on several fronts to downgrade the use of Tibetan in edu-
 cation. According to NGO reports Tibet University  pped its Tibetan language en-
 trance requirement and switched to Chinese to teach a course in Tibetan history in
 the Tibetan Language Department. All but 1 of 17 courses there are now taught
 in Chinese, although the University was established in 1985 to increase the study
 of Tibetan language and culture in Tibetan. There was a suggestion late in the year
 to suspend entry of the 1997 freshman class entirely while new materials were de-
 veloped and resume operation with a class to enter in 1998. Four highly successful
 experimental Tibetan language middle schools are being closed down or phased out.
 A new project has started toprovide bilingual Chinese and Tibetan instruction from
 grade one on to increase children's fluency in Chinese.
 Primary schools at the village level teach in Tibetan, but those usually have only
 two or three grades. Illiteracy levels are high-the current rate for all Tibetans is
 over 44 percent-and in some areas it reaches 80 percent. Approximately 70 percent
 of eligible children attend primary school, but most pupils end their formal edu-
 cation after graduating from village schools. Most of those who attend regional high
 schools continue to receive some of their education in Tibetan, but knowledge of Chi-
 nese is necessary to receive a higher education.
 The Dalai Lama continued to express concern that development projects and other
 central government policies encourage a massive influx of Nan Chinese into Tibet,
 which has the effect of overwhelming Tibet's traditional culture and diluting Tibetan
 demographic dominance. In recent years, freer movement of people throughout
 
 
 China, government-sponsored development, and the prospect of economic oppor-
 tunity in Tibet have Cd to a substantial increase in the non-Tibetan population (in-
 cluding China's Muslim Hui minority as well as Han Chinese) in Lhasa and other
 urban areas. Most of these migrants profess to be temporary residents, but small
 businesses run by ethnic Han and Hui peoples (mostly restaurants and retail shops)
 are becoming more numerous in or near some Tibetan towns and cities. In Lhasa
 roughly one-third of the population is Han Chinese; elsewhere, the Han percentage
 of th population is significantly lower. Chinese officials assert that 95 percent of
 Tibet's o icially registered  pulation is Tibetan, with Han and other ethic groups
 making up the remainder. Ongoing economic development raises the prospect of the
 temporary or permanent transfer to Tibet of increased numbers of non-Tibetan tech-
 nical personnel. Since 1994, 50 major investment projects have been completed at
 a cost of $400 million. An increased number of immigrants from China's large tran-
 sient population is seeking to take advantage of new economic opportunities.
 Economic development, fueled by central government subsidies, is modernizing
 p arts of Tibetan society and changing traditional Tibetan ways of life. While the
 Government has made efforts in recent years to restore some of the physical struc-
 tures and other aspects of Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan culture damaged or de-
 stroyed during the Cultural Revolution, repressive social and political controls con-
 tinue to limit the fundamental freedoms of ethnic Tibetans.
