 TIBET
 (This section of the report on China has been prepared pursuant to Section 536
 (b) of Public Law 103-236. The United States recognizes the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion-hereinafter referred to as 'Tibet"-to be part of the People's Republic of
 China. Preservation and development of Tibet's unique religious, cultural, and lin-
 guistic heritage and protection of its people's fundamental human rights continue
 to be of concern.)
 Respect for the Integrity of the Person.-The Chinese Government strictly controls
 access to and information about Tibet. Thus, it is difficult to determine accurately
 the scope of human rights abuses. However, according to credible reports, Chinese
 government authorities continued to commit serious human rights abuses in Tibet,
 including instances of torture, arbitrary arrest, detention without public trial, and
 long detention of Tibetan nationalists for peacefully expressing their political views.
 Tight controls on religion and on other fundamental freedoms continued and in
 some cases intensified.
 The authorities permit many traditional religious practices, and public manifesta-
 tions of belief. Those activities viewed as vehicles for political dissent, however, are
 not tolerated and are promptly and forcibly suppressed. Individuals accused of polit-
 ical activism faced serious persecution during the year, as the Government pro-
 ceeded with its largely unsuccessful campaign to discredit the Dalai Lama as a reli-
 tious leader and limit the power of religious persons and secular leaders sympa-
 ttetic to him. The campaign was carried out under the slogan "Buddhism must con-
 form to Socialism and not Socialism to Buddhism." Efforts to reeducate monks and
 nuns continued as part of the campaign. The ban on photographs of the Dalai Lama
 continued. There were reports of imprisonment and abuse or torture of monks and
 nuns accused of political activism, as well as the closure of several monasteries.
 The authorities in Tibet were concerned about potential violence and demonstra-
 tions at the time of the Hong Kong reversion in July, and security restrictions were
 increased then on both internal and external travel. There was, however, no unrest
 in Tibet during the reversion and there were no confirmed reports of bombings or
 other political violence in Tibet in 1997. Foreigners, including international NGO
 personnel, experienced increased restrictions on access to Tibet that began mid-1997
 and, in some cases, continued until the end of the year.
 Legal safeguards for ethnic Tibetans detained or imprisoned are the same as
 those in the rest of China and are inadequate in design and implementation. Lack
 of independent access to prisoners or prisons makes it difficult to assess the extent
 and severity of abuses and the number of Tibetan prisoners. Nonetheless, there are
 many credible reports that prisoners are tortured, beaten, and otherwise mistreated.
 In October Physicians for Human Rightspublished a report based on 1996 inter-
 views with 258 Tibetan refugees living in India. According to the report, 38 of those
 interviewed stated that they personally had been subected to beatings, electric
 shocks, suspension in painful positions, and other forms of torture or abuse.
 Several foreign delegations visited Tibetan prisons. In April an official Norwegian
 delegation visited Tibet to discuss human rights issues and was allowed to visit
 Drapchi prison in Lhasa. The delegation met with ordinary prisoners, but was not
 given access to political prisoners  Augs a delegation from Switzerland also vis-
 ited Drapchi prison. In September seven German parliamentarians from the Bun-
 destag Subcommittee for Human Rights and Humanitarian Aid also made a prison
 visit. in October the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention visited Drapehi
 prison, where group members were allowed to interview certain prisoners without
 the presence of Chinese officials.
 Ngawang Choephel, the 29-year-old Tibetan ethnomusicologist who was sentenced
 to 18 years in pisnon charges of "espionage" in late 1996, had his appeal denied
 
 
 740
 in February and remains at an undisclosed prison. In April the former abbot of the
 Tashilhunpo monastery, Chadrel Rinpoche, was sentenced to 6 years in prison after
 a trial that was closed to the public. The 58-year-old Abbot was arrested in 1995
 for communicating with the Dalai Lama over the search for the reincarnation of the
 Panchen Lama, Tibet's second highest religious leader. There was no official infor-
 mation about Chadrel Rinpoche between his arrest and sentencing. Two other Tibet-
 ans were sentenced along with Chadrel Rinpoche for "colluding with separatist
 forces abroad" and "seriously jeopardizing national unification and the unity of eth-
 nic groups." An assistant, Champa Chung, was sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment,
 and a third defendant, Samdrup, received 2 years' imprisonment. According to credi-
 ble reports, Chadrel Rinpoche has been held in a secret compound of a Sichuan pris-
 on where he has been separated from other prisoners, denied all outside contacts,
 and restricted to his cell.
 According to Western press reports, two Tibetans-Shol Dawa and Topgyal-were
 sentenced to 9 and 6 years in prison, respectively, for compiling a list of current and
 released political prisoners that they planned to send adra . In September 132
 prisoners-including some jailed for political offenses-were granted court-ordered
 prison term reductions or parole after showing evidence of reform and good behav-
 ior.
 According to a May work report presented by Bai Zhao, president of Tibet's High-
 er People's Court, in 1996 the courts handled 47 cases involving 98 persons charged
 with crimes that "endangered national security."
 Family planning remains an important goalfor the authorities in Tibet, but fam-
 ily planning policies are applied more leniently to ethnic Tibetans, and ethnic Tibet-
 ans continue to be allowed to have more children than Han Chinese.
 Freedom of Religion.-The Government allows a number of forms of religious ac-
 tivity in Tibet. It does not tolerate religious manifestations that advocate Tibetan
 independence or any expression of "splitism." At a September news conference, a Ti-
 betan government official compared Chinese actions in Tibet to foreign governments'
 responses to cult activity. The Government condemns the Dalai Lama's political ac-
 tivities and leadership of-a government-in-exile. The official press intensified rhet-
 oric against him and repeatedly described him as a "criminal" determined to split
 China in an attempt to undermine the credibility of his religious authority. Officials
 insist that dialogue with the Dalai Lama is essentially impossible and claim that
 his actions belie his repeated public assurances that he does not advocate independ-
 ence for Tibet.
 Most Tibetans practice Buddhism to some degree. This holds true for many ethnic
 Tibetan government officials and Communist Party members. Some 1,000 religious
 figures hold positions in local people's congresses and committees o? the Chinese
 People's Political Consultative Conference. To bolster loyalty to the party, the Gov-
 ernment step ped up efforts to ensure that party cadres in Tibet, over 70 percent of
 whom are ethnic Tibetans, adhere to the party's code of atheism.
 Buddhist monasteries and proindependence activism are closely associated in
 Tibet. Throughout the year, the Government expanded the patriotic education cam-
 agns begun in 1996 in three monasteries to include monasteries throughout the
 ibe Autonomous Region. The campaigns, which have been largely unsuccessful in
 changing Tibetans' attitudes, are  d a controlling the monasteries and expelling
 sympathizers of Tibetan independence and supporters of the Dalai Lama. According
 to the Dalai Lama, monks are required to be "patriotic" and sign a declaration
 agreeing to reject independence for Tibet; reject the boy selected by the Dalai Lama
 as the 11th reincarnation of the Panchen Lama; reject and denounce the Dalai
 Lama; recognize the unity of China and Tibet; and not listen to the Voice of Amer-
 ica. According to credible reports, monks who refused to sign were expelled from
 their monasteries and were not permitted to return home to work. By the end of
 the year, portraits of the Panchen Lama selected by Beijing were on prominent dis-
 play in monasteries, as were sets of rules governing religious activi~ty. Resistance
 to the campaigns was intense, and the Government s efforts were deeply resented
 both by monks and by lay Buddhists, some of whom fled Tibet. According to a May
 NGO report, officials were reassessing the campaign because the harsh tactics and
 penalties employed were backfiring. Approximately 3,000 Tibetans enter Nepal each
 year to escape conditions in Tibet, according to the UN . High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees.
 Chinese officials state that Tibet has more than 46,300 Buddhist monks and nuns
 and approximately 1,780 monasteries, templea, and religious sites, and some travel-
 ers to Tibet have reported seeingnincreased numbers of monks and nuns. The Gov-
 enent, however, has moved to curb the proliferation of Tibetan Buddhist mon-
 asteries, which are seen as a drain on local resources and a conduit for political in-
 fitration by the Tibetan exile community. The Government states that it strictly en-
 
 
 forces limits on the number of monks in major monasteries. Following disturbances
 in Ganden in May 1996, and the subsequent campaigns, the number of monks there
 reportedly decreased from 700 to 500.
 The Government continues to oversee the daily operations of major monasteries.
 Although the Government generally contributes only a small percentage of the mon-
 asteries' operational funds, it retains management control of the monasteries
 through the government-controlled democratic management committees and the
 local religious affairs bureaus. In April 1996 regulations restricted leadership of
 management committees of temples to "patriotic and devoted" monks and nuns.
 Continued antigovernment sentiment indicated, however, that these government ef-
 forts were largely unsuccessful.
 The Government continued to insist that the boy it selected and enthroned in
 1995 is the Panchen Lama's 11th reincarnation. The boy appeared publicly in
 Beiing in August to preside over Tibetan Buddhist rites marking the 10th anniver-
 sary of the founding of the China Advanced Tibetan Buddhism College. At all other
 times he was held incommumcado by Chinese authorities. Meanwhile, the Govern-
 ment also continued to detain the boy selected by the Dalal Lama as the Panchen
 Lama's reincarnation. The boy's family was also detained. The Government refused
 to provide access to either of the boys or their families, whose exact locations were
 unknown. Tibetan monks have claimed that they were forced to sign statements
 pl     gallegiance to the boy the Government seleted as the reincarnation of the
 en Lama. There is widespread sentiment in Tibet in favor of the boy selected
 by the Dala Lama. The party also urged its members to support the "official" Pan-
 chen  ana, and the Shigatse city Communist Party Committee's Propaganda De-
 partment had pictures of the by printed for use in public and private religious dis-
 Plae Government continued to restore Buddhist sites, many of which were de-
 stroyed during the Cultural Revolution. The Government has contributed significant
 sums towards these restoration efforts, in part to promote the development of tour-
 ism in Tibet. The monasteries continue to house and train young monks, making
 possible the transmission of Tibetan Buddhist traditions to future generations.Al
 though by law monks are prohibited from ,joining a monasteiy prior to the age of
 16, many younger boys in fact enter monastic life.
 In December the International Commission of Jurists, a nongovernmental organi-
 zation, issued a report that criticized the Government's repression of religious free-
 dom in Tibet.
 Economic Development and Protection of Cultural Heritage.-Tibetans receive
 preferential treatment in marriage and family planning policies, as do China's 54
 other minority ethnic groups. iowever, discrimination against Tibetans is wide-
 spread, especially in the area of employment.
 The central Government and other provinces of China heavily subsidize the Ti-
 betan economy, which has grown by an average annual rate of 10.5 percent during
 1989-1996. Over 90 percent of Tibet's budget income comes from outside sources.
 Tibet also benefits from a wide variety of favorable economic and tax policies. These
 policies, however, have attracted growing numbers of ethnic Han and Hui immi-
 grants from other parts of China, that are com.ting with-and in some cases dis-
 p lacing-Tibetan enterprises and labor. Overall, government development policies
 have helped raise the economic living standards of many ethnic Tibetans but many
 benefits of development accrue to Han Chinese. Rapid growth, the expanding tour-
 ism industry, and introduction of more modern cultural influences have also dis-
 rupted traditional livingpatterns and customs, causing environmental problems and
 threatening traditionalTibetan culture.
 illiteracy levels are high. The current rate for all Tibetans is approximately 40
 percent, and in some areas it reaches 80 percent. Chinese officials have over the
 past few years downgraded the use of Tibetan in education. Primary schools at the
 village level teach in Tibetan, but these schools usually have only two or three
 grades. A pproximately 70 percent of eligible children attend primary school, but
 most pupils end their formal education after graduating from village schools. The
 Government recently announced that it would abandon efforts to keep, elementary
 education entirely in Tibetan and begin teaching Chinese to Tibetan childen start-
 ing in the first grade. The Government stated that this step was taken in order to
 make Tibetan children more competitive with their Han counterparts, and provide
 more educational and employment opportunities in the long run. According to local
 education officials, Tibetan is the main language of instruction in middle schools,
 although there are special classes offering instruction in Chinese. Most, but not all,
 of the students in these Chinese classes are ethnic Han. Experimental Tibetan mid-
 de schools, which had been established  te 1980's, and were reportedly success-
 ful, closed down. Most of those who attend regional high schools continue to receive
 
 
 some of their education in Tibetan, but knowledge of Chinese is necessary to receive
 a higher education.
 Tibet University is a small university with 1,300 students established to train Ti-
 betan teachers for the local educational system. Ethnic Tibetans resent dispropor-
 tionate Han representation in the student body and faculty. Tibetans constitute ap-
 proximately 95 percent of the population, but only 80 percent of Tibet University's
 student body, and 30 percent of all university faculty in the Tibet Autonomous Re-
 gion. Although Tibetans are given admission preferences, Han Chinese students fre-
 quently gain admission because they score higher on admission exams due to
 stronger Cunese language skills and educationa backgrounds. Authorities report-
 edly require professors, particularly those from Tibet University's Tibetan Language
 Department, which is viewed as a potential source of dissent, to attend political edu-
 cation sessions and limit course studies and materials in an effort to prevent "sepa-
 ratist" political and religious activity on campus. Some ancient texts are banned for
 political reasons.
 The Dalai Lama and Tibetan experts have expressed concern that development
 projects and other central government policies adopted at a 1994 work conference
 in Tibet encourage a massive influx of Han Chinese into Tibet, which has the effect
 of overwhelming Tibet's traditional culture and diluting Tibetan demographic domi-
 nance. In recent years, in Lhasa and other urban areas, freer movement of people
 throughout China, government-sponsored development, and the prospect of economic
 opportunity in Tibet, have led to a substantial increase in the non-Tibetan popu-
 lation (including China's Muslim Hui minority as well as Han Chinese). An in-
 creased number of immigrants from China's large transient population seek to take
 advantage of these new economic opportunities. Most of these migrants profess to
 be temporary residents, but small businesses run by ethnic Han and Hui citizens
 (mostly restaurants and retail shops) are becoming more numerous in almost all Ti-
 betan towns and cities. In Lhasa between one-third and one-half of the population
 is Han Chinese; elsewhere, the Han percentage of the population is sigmficantly
 lower. In rural areas, the Han presence is often negligible. Chinese officials assert
 that 95 percent of Tibet's officially registered population is Tibetan, with Han and,
 other ethnic groups making up the remainder. Tis igure, however, does not in-
 dlude the large number of "temporary" Han residents including military and para-
 military troops and their dependents, many of whom have lived in Tibet for years.
 China's economic development policies, fueled in Tibet by central government sub-
 sidies, are modernizing parts of Tibetan society and changing traditional Tibetan
 ways of life. Although the Government has made efforts in recent years to restore
 some of the physical structures and other aspecs of Tibetan Buddhism and Tibetan
 culture damaged or destroyed during the Cultural Revolution, repressive social and
 political controls continue to limit the fundamental freedoms of ethnic Tibetans and
 risk undermining Tibet's unique cultural, religious, and linguistic heritage.
