T@D< KF A98E;FE K?< ALKF:I8KJ
8E; ED9I8:< R@>?KJ:
The International Response to the Arab Spring
By Kenneth Roth
The sad truth is that the dominant Western policy toward the Arab people traditionally
has been one of containment. Today many applaud as the people
of the region take to the streets to claim their rights, but until recently
Western governments frequently acted as if the Arab people were to be
feared, hemmed in, controlled. In other regions, democracy spread, but in the
Middle East and North Africa, the West seemed content to back an array of
Arab autocrats, so long as they in turn supported Western interests.
Elsewhere, governments were expected, at least in principle, to serve their
people, but the West looked to the monarchs and strongmen of the Arab
world to guarantee “stability,” to keep the lid on popular demands. The
world’s promotion of human rights had an Arab exception.
The Arab Spring showed that many people in the region do not share the
West’s comfortable complacency with autocratic rule. No longer willing to be
the passive subjects of self-serving rulers, they began to insist on becoming
full citizens of their countries, the proper agents of their fate. In one country
after another, an act of repression sparked popular outrage at a regime that
had taken one brutal step too many. This time the much discussed but long
quiescent Arab Street arose and upended the old order. In finding its collective
voice and power, the region’s people transformed its politics in a way
that will not be easy to turn back.
In Tunisia, the catalyst was the self-immolation of fruit vendor Mohamed
Bouazizi after a routine case of humiliation by the police. In Egypt, it was photos
of the deformed face of Khaled Said, a young man beaten to death by the
police. In Syria, it was the torture of teenagers for scribbling anti-regime graffiti.
In Libya, it was the arrest of Fathi Terbil, the lawyer for the victims of the
1996 Abu Salim prison massacre. These quotidian examples of abuse, among countless others, sparked what in essence became a series of human rights
revolutions—driven by demands for governments that, finally, would be elected
by their people, respectful of their rights, and subject to the rule of law.
The West is still adjusting to this historic transformation. While generally
opposing the violent suppression of peaceful demonstrations, many of the
world’s leading democracies remain reluctant partners of the protesters, worried
by the consequences of entrusting these pivotal countries to their citizens.
And if Western governments have been hesitant to abandon autocratic
friends, many other countries have shown outright hostility to the rebellions.
Dictatorial governments have been predictably terrified by the precedent of
people ousting authoritarian regimes. China went to extraordinary lengths to
prevent “Jasmine rallies” inspired by Tunisia’s Jasmine Revolution. North
Korea was so determined to keep its people in the dark about the Arab Spring
that it prevented its workers in Libya from returning home. From Zimbabwe to
Iran, Sudan to Uzbekistan, Cuba to Russia, Ethiopia to Vietnam, autocrats live
in fear of the kind of popular power demonstrated by the Arab Spring.
They are not wrong in their apprehension. The uprisings show that the quest
for rights has broad appeal, capable of uniting disparate elements of society
and generating a powerful collective force for change. The old tools of repression—
the censorship, the arbitrary detention, the torture, the killing—seem
only to have emboldened the demonstrators once they gained confidence in
their numbers. Rather than instilling fear and grudging acquiescence, the
repression showed the autocrats’ true colors and highlighted the righteousness
of the protesters’ cause. That sends a chilling warning to regimes long
confident in the assumption that their repressive capacity would always
eclipse the public’s discontent.
More disappointing in their response to the Arab Spring have been some
democratic governments of the global South, such as Brazil, India, and South
Africa. They seemed to be guided less by the aspirations of the Arab people
than by their commitment to outmoded views of national sovereignty, even when it has meant shielding repressive regimes from urgently needed international
pressure. Despite themselves having developed accountable governments
and the rule of law, these Southern democracies showed only sporadic
interest in helping the people of the Arab world who were struggling to do the
same. More often, they pointed to the potential misuse of human rights pressure—
the fear that it might serve as a tool of Northern dominance—to justify
failing to use their own influence on serious violators of human rights.
This indifference from many quarters to the rights of the region’s people must
end. Standing firmly with the people of the Middle East and North Africa when
they demand their legitimate rights is the best way to exert pressure on their
persecutors to stop the bloodshed. A principled insistence on respect for
rights is also the best way to help these popular movements steer clear of the
intolerance, lawlessness, and summary revenge that are a risk in any revolution
and its aftermath.
The Arab Spring is a transformative moment, an historic opportunity for a
long-suppressed people to seize control of its destiny. Yet the transformation
will not be easy. The people of the region, like everywhere else, deserve the
world’s support for their rights as they embark on this long-awaited venture.
It is time for the Arab exception to end.
The West’s Embrace of Arab Autocrats
Western governments allowed the Arab exception because they believed their
interests in the region would be better served by authoritarian rulers’ illusory
promise of “stability” than by the uncertainties of elected government. Five
core reasons explain the West’s past acceptance of these would-be presidents
and monarchs-for-life.
The first was containing any threat to Western interests from political Islam.
Western governments and their allies have always had a certain ambivalence
toward political Islam—promoting it when seen as a useful foil for a more
dreaded enemy (the mujahedeen against the Soviets, Hamas against the
Palestine Liberation Organization) or when it aligned with Western interests (as in Saudi Arabia). But when political Islam challenged friendly governments,
the West has been deeply wary.
A major catalyst for this distrust was a non-Arab nation—Iran, as it emerged
after overthrowing the Western-supported Shah. The dread of “another
Khomeini”—of Iran’s hostility to the United States, brutality toward its own
people, and support for Hezbollah and Hamas—led many Western governments
to distrust political Islam when it took the form of an opposition movement
challenging an ally.
The nadir of this distrust came in the early 1990s when, after a brief political
opening in Algeria, the Islamic Salvation Front appeared to be on the verge of
electoral victory. A military coup stopped the electoral process with scant
Western protest. Coup supporters argued that the Islamists’ secret agenda
was to allow “one man, one vote, one time.”
Many Islamic parties have indeed embraced disturbing positions that would
subjugate the rights of women and restrict religious, personal, and political
freedoms. But so have many of the autocratic regimes that the West props
up. Moreover, Islamic movements are hardly monolithic or implacably
opposed to rights. Yet rather than engage with them to demand respect for
rights, Western governments have often treated them as untouchable.
That distrust made a mockery of occasional Western support in the region for
democracy. For example, in a post-facto attempt to justify his invasion of Iraq
as an act of democracy promotion, US President George W. Bush briefly
pressed for elections elsewhere in the region as well. But that democracy
agenda quickly ended once Hamas prevailed in fair elections in the West
Bank and Gaza in 2006, and the Muslim Brotherhood won most of the seats it
contested in Egypt’s parliamentary elections in 2005.
Despite Western caution, political Islam has gained adherents as it has
become a primary mode of expressing discontent with the region’s corrupt
and unresponsive rulers. Because the mosque has often been the freest institution
in an otherwise suppressed civil society, it has also become a natural
gathering point for dissent. Arab leaders typically have had only to dangle the threat of hostile Islamists replacing them in order to lock in Western support
for crackdowns and defer demands for elections.
A second reason for Western indulgence of Arab strongmen was the perception
that they could help to combat the threat of terrorism. Arab extremists by
no means hold a monopoly on terrorism, but Western policymakers viewed
certain Arab groups as particularly menacing because they murdered civilians
not only in their own countries but also in the West. In the name of protecting
their citizens, Western governments were willing to promote Arab autocrats
who vowed to fight these terrorists. That these autocrats also tortured or
repressed their own people was seen as secondary. That this repression often
fueled support for violent extremist groups was ignored.
Third, the West trusted Arab autocrats more than the Arab people to reach a
modus vivendi with Israel—a factor that was particularly important in policy
toward Egypt, Jordan, and to some extent Syria and Lebanon. Many Arabs
were naturally disturbed by Israel’s repression of the Palestinian people, and
often protested. The autocrats of the region soon learned that allowing—even
encouraging—these protests was a good way to channel discontent away
from their own misrule. So long as Arab dictators kept the protests under control,
they enjoyed Western support. Those who went further and signed a
peace treaty with Israel received massive US aid regardless of their domestic
policies.
Fourth, the West saw Arab autocrats as the best way to sustain the flow of oil.
Of course, even Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s Iran and Muammar Gaddafi’s
Libya willingly sold oil to the West. But with markets tight and prices high,
revolutionary change, particularly in Saudi Arabia, risked economic turmoil
through a disruption of the oil flow. Nor did the West want a hostile Iran to
gain control over the vast oil reserves of its neighboring Persian Gulf states.
To prevent these scenarios, or any threat to the cozy relationships that developed
between Western and Arab business elites, the West preferred the
strongmen it knew to the vagaries of popular rule. Meanwhile, often-bountiful
oil revenue gave these autocrats the coercive means to retain power without
accountability to a tax-paying public.
Finally, the West—particularly the European Union—looked to the region’s
authoritarian governments to help stem migration. Northern Africa is both a
source of, and an important transit route for, undocumented migration to
Europe. The West relied on pliant governments to help curb it—to prevent
migrants from departing their shores and to accept their summary return. The
EU, in turn, rewarded these governments with various trade and aid agreements.
The Fallacy of the “Arab Exception”
Despite their self-interested motives, Western governments did not like to
admit their preference for Arab authoritarianism. Instead, they proceeded as
if the usual convenient mischaracterizations of Arab society were true—that it
was politically passive and underdeveloped, that deference to authority was
inherent in Arab culture, that some combination of Arab tradition and Islam
made the people of the region uninterested in or unsuited for democracy. The
uprisings that have shaken the Arab world belie these convenient excuses for
accommodating the region’s despots.
Ironically, none of the forces most feared by the West lay behind this last
year’s outburst of popular protest. Political Islam was little in evidence as a
spark or sustaining force for the uprisings; it emerged mainly later, when the
Islamists’ better organization and traditional opposition role gave them a
competitive advantage over newer activists and parties. Nor was there any
prominent place in the protests for opposition to Israeli policies, support for
terrorism, or anti-Western sentiment. The uprisings represented a determination
to improve life at home rather than flee to Europe.
The driving force for the rebellions was opposition to autocratic rule itself.
Tunisians, Egyptians, Libyans, Bahrainis, Yemenis, Syrians, and others had
had enough of the repression, corruption, cronyism, arbitrary rule, and stagnant
societies of the autocrats. These were protests of outrage at an out-oftouch,
self-serving elite. Much like the revolutions that upended Eastern
Europe in 1989, the Arab upheavals were inspired by a vision of freedom, a desire for a voice in one’s destiny, and a quest for governments that are
accountable to the public rather than captured by a ruling elite.
International Ambivalence
Yet Western governments still at times have been ambivalent about these
movements and selective in their response, unsure how to reconcile their
comfort with the old autocrats and the growing realization that these despots’
days are numbered. The US and EU were most principled and determined in
responding to repression by two Arab governments that at various points had
been considered antagonists. In Libya, they imposed sanctions and invoked
the International Criminal Court (ICC). Several of them forged a rapid military
response to what they saw as an impending human rights disaster. In Syria,
after some hesitation, they aligned themselves with a peaceful opposition
movement and instituted targeted sanctions against President Bashar al-
Assad’s government.
Elsewhere, however, the Western approach to the region’s uprisings has been
more tentative and uncertain. The US government was reluctant to challenge
Egypt’s President Hosni Mubarak, a perceived bulwark of regional “stability,”
until his fate was virtually sealed, and then was hesitant for too long to press
Egypt’s ruling military council to subject itself to elected civilian rule. France
remained similarly attached to Tunisia’s President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali
until his reign had largely ended.
Similarly, Western governments imposed no meaningful consequences for
killing protesters on the government of Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh,
whom they viewed as a defense against al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
They condemned Bahrain’s suppression of its democracy movement, and
urged some reforms, but applied no real pressure on the government out of
concern for the fate of the US Fifth Fleet’s base, as well as deference to Saudi
Arabia, which worried about Iranian meddling in that Shia-majority country
and feared a democratic model off its shore. Even within the US government,
policymakers were divided on Bahrain, with the US Congress blocking an
arms sale proposed by President Barack Obama’s administration. Meanwhile, Western governments urged reforms in the region’s other monarchies, such
as constitutional amendments in Morocco and pledges for change in Jordan,
but said little when monarchies have taken anti-democratic actions, such as
the adoption of new repressive laws in Saudi Arabia and the imprisonment of
five democracy activists in the United Arab Emirates.
Nations outside the West have shown similar inconsistency. Arab League governments
historically sought to defend each other from any form of human
rights criticism. Now, they have become more constructively engaged, driven
to varying degrees by the new post-rebellion governments, regional rivalries
(especially with Iran), and an attempt to stay relevant amid the region’s prodemocracy
movements. In Libya, the Arab League’s endorsement of pressure
on Gaddafi laid the groundwork for action by the United Nations Security
Council. In Syria, the Arab League protested the political killings and crafted a
plan for ending the violence to which Syria theoretically agreed. When Syria
predictably broke its word, the Arab League suspended its membership and
announced sanctions.
By contrast, the African Union has been shamefully complacent. Ostensibly
founded to promote democracy, it has acted like a dictator’s support club,
siding with whichever government happens to be in power regardless of its
conduct. As the revolutions proceeded in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, the AU
was at best irrelevant, at worst unhelpful. Only the AU’s independent African
Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights, in its first substantive case, ordered
Gaddafi to end the killing.
Russia and China tolerated international action in Libya only when their political
isolation would have made blocking it seem callous. When they had partners
in their indifference, as in the case of Syria, they had no qualms about
vetoing international action.
Brazil, India, and South Africa—the key Southern democracies on the UN
Security Council—endorsed or tolerated international action on Libya, but
then cited NATO’s alleged overstepping of its protection mandate there as a justification for not endorsing even symbolic Security Council pressure on
Syria.
This international ambivalence comes at a time when the Arab Spring revolutions
are anything but complete. Idealistic revolutionaries face serious countervailing
pressures with no guarantee of victory. Moreover, the revolutionaries
themselves have at times violated rights, as in Libyan militias’ apparent
summary execution of Muammar Gaddafi and his son Muatassim and their
persecution of black African migrant workers. The international community
could play an important role in countering these threats to the emergence of
rights-respecting democracies—from both the old powers and the new revolutionary
forces.
Three Groups of Countries in the Region
In considering the region, it is useful to think in terms of three broad groups
of countries.
The first, comprising Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, has overthrown long-time
autocrats (though in the case of Egypt, not entrenched military rule) and at
this writing is in the difficult process of building a new governmental order.
The task is not simple. It is easier to tear down autocratic institutions than to
replace them with democratic ones, to build consensus on the need to oust
the despot than to forge a common vision of what should replace him. And
unlike in Eastern Europe in 1989, there is no lure of prospective European
Union membership to encourage the new governments to respect rights
(although the EU does have other carrots to offer, such as trade preferences
and visa liberalization). Nor are repressive regimes crumbling as quickly as in
1989 or opponents of those regimes as united. Rather, the cautionary tale
comes from the dictatorships of post-Soviet Central Asia, where anti-democratic
forces prevailed and substituted new repressive regimes for their
Communist predecessors.
Fortunately, the countries in this first group are relatively unburdened by the
sectarian strife that so poisoned Iraq’s post-Saddam Hussein nation building and continues to rear its head in Syria, Bahrain, and Saudi Arabia. However,
these countries have their own divides at risk of being inflamed—tribal in
Libya, Copt-Muslim in Egypt, coastal-interior in Tunisia. Particularly in times
of uncertainty, people are more susceptible to the fear-mongering and provocation
that encourage resort to communal identities, and there are always
beneficiaries of the old order who are willing to stoke those fears. Moreover,
if hard economic times continue, the danger grows of people forsaking democratic
ideals for uglier, less tolerant, politics.
At the moment, Tunisia seems best placed to move forward. Old laws restricting
association, assembly, speech and political parties have been reformed.
After elections for a constituent assembly that were widely seen as free and
fair, the Islamic party al Nahda (“The Awakening”) gained a plurality of the
vote, and its leaders made encouraging pledges about building a broad
governing coalition and respecting the rights of all Tunisians. This is a promising
beginning, but the pledges, of course, remain to be tested.
In Libya, the transitional authorities repeatedly vowed to respect citizens’
rights, to establish control over all militias, and to subject themselves to the
rule of law. But fulfilling these pledges will be difficult, particularly in a country
that Gaddafi deliberately left bereft of developed government institutions.
So far, the new authorities have failed to gain control over the many militias
that have power and substantial arms. And despite stated plans to try Saif al-
Islam Gaddafi, the former leader’s son wanted by the ICC, they have not built
a criminal justice system capable of meeting ICC requirements for a fair trial.
Egypt, the region’s largest country and long-time leader, must still overcome
intense internal divisions among three broad groupings: the military which
despite great popular discontent remained in power after replacing Mubarak,
the largely secular leftists and liberals who were so prominent during the
Tahrir Square uprising, and the Islamists who at key moments joined the
demonstrations in large numbers and have emerged as the dominant political
force. At various points each group cautiously has seen the others as both
potential allies and adversaries.
The military, under pressure to give up power, at times saw the Islamists with
their social orientation as less likely than the liberals to impede its autonomy
or to scrutinize its massive budget and business interests. The liberals
looked (illiberally) to the military to enforce limits on political Islam, while
joining with the Islamists in an effort to oust the military. The Islamists, distrustful
of the military after decades of suppression, hoped the liberals would
help to secure a democratic transition, yet potentially differed from the liberals
on a range of social freedoms. And to further complicate matters, the
Islamists were divided in their interpretation of Islamic law and the role they
see for Islam in governing the country. It remains far from clear how this
complicated tug-of-war will be resolved.
The second group of Arab countries—Syria, Yemen and Bahrain—is enmeshed
in struggles between abusive governments and oppositions calling for democratic
rule. Syrians have shown remarkable bravery, repeatedly taking to the
streets despite the omnipresence of security forces that frequently respond
with lethal force. Yemen’s overwhelmingly peaceful protests have been gradually
overshadowed by armed clashes among rival elite factions, and it is too
soon to tell whether an exit pact signed by President Saleh is a step toward
genuine reform. Bahrain’s rulers, backed by security forces led by neighboring
Saudi Arabia, have used a panoply of repressive tools—lethal force
against peaceful protesters, torture and ill-treatment, unfair trials, abrupt dismissal
of workers from jobs and students from universities—but have succeeded
only in creating a divided population with many seemingly counting
the days until the next opportunity to rise up. The success of the protest
movements in these countries remains very much in play.
Finally, there are the region’s monarchies which, apart from Bahrain, have
largely avoided large-scale uprisings. They enjoy the advantage of being able
to diffuse popular discontent by sacking the government—Jordan in particular
has seen a revolving door of prime ministers—without jeopardizing the
monarchy. Some monarchs—in Morocco, Kuwait, and Qatar—have experimented
with granting limited powers to elected parliaments while retaining
control over the most important levers of power. Some in the Persian Gulf
have tried to buy social peace by showering salary increases and subsidies on disgruntled populations. These tactics, at times coupled with a heavy
dose of repression, have mostly diffused large-scale protests.
Yet that social peace may be short-lived. Saudi Arabia, for example, has elements
for its own springtime movement: an aging leadership and a young
and disenchanted population. (The same can be said of non-monarchial
Algeria, which suppressed the limited protests it experienced in 2011.) The
Saudi royal family has been savvy so far about preserving its rule—whether
by disbursing oil money or whipping up sectarian fears—but that is only
buying time.
The Proper Role of the International Community
How should the international community respond to this complex and varied
landscape? Before taking up prescriptions, a degree of humility is in order.
The revolutions of the Arab Spring have been internally driven—the achievement
foremost of those countries’ citizens. External forces have had influence,
but in most places only around the margins.
That said, the response of external actors can be important, and sometimes
decisive. The Arab League’s abandonment of Gaddafi as his forces opened
fire on protesters in Tripoli and he threatened a massacre in Benghazi laid the
groundwork for UN Security Council action to protect civilians. US pressure,
reinforced by the leverage of large-scale aid, helped to convince Egypt’s military
early in the revolution to protect the Tahrir Square demonstrators from
attacks by police and Mubarak supporters. Targeted economic sanctions on
the Syrian elite provide one of the best chances of convincing its members to
part with Assad’s brutal strategy of repression.
Looking forward, to promote democratic, rights-respecting governments, the
international community should adopt a more principled approach to the
region than in the past. That would involve, foremost, clearly siding with democratic
reformers even at the expense of abandoning autocratic friends. There
is no excuse for any government to tolerate Assad’s lethal repression, to
close its eyes to Bahrain’s systematic crackdown, or to exempt other monarchs from pressure to reform. All autocrats should be dissuaded from using
repression to defend their power and privileges.
Such principled support for protesters can also positively influence the outlook
of the new governments they seek to form. Revolution can be a heady
experience, opening previously unthought-of possibilities for the majority to
take control of its fate. But the revolutionaries must also accept the constraints
on majoritarian rule that rights require, especially when it comes to
the rights of minorities, whether political, religious, ethnic or social.
Revolutionary zeal can lead to summary revenge or a new imposed orthodoxy.
Continuing economic hardship can lead to scapegoating and intolerance.
International affirmation of the importance of respecting the rights of all citizens
can help to ensure the emergence of genuine democracies. Conditioning
economic assistance on respect for those rights, just as the EU conditioned
accession for Eastern European states, can help to steer new governments in
rights-respecting directions.
By the same token, the international community must also come to terms
with political Islam when it represents a majority preference. Islamist parties
are genuinely popular in much of the Arab world, in part because many Arabs
have come to see political Islam as the antithesis of autocratic rule, in part
because Islamist parties generally did a good job of distinguishing themselves
through social service programs from the corrupt and self-serving
state, in part because Islamists enjoyed organizational advantages that longrepressed
secular counterparts did not share, and in part because political
Islam reflects the conservative and religious ethos of many people in the
region. Ignoring that popularity would violate democratic principles.
Rather, wherever Islam-inspired governments emerge, the international community
should focus on encouraging, and if need be pressuring, them to
respect basic rights—just as the Christian-labeled parties and governments of
Europe are expected to do. Embracing political Islam need not mean rejecting
human rights, as illustrated by the wide gulf between the restrictive views of
some Salafists and the more progressive interpretation of Islam that leaders such as Rashid Ghannouchi, head of Tunisia’s Nahdha Party, espouse. It is
important to nurture the rights-respecting elements of political Islam while
standing firm against repression in its name. So long as freely elected governments
respect basic rights, they merit presumptive international support,
regardless of their political or religious complexion.
The Quest for Freedom of Expression
The right to freedom of expression also requires consistent defense. The Arab
revolutions became possible only as civil society was able to organize itself
and, using the internet, build public outrage by circumventing the state’s
monopoly over the public dissemination of information. Satellite television,
represented foremost by Al Jazeera, also played an essential role in galvanizing
outrage to the brutal repression that it regularly beamed throughout the
region. Just as civil society must continue to be nurtured, so this key medium
of communication needs a strong defense, even when its message may be
seen as “anti-Western.”
The newest frontier for the battle over free expression is social media. Though
limited to a wired elite, and surpassed in importance by more prosaic technology
such as satellite TV and mobile telephones, social media played an
early and important role, allowing seemingly leaderless movements to build
momentum gradually, with participants standing up to be counted (for example,
by signaling support on Facebook) without necessarily taking to the
streets until there was a sufficient sense of safety in numbers. Social media
such as Twitter also helped protesters to communicate with each other and
the world about police repression and ways to outfox it. Activists used
YouTube to post mobile-phone videos recording military and police brutality.
But social media can also be a tool for monitoring and repressing the
opposition. That was President Assad’s calculation when he invited Facebook
and YouTube into Syria at the height of Egypt’s revolution. His bet that his
secret police could stay a step ahead of proliferating users turned out to be
misplaced, but other countries both in the region and beyond are still trying to limit the political threat that social media poses, often using Western
technology.
The winner of this cat-and-mouse game between censor and user, the repressive
monitor and the freedom-seeking protester, remains in doubt. Strong
global standards are needed to better protect the freedom and privacy of
internet users. And international companies should be prevented from selling
equipment or know-how to governments, in the Arab world or elsewhere, that
allows them to spy on or repress ordinary citizens.
Complicity in Torture
Even the tightest controls cannot prevent some whiff of freedom from entering
public consciousness, and the region’s security forces have all too often
responded with torture. In principle, the international community firmly
opposes torture, as reflected in numerous treaties outlawing it without exception.
Yet the fight against terrorism and political Islam led to growing international
tolerance of, and sometimes active complicity in, torture. Following the
September 11, 2001 attacks the Bush administration not only used torture
itself but, aided by various allies, also sent terrorist suspects for interrogation
by the region’s security forces despite their pervasive use of torture. That
inexcusable complicity set a terrible precedent, reinforcing regional security
forces’ worst habits, while weakening the credibility of occasional protests
from the West.
The Obama administration ordered an end to this complicity in torture but
has refused to investigate, let alone prosecute, the US officials who were
responsible. The short-term political calculation behind that dereliction of
duty risks dangerous long-term consequences by signaling that torture is a
policy option rather than a crime. The United Kingdom government has at
least authorized an investigation into British complicity in torture overseas,
but so far under rules of secrecy and unilateral inquiry that bode poorly for an
honest examination.
Western hypocrisy toward torture in the region is best illustrated by the use of
“memoranda of understanding,” or “diplomatic assurances,” to justify sending
terrorism suspects to security services that are likely to torture them. CIA
documents that Human Rights Watch found in a Libyan intelligence office
show how these worked. The US and UK cooperated in sending suspects captured
abroad for interrogation by Libyan intelligence services despite their
notorious torture record. Yet the CIA dutifully sought assurances from the
Libyans that suspects would not be mistreated. These assurances were no
more than a fig leaf. Given that the Libyan government was already flouting
its legally binding treaty obligations not to torture, as the US government
itself regularly reported, there was no reason to expect it to respect a quiet
promise between diplomats or intelligence agencies. It would make an enormous
contribution to ending torture in the Arab world if the West were to
come clean about its own complicity, punish those responsible for the crime
of ordering or facilitating torture, and explicitly end use of diplomatic assurances
to justify sending suspects to countries where they risk torture.
The Need to End Impunity
Revolutionary movements need help building the governing institutions that
the autocrats deliberately left weak and underdeveloped, above all national
institutions of justice for holding all representatives of the state subject to
the rule of law. Until security forces and government officials have a reasonable
expectation that their misconduct will land them in court, the temptation
to resort to the former regimes’ corruption and abuse will be hard to resist.
Yet at least when it comes to international justice, the international community
still sometimes acts as if democratic transitions are best advanced by
sweeping past abuses under the rug. As the Arab upheavals have shown, a
precedent of impunity is not easily forgotten, increasing the likelihood that
bad habits persist. And prosecution is not the impediment to democratic
change that is so often assumed.
When the ICC issued arrest warrants for Muammar Gaddafi, his son Saif
al-Islam, and his intelligence chief Abdullah Sanussi, some argued that this act of justice would discourage Gaddafi from relinquishing power. Yet in common
with most dictators, Gaddafi had already made clear even before the ICC
warrants that he intended to stay in power until the bitter end, with his son
Saif vowing that they would fight on “to the last man.” If anything, the arrest
warrants hastened Gaddafi’s downfall by signaling to his coterie that they
had no political future with him and were better off defecting.
But Gaddafi was a tyrant who was easy to abandon and hold to account. The
international community was less principled in the case of Yemen’s Saleh. In
an initiative launched by the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) with no clear
disapproval from the UN Security Council, Saleh and other senior officials
were offered blanket immunity from prosecution in exchange for stepping
down. The perverse effect was that Saleh’s government was given a green
light to continue killing demonstrators without consequence. Even when
Saleh agreed to resign as president, his supporters continued to kill, knowing
that if they succeeded in clinging to power, they obviously would not prosecute
themselves, and confident that if they failed, the GCC had said they
would not face prosecution either.
The international community was no more principled in its approach to justice
elsewhere in the region. Russia, China, Brazil, India, and South Africa all
refused to support authorizing ICC involvement in Syria, despite levels of
killing that far exceeded Libya’s at the time of its referral to the ICC. And the
West persisted in its usual exemption of Israel from the demands of justice,
most recently insisting that if the Palestinian Authority is accepted as a UN
observer state it must not seek access to the ICC. The US even opposed a proposed
UN Human Rights Council request that the Security Council refer Syria
to the ICC for fear that it would set a precedent that might be used against
Israel.
The Role of Brazil, India, and South Africa
The international response to the Arab rebellions illustrates the importance of
building broad coalitions in defense of human rights. Multilateral pressure for
reform reaffirms that the values in question are universal rather than the narrow agenda of a particular region. Quite apart from the much-contested military
intervention in Libya, the international community was strongest in putting
pressure on Gaddafi when it acted in unison. That Brazil, India, and
South Africa, backed by the Arab League, joined the major Western powers in
referring Libya to the ICC made it difficult for China or Russia to stand isolated
in opposition. The result was historic—unanimous UN Security Council
action—sending Gaddafi a powerful message he ignored at his peril.
Sadly, when it came to defending the Syrian people, Brazil, India, and South
Africa reverted to their reflexive opposition to human rights pressure and
refused to support Security Council action even as the Assad government
killed thousands of protesters. Only in the less powerful UN General
Assembly did Brazil support a critical resolution on Syria, while India and
South Africa abstained. As noted, their main excuse for not supporting
Security Council action was NATO’s alleged overreaching in Libya—when, they
contended, NATO moved beyond the authorized protection of civilians and
adopted an agenda of regime change. But no one could have interpreted the
mildly worded draft Security Council resolution on Syria that they refused to
support as authorizing military force. Instead, they effectively asked the people
of Syria to pay the price for NATO’s alleged misconduct in Libya. That
indifference to Syrians’ plight is particularly disappointing coming from countries
that enjoy strong democratic governance, and in the past have suffered
the indifference of other countries to their own struggle for freedom.
The Role of Turkey
Perhaps the most interesting new presence in the region is Turkey. Despite its
distinct history, it remains a powerful example of a country with a religiously
conservative elected government that has not used Islam as a pretext to
undermine basic rights. Turkey has capitalized on its growing stature by
entering the political fray of the Arab world. More vigorously than its Arab
neighbors, Turkey denounced the political killing in Syria, championed
democratic change in Egypt, and opposed Israel’s punitive blockade of Gaza.
Yet Turkey faces several challenges if it is to live up to its enormous potential
in the human rights realm. Will it use its growing influence in multilateral arenas
to oppose the outdated view of India, Brazil, and South Africa that it is
somehow imperialistic to stand with people who are risking their lives to
protest repression by their governments? Will Turkey press for democratic
change not only among the uprisings of the Arab world but also in Iran, which
crushed its Green Revolution in 2009, and the stultified and repressive countries
of post-Soviet Central Asia? And will Turkey clean up its worsening
human rights record at home–including persistent restrictions on freedom of
speech and association, a flawed criminal justice system, and long-term mistreatment
of its Kurdish minority—so it can be a less compromised proponent
of human rights abroad? Turkey can make a positive difference on human
rights in the region—if its leaders take the bold decisions at home and
abroad needed to advance this cause.
A Global Responsibility
The past year has seen revolutions in the Arab world that few would have
imagined. These uprisings present extraordinary opportunities to heed the
pleas of people who so far have benefited little from global human rights
advances of the last half-century. Yet given the violent forces resisting
progress, it is wrong to leave the fate of the Arab world solely in the hands of
the people facing the guns. The international community has an important
role to play in assisting the birth of rights-respecting democracies in the
region.
So far, that role has been played only equivocally. Short-term parochial interests
are still too often allowed to stand in the way of a more principled and
helpful response. Ultimately, the international community must decide what
it stands for—whether it values the rights and aspirations of the individual
over the spoils and promises of the tyrant. As we pass the first anniversary of
the initial Arab Spring rebellions, the international community will help to
determine whether violent governments prevail over protesters seeking a better
life, and whether the protesters’ vision includes respect not only for their own rights but also for those of all their fellow citizens. It is a global responsibility
to help see a positive conclusion to the Arab people’s brave efforts to
demand their rights, and to ensure that the toppling of one autocratic regime
does not lead to its replacement by another.
The World Report
The World Report is Human Rights Watch’s twenty-second annual review of
human rights practices around the globe. It summarizes key human rights
issues in more than 90 countries and territories worldwide, drawing on
events from January through November 2011.
The book is divided into five essays, followed by a photo essay, and countryspecific
chapters.
In the first essay, Eric Goldstein considers signs of change that human rights
workers overlooked before this year’s populist revolts (“Before the Arab
Spring, the Unseen Thaw”). Rachel Denber sifts through the aftermath of the
USSR’s collapse 20 years ago in search of lessons (“After the Fall”).
Meanwhile, Ben Ward notes that while many European officials see the Arab
Spring as “the most thrilling period since the fall of the Berlin Wall,” domestic
rights policies increasingly are falling short (“Europe’s Own Human Rights
Crisis”).
Next, Shanta Rau Barriga looks at misguided policies that often deprive people
with disabilities of the ability to make fundamental choices about their
own lives, while claiming to protect them (“From Paternalism to Dignity”).
“Good intentions,” she notes, “don’t always make for good policy.”
Finally, Jo Becker and Nisha Varia sound a cautious note of victory, hailing a
new International Labour Organization convention that establishes global
labor standards for the 50 to 100 million women and girls worldwide who
clean, cook, and look after children and the elderly in private homes (“A
Landmark Victory for Domestic Workers”).
The photo essay that follows—which includes images from the 2011 uprisings
in Bahrain, Egypt, Libya, Syria, Tunisia, and Yemen—captures some of the
tumult, violence, and also hope seen during the past 11 months.
Each country entry identifies significant human rights issues, examines the
freedom of local human rights defenders to conduct their work, and surveys
the response of key international actors, such as the United Nations,
European Union, Japan, the United States, and various regional and international
organizations and institutions.
The report reflects extensive investigative work undertaken in 2011 by the
Human Rights Watch research staff, usually in close partnership with human
rights activists in the country in question. It also reflects the work of our
advocacy team, which monitors policy developments and strives to persuade
governments and international institutions to curb abuses and promote
human rights. Human Rights Watch publications, issued throughout the year,
contain more detailed accounts of many of the issues addressed in the brief
summaries in this volume. They can be found on the Human Rights Watch
website, www.hrw.org.
As in past years, this report does not include a chapter on every country
where Human Rights Watch works, nor does it discuss every issue of importance.
Failure to include a particular country or issue often reflects no more
than staffing limitations and should not be taken as commentary on the significance
of the problem. There are many serious human rights violations that
Human Rights Watch simply lacks the capacity to address.
The factors we considered in determining the focus of our work in 2011 (and
hence the content of this volume) include the number of people affected and
the severity of abuse, access to the country and the availability of information
about it, the susceptibility of abusive forces to influence, and the importance
of addressing certain thematic concerns and of reinforcing the work of local
rights organizations.
The World Report does not have separate chapters addressing our thematic
work but instead incorporates such material directly into the country entries.
Please consult the Human Rights Watch website for more detailed treatment
of our work on children’s rights, women’s rights, arms and military issues,
business and human rights, health and human rights, international justice,
terrorism and counterterrorism, refugees and displaced people, and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender people’s rights, and for information about our
international film festivals.
Kenneth Roth is executive director of Human Rights Watch.