 TAJIKISTAN
 Tajikistan remains in the hands of a largely authoritarian government, but has
 established some nominally democratic structures. The Government's narrow base
 of support renders it incapable of controlling the entire territory of the country. The
 Government of President Emomali Rahmonov, comprised largely of natives of the
 Kulob region, continued to dominat  e State. Opposition to this control and frus-
 tration with declining public order led to large and sometimes violent demonstra-
 tions in several regions. The demonstrators sought improved security and the re-
 moval of officials (particularly those of Kulobi origin) and their replacement by local
 residents. In response to this popular pressure, the Government transferred sub-
 stantial numbers of officials of Kulobi origin to other areas.
 Tajikistan has not successfully achieves national reconciliation after its 1992 civil
 war. Under United Nations auspices, the Government and the armed, externally
 based opposition continued a series of inter-Tajik talks, including a round in
 Ashgabat in July. While a cease-fne agreement and an accord on ecange of pris-
 oners were signed at that session, neither was immediately implemented, and re-
 peated, continuing ease-fire violations were reported by the Unitd Nations Mission
 of Observers to Tajkistan (UNMOT). Further taks were held in Teran in October,
 and the President and opposition leader met in Afghanistan in December, signing
 a cease-fire agreement. ADeember 19-23 summit meeting in Moscow produced a
 framework docment on national reconciliation whose details were to be completed
 in 1997. At the end of the year, the Government was intensively engaged in the
 U.N. peace process.
 Internal security is the responsibility of the Ministries of Interior, Security, and
 Defense. The Russian Army's 201st Motorized Rifle Division, part of a Common-
 wealth of Independent States (01) peacekeeping force estabihed in 1993, re-
 mained in the country. Some regions of the country remained effectively outside the
 Government's contro. Government control in other areas was at the sufferance of
 local opposition commanders, or was limited to the daylight hours. Opposition
 forces, supported by at least some Afghan and Arab Islamic mercenaries, and local
 bandit units, used p arts of the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast (GBAO) and
 Gharm Valley as abase for launching attacks. Some members of the security forces
 and government-aligned militias committed serious human rights abuses. The
 armed opposition also committed serious human rights abuses.
 The economy continued to decline, and government revenue remains highly de-
 pendent on the government-owned cotton     aluminum industries. Most Sviet-era
 factories operate at a minimal level, if at all, while privatization has moved ahead
 only slowly. As much as one-third of the total population is unemployed or signifi-
 catly underemployed, according to government estimates. However, inflation
 dropped sharply, and the exchange rate remained steady. Most wages and pensions
 are paid, although not all missed payments have been made. Current wages are ex-
 tremely low and not enough to support adequate nutrition without supplemental in-
 come.
 The Government's human rights record improved slightly, although serious prob-
 lems remain. During fighting with the opposition, government artillery fire killed
 civilians. The Government limits citizens right to change their government. Some
 members of the security forces and government-aligned forces were responsible for
 disappearances and forced conscription, and regularly tortured  abused detain-
 ees. The Government prosecuted few perpetrators of these abuses. The Minister of
 Interior continued efforts to remove from his Ministry some of the professionally un-
 qualified and worst human rights abusers, but substantial problems remain. Prison
 conditions remain life threatening, and the Government continued to use arbitrary
 arrest and detention. There are often long delays before trials, and the judiciary is
 subject to political and paramilitary pressure. The authorities infringe on citizens'
 right to privacy.
 he   Gvernment severely restricts freedom of speech and freedom of the press
 and essentially controls the electronic media. No genuine opposition media appeared
 
 
 1145
 
 during the year, although there are new semi-independent, largely nonpolitical
 media. The authorities strictly control freedom of assembly and association or poit-
 ical organizations. One new political party was allowed to register in 1996, bringing
 the total to seven; the three opposition parties and a branch of the fourth affiited
 with the armed opposition remained suspended. The Government generally cooper-
 ated with the Organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in
 Dushanbe although it declined to act on OSCE proposals to establish a human
 rights ombudsman. The Government claimed it will establish its own ombudsman,
 but had not done so at year's end. Violence against women is a problem.
 The external opposition also committed serious human rights abuses, including
 the killing of captured soldiers based on their ethnic (Uzbek) or geographic (Kulob)
 origin, as well as threats, extortion, and abuse of civilian populations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There were a significant number of
 extrajudicial killings. However, the unstable situation and the proliferation of armed
 groups make it difficult to assign responsibility in many individual cases. Some
 killings were probably committe by government forces, some by the opposition, and
 some by independent warlords. The Government has investigated some of the higher
 profile cases, but without positive results. The competence of those efforts as well
 as their independence are questionable.
 Indiscriminate artillery fire by government forces killed an undetermined number
 of noncombatants (see Section 1.g.).
 Several prominent figures were killed by unknown persons, including the mufti
 of Tajikistan and members of his family; a prominent member of Parliament; an
 ethni  Russian, Tajik citizen journalist (see Section 2.a.); and the rector of the medi-
 cal institute. These cases remain unsolved.
 Illustrative of such cases is the murder of Muhammad Osimi, a respected senior
 academic (see Section 2.a.). Osimi was prominent in promoting Tajik culture, but
 not politically active. No group claimed to have killed Osimi and there was no credi-
 ble explanation for his death. The Government claimed that it partially solved the
 murder, as one of the alleged assailants in the case was killed by government units
 near Dushanbe. Due to the circumstances of the killing and the absence of publicly
 presented documentary evidence, however, the Government's assertion has not been
 widely accepted.
 A number of local officials, businessmen, and professional figures were killed dur-
 ing the year for economic, ethnic, political, and other reasons. Few if any suspects
 have been identified. There have been arrests in some of the murders of business-
 men, but there have been no arrests in any high-profile case, and none of those ar-
 rested has been brought to trial.
 Since mid-Augu~st, an extended series of clashes between two grups seeking to
 control Tursunzade has resulted in at least 30 deaths; some of those kiled were un-
 armed bystanders. These killings do not appear to be connected with the Govern-
 ment's conflict with the opposition, but reflect the lack of governmental control and
 the arrogation of local authority by regional strangmen.
 Several Russian army officers, soldiers, and st  were killed during the year. One
 officer was shot in March; two were killed in August when a bomb exploded near
 their troop transport. The Russian border forces and the Government have generally
 blamed the opposition in these cases, but the armed opposition has denied the
 charges.
 Poor prison conditions and lack of food and adequate medical treatment resulted
 ina significant number of deaths in custody (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Disappearnce.-A number disappearanes were reported, moast significantly
 the February disappearance of Zafar Rahmnov, opposition cochairman of the Joint
 Commission to observe the cease-fire. At year's end, there was still no information
 concerning his fate.
 The Government has not been active in investigating claims of previous dis-
 appearances. There were no developments in the 1993 disappearances of judge
 Tagek Shukurov or the surgeon and Democratic Party Dushanbe branch chair-
 man Dr. Ayniddin Sedikov.
 Many cases of young men thought to have disappeared actually involve forcible
 censcrption (see Section 1.f.). Other missing young men may have defected to, or
 are being held prisoner by, the opposition.
 c. Torture and Other cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Security officials particularly those in the Ministry of Interior, regularly beat de-
 tain    n custody. Security foes were responsible for widesprea.ca.., esp-
 
 
 1146
 cially of prisoners and detainees to extort confessions. In April two Democratic
 Party activists were arrested for distributing leaflets and beaten, although no formal
 charges were filed against them. Police shot one demonstrator in Uro-Teppa in May
 (see Section 2.b.).
 In previous years, there were reports of rape or threat of rape of women in prison
 or detention. There were no such reports this year- however, there is no reason to
 believe that circumstances have changed.
 Prison conditions remain harsh and life threatening. Prisons are generally over-
 crowded, unsanitary, and disease-ridden, producing serious threats to many pris-
 oners' health and a significant number of deaths from hunger and malnutrition.
 This reflects in part the, self-funded status of most prisons, under which prisoners
 are supposed to grow much of their own food or make goods for sale. The general
 collapse of governmental programs and of the economy has caused the virtual dis-
 appearance of these programs. Conditions in most prisons improved somewhat in
 1996, due primarily to the efforts of international relief groups and the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Some food production is resuming.
 Family members are allowed access to prisoners, in accordance with the law. De-
 spite its standard modalities, the ICRC has not succeeded in gaining access to pris-
 oners in pretrial detention (where most abuses occur) but has been able to establish
 a progm to supply food for inmates in many institutions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Code has not been signifi-
 cantly amended since independence, and it therefore retains many of the defects in-
 herited from Soviet times. Revision of the Criminal Code is a high priority of the
 Majlisi Oli (parliament). The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention and ro-
 vides few checks on the power of procurators and police to arrest persons. Pu lic
 order, which broke down during the civil war, has yet to be fully restored, and the
 virtual immunity from prosecution of armed militia groups has further eroded the
 integrity of the legal system.
 Police may legally detain persons without a warrant for a period of 72 hours, and
 the procurator's office may do so for a period of 10 days after which the accused
 must be officially charged. At that point, the Criminal Code permits pretrial deten-
 tion for up to 15 months. The first 3 months of detention are at the discretion of
 the local procurator, the second 3 months must be approved at the regional level,
 and the Procurator General must sanction the remaining time in detention. The
 Criminal Code maintains that all investigations must be completed 1 month before
 the 15-month maximum in order to allow the defense time to examine government
 evidence. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a preliminary judicial
 hearing on the charge or detention. In criminal cases, detainees may be released
 and restricted to their place of residence pending trial. Once a case is entered for
 trial, the law states that it must be brought before a judge within 28 days. However,
 it is common for cases to languish for many months before the trial begins.
 The number of politically motivated arrests decreased compared with 1995. There
 are credible allegations of illegal government detention of members or relatives of
 members of opposition political parties for questioning. In most cases, the security
 officers do not obtain arrest warrants and do not bring charges. Those released
 sometimes claimed that they were mistreated and beaten during detention.
 Opposition sources maintain that security forces detained dozens of persons un-
 lawfully without charge. Since the law recludes visits to persons in pretrial deten-
 tion, it is not possible to assess these allegations.
 The Constitution states that no one can be exiled without a legal basis; no laws
 have been passed so far setting out any legal basis for exile. There were no reports
 of the use of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The 1994 Constitution states that judges are inde-
 pendent and subordinate only to the Constitution and the law; it prohibits inter-
 ference in their activities. However, judicial officials at all levels of the court system
 are heavily influenced by both the political leadership and, in many instances,
 armed paramilitary groups. Under the Constitution, the President has the right,
 with confirmation by the Parliament, to both appoint and dismiss judges and pros-
 ecutors. Judges at the local, regional, and republic level are, for the most part, poor-
 ly trained and lack understanding of an independent judiciary.
 The court system, largely unmodified from the Soviet period, includes city, dis-
 trict, regional, and national levels, with a parallel military system. Higher courts
 serve as appellate courts for the lower ones. The Constitution establishes additional
 courts, including a Constitutional Court. This court has begun to function, has
 heard some cases, and issued decisions.
 According to the law, all trials are public, except in cases involving national secu-
 rity or the protection of minors. The court will appoint an attorney for those who
 do not have one. Defendant may choose their own attorneys but may not necessarily
 
 
 1147
 choose among court-appointed defenders. In practice, arrested persons are often de-
 nied prompt, and in some cases any, access to an attorney.
 The procurator's office is responsible for conducting all investigations of alleged
 criminal conduct. In theory, both defendant and counsel have the right to review
 all government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence and testi-
 mony. No groups are barred from testifyting, and all testimony is theoretically given
 equal weight, regardless of ethnicit or ender of the witness. Ministry of Justice
 officials msintain that defendants benefit from the presumption of innocence, de-
 spite the unmodified Soviet legal statute, which presumes the guilt of all brought
 to triaL Thus, in practice, bringing charges tends to suggest guilt to most Taiks.
 Pressure continues to be exerted on the judicial systemby local strongmen, their
 armed paramilitary groups, and vigilantes who operate outside of government con-
 trol, sometimes leading to the dismissal of charges and dropping of cases. Bribery
 of prosecutors and judges is also considered to be widespread.
 The Government hoIds political prisoners, although estimates of the number vary
 widely. The Government and the Tajik opposition exchanged multiple lists of pris-
 oners of war (POW's) and political prisoners for exchange as a result of the fifth
 round of inter-Tajik talks in Ashgabat. The largest opposition list totaled 596 names
 of political prisoners believed by the opposition to be in government custody, while
 the largest government list totaled 463 soldiers believed by the Government to be
 held by the opposition. Both lists undoubtedly include names of many persons who
 were missing or dead, or, in the case of POW's held by the opposition, who defected.
 No prisoners were exchanged in 1996.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and prohibits interference
 with correspondence, telephone conversations, and postal and communication rights,
 except 'in cases prescribed by law." Police may not enter and search a private home
 without the approval of the procurator. In some cases, police may enter and search
 a home without permission, but they must then inform the procurator within 24
 hours. Police are also permitted to enter and search homes without permission if
 they have compelling reason to believe a delay in obtaining a warrant would impair
 national security. There is no judicial review of police searches conducted without
 a warrant.
 There are continuing credible reports of arbitrary illegal search and seizure by
 government forces.
 Forced conscription occurred extensively as the armed forces sought to maintain
 sufficient strength to prosecute the war against the armed opposition in the face of
 both widespread reluctance to serve and draft evasion. There are numerous credible
 reports of young men being caught in public places and sent directly to the front
 line, or to very short-term training camps before being sent to battle zones. Checks
 on service liability are typically not made, so that persons with legal deferments
 were still forced into service. Some of these persons were killed in the line of duty,
 and there were reports of their bodies being dumped on their parents' doorsteps.
 In some cases, particularly where the conscript is under age, parents have been
 able to obtain his release by appearing at the training camp or military base with
 appropriate documentation. The involvement of an OSCE representative may also
 have been central to obtaining these releases.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Tajikistan signed a code of conduct at the OSCE conference in Budapest in
 1994, obliging it to incorporate into domestic legislation the provisions of the code
 dealing with umanitarian standards in internal conflicts. This has not been done.
 The ICRC has sought access to all persons detained in connection with the conflict
 without success.
 Despite continued political efforts under United Nations auspices to mediate a na-
 tional reconciliation and the continued nominal existence of a cease-fire agreement,
 fighting increased in intensity and geographic extent over 1995 levels. Government
 artillery forces exercised little discipline, resulting in noncombatant deaths.
 A May attack by the opposition on Tavildara led to many months of fighting in
 that central Tajikistan area, resulting in many deaths, much destruction of civilian
 property and public resources such as bridges and highways, the placement of land-
 mines by both sides, and the internal displacement of several thousand persons.
 POW's are mistreated by both sides.
 While precise figures are not available, several hundred troops died on both the
 government and opposition sides. Several times that number were injured, and
 many civilians were killed, wounded, or forced to flee.
 On December 20,23 persons in a U.N. convoy, including 7 U.N. military observ-
 ers, were taken hostag by fighters loyal to a local commander, Rizvon Sadirv, who
 formerly supported the opposition, but recently was reported to have defected to the
 
 
 1148
 Government. The hostage takers were not part of the government's military forces
 and were quickly persuaded to release the hostages unharmed.
 Section 2. Respect for Ciuil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite the Constitution and the 1991 law pro-
 tecting freedom ofpeech and the press, the Government severely restricts freedom
 of expression m practice. Journaists, broadcasters, and individual citizens who dis-
 agree with government picies canot speak freely or critically. The Government
 exercises control over the media both overtly through legislation and less obviously
 through such mechanisms as friendly advice to reporters on what news should not
 be covered. The Government also controlled the printing presses, the supply of
 newsprint, and broadcasting facilities, and subidizs virtually all publications and
 productions. Editors fearful of reprisals exercise careful self-censorship.
 Journalist o the newspaper Sadoi Mardum, published by the Parliament, were
 not permitted to publish an article critical of a parliamentary deputy. The journal-
 ists were able to publish the article in the executive branch newspaper, but were
 then threatened by the subject of their article. An independent television station in
 the northern city of Khojand, linked to a former provincial chairman, was closed by
 the regional government.
 On March 28 Viktor Nikulin, an ethnic Russian native of Tajikistan who worked
 for a Moscow television station, was murdered in Dushanbe by unknown persons.
 No progress has been made in solving this death (see Section l.a.).
 There were some improvements regarding freedom of speech and the press. Sev-
 eral new, semi-independent publications appeared, although they are largely non-
 political. Letters critical of the official version of the antigovernment demonstrations
 that took place in the northern city of Uro-Teppa in May were rinted in Dushanbe
 in August. A semi-governmental Dushanbe television station that had been closed
 in September 1995, resumed limited broadcasting under a new name in September.
 A seminar to discuss the proposed new electronic media law was held in Dushanbe
 in Auust.
 Academic expression is limited by fear of reprisals the complete reliance of sci-
 entific institutes upon government funding, and by the need to find alternate em-
 ployment to generate sufficient income leaving little time for academic wiiting.
 Prominent Tajik academic Muhammad Mini was killed during the year, but it ap-
 pears unlikely that his death was connected to his academic work.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly and association. In practice, however, the authorities
 exercise strict control over organizations and activities of a political nature. Al-
 though free assembly and association are permitted for nonpolitical associations, in-
 cluding trade unions, freedom of association is circumscribed by the requirement (in
 the law on nongovernmental associations) that all organizations must first register
 with the Ministry of Justice. This process is often slowed by the requirement to sub-
 mit documents in both Russian and Tajik. The Ministry of Justice's verification of
 the text inevitably delays the granting of registration. Once registered an organiza-
 tion must apply for a permit frm the local executive committee in order legally to
 organize any public assembly or demonstration.
 In the spring there were demonstrations in the Khatlon region to protest rising
 bread prices and the nonpayment of salaries. In May large demonstrations took
 place in Khujand, sparked by the killing of a prominent local businessman and in
 protest of the presence of numerous government officials from the Kulobi region. De-
 mands were made regarding military service by young men. After the demonstra-
 tions, some of the organizers were arrested. Similar demonstrations took place in
 several other northern cities. In Uro-Teppa in May police shot one demonstrator,
 leading to the burning of several buildings.
 In August demonstrations in Hissor to protest the behavior of local militia led to
 the dismissal of the regional security chief, a Kulobi by origin.
 There are six political parties officially registered with the Government. Three of
 the four political parties suspended in 1993-the Islamic Revival Party, the
 Rastokhez National Movement, and the Lall Badakhshan Movement for the Auton-
 omyof the Pamirs--remained suspended. In March a seventh political party,
 Adatkhoh (justice seeker), was registered. In addition a national front organization
 (Public Accord) established by the Government was registered in March.
 In several cases, members of suspended political parties have been unable to find
 employment, apparently due to actions taken by the secarity services.
 c. Freedom oReligion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Reli-
 gion and State are separate and neither the law nor the Government places restric-
 tions on religious worship. However, according to the Law on Freedom of Faith, the
 Committee on Religious Affairs under the Council of Ministers registers religious
 
 
 1149
 communities and monitors the activities of the various religious establishments.
 While the official reason given is to ensure that they are acting in accordance with
 the law, the practical purpose is to ensure that they do not become overtly political.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose their place
 of residence, to emigrate, and to return. In practice, the Government generally re-
 spects these rights, with some regulation.
 The Government has stipulated that both citizens and foreigners are prohibited
 from traveling within a 25-kilometer zone along the country's borders with China
 and Afghanistan without permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In prac-
 tice, however, international aid workers and diplomats travel freely in these regions
 without prior government authorization.
 Residents of Dushanbe and those travelers wishing to remain longer than 3 days
 are supposed to register with central authorities, and regulations require registra-
 tion at the local Ministry of Interior office upon arrival and departure from a city.
 However, these regulations are largely ignored in practice. There are no legal re-
 strictions on changing residence or workplace. Citizens who wish to travel abroad
 must obtain an exit visa. There is no evidence that these are withheld for political
 reasons.
 There is no law on emigration. Those wishing to migrate within the former Soviet
 Union notify the Ministry of Interior of their departure. Persons wishing to emigrate
 beyond the borders of the former Soviet Union must receive the approval of the rel-
 evant country's embassy in order to obtain their passport. Persons who settle abroad
 are required to inform the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests section of the
 nearest Russian embassy or consulate.
 Persons who wish to return to Tajikistan after having emigrated may do so freely
 by submitting their applications to the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests
 section of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate. The Government adjudicates
 requests on a case-by-case basis. There is no indication that persons, other than
 those who fled Tajikistan for political reasons after the civil war, are not freely per-
 mitted to return. Persons currently active with the Tajik opposition whose travel
 documents have expired have at times had difficulty obtaining new documents per-
 mitting them to return.
 Under the 1994 refugee law, a person granted refugee status is guaranteed the
 right to work and move freely throughout the country. The Central Department of
 Refugee Affairs under the Ministry of Labor has responsibility for the registration
 of refugees.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to
 refugee status. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where
 they feared persecution. The Government, particularly the Ministry of Labor,
 worked closely with the UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration
 on behalf of refugees and internally displaced persons.
 The Government provides first asylum, and has provided it to 1,060 refugees from
 Afghanistan since July 1995.
 In July 1995, the Central Department of Refugee Affairs (CDR) under the Min-
 istry of Labor took over from the UNHCR the registration of refugees, in accordance
 with the 1951 Convention on Refugees and Tajikistan's 1994 Law on Refugees. An
 unresolved problem stems from the unofficial government policy of denying official
 status to the Afghan spouses and children of returning Tajik refugees by denying
 them residence permits.
 Tajik refugees continued to return from northern Afghanistan, as did internally
 displaced persons from Gorno Badakhshan, to the Dushanbe and Khatlon regions,
 albeit slowly. Approximately 20,000 to 22,000 refugees remain in Afghanistan. Op-
 position groups have reportedly blocked the return of these refugees through threats
 and harassment. The number of internally displaced persons increased sharply with
 the summer fighting in Tavildara, to approximately 14,000. While significant prob-
 lems remain with illegal occupation of returnees' homes by those loyal to the victori-
 ous Popular Front militias, progress continues to be made in evicting the occupiers.
 The UNHCR reported that the Government's responsiveness, including that of
 local authorities, was greater than in 1995 in investigating cases of illegal housing
 occupation and accusations of crimes against returnees, although not all cases were
 brought to successful conclusions.
 
 
 1150
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Government limits the right of citizens to change their government peacefully
 and freely. The Government ofPresident Rahmonov remains dominated by Kulobi
 regional political interests, although the prime ministers have been from the north-
 ern Khojand region. Three of the four opsition parties suspended in 1993 remain
 suspended. One new party was registered, joining six other legal parties. Many op-
 ition party activists remained either jailed or in exile abroad, although one mem-
 roftheoposion negotiating team resides in Tajikistan and the opposition mem-
 bers of the Joint Commission have spent extended periods in Tajikistan since early
 p~ariamentary (Majilsi Oil) elections conducted in 1995 were marked by nu-
 merous irregularities, such as voter intimidation and ballot-box stufing, and did not
 result in a truly independent Parliament.
 There are no formal barriers to women's participation in the electoral process, al-
 though since the removal of Soviet-era quotas the number of female deputies has
 declined. At year's end there were 16 female deputies in the Parliament, 1 woman
 serving as a deputy prime minister, 1 as a minister, and several as deputy min-
 isters.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government's record on dealing with international and nongovernmental in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights abuses was mixed. Lingering fear of persecution
 by government or extragovernmental elements has discouraged efforts by citizens to
 form their own human rights organizations. The Government has not interfered,
 however, with citizens' and government officials' participation in international and
 local seminars sponsored by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Eu-
 rope, the International Commission of the Red Cross, United Nations agencies,
 NGO's, and foreign governments on such topics as the rule of law, an independent
 judiciary, and international humanitarian law. Discussion at such seminars, includ-
 ing those held in Tajikistn, has at times been critical of the Government.
 The Government worked closely with the United Nations Mission of Observers in
 Tajikistan and the United Nations Secretary Goneral's Special Representative in the
 course of the inter-Tajik talks.
 The OSCE's mission continues to monitor human rights issues, including through
 three field offices, which receive generally good cooperation from local officials.
 While the Government at first aged to establish a national human rights institu-
 tion and ombudsman position with OSCE financial support, it later decided to estab-
 lish such functions itself. Thus far no institution or ombudsman position has been
 established.
 The ICRC intensified contacts with government entities concerned with prisoners,
 but still was not given access to prisoners in accordance with its standard modali-
 ties.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the rights and freedoms of every person regardless
 of nationality, race se, language, religious beliefs, political persuasion, social sta-
 tus, knowleg, an  property. It also explicitly states that men and women have the
 same rights. In practice, however, there is discrimination as a result of cultural tra-
 ditions and the lingering hostilities from the 1992 civil war.
 Women.-While no official data are available on the prevalence of spousal abuse,
 wife beating is a common problem. In both urban and rural areas, many cases of
 wife beating are unreportedand many of those reported are not investigated. There
 is a widespread reluctance to discuss the issue or provide assistance to women in
 abusive situations. In addition abduction of brides is widely reported, and there are
 reliable reports of young women prevented from leaving the country due to threats
 against their families should they do so.
 The Criminal Code prohibits rape, although it is widely believed that most rape
 cases are unreported. There are no rape crisis centers or special police units for han-
 dling these cases. The threat of rape is reliably rpoed as eing used to coerce
 women. The situation is exacerbated by a general decline in public order, so that
 in many cities, including Dushanbe, women exercise particular care in their move-
 ment, especially at night.
 Laws exist against keeping brothels, procuring, making or selling prnography,
 infecting another person with a venereal disease, and sexual exploitation of women.
 
 
 1151
 According to the law, women have equal rights with men. Inheritance laws do not
 discriminate against women. In practice, however, inheritances may pass dispropor-
 tionately to sons.
 The participation of women in the work force and in institutes of higher learning
 is one of the positive legacies of the Soviet era. There is no formal discrimination
 against women in employment, education, or housing, and in urban areas women
 can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enterprises. Divorce
 rates in urban areas are comparatively high, and women tend to carry the burden
 of child-rearing and household management whether married or divorced. In rural
 areas, women tend to marry younger, have larger families, and receive less edu-
 cation than women in cities. Due to the prevalence of large families, women in rural
 areas are also much less likely to work outside the home. Articles in the Criminal
 Code protect women's rights in marriage and family matters.
 Children.-The extensive government social security network for child welfare
 continued to deteriorate. Women are provided 3 years of maternity leave and
 monthly subsidies for each child, which were increased at the time price controls
 on bread were lifted. Education is compulsory until age 16, but the law is not en-
 forced. All health care is free. However, the Government's lack of financial resources
 left it unable to fulfill many of its obligations for the provision of subsidies and care
 for maternal and child health.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Law on Social Protection of Invalids stipu-
 lates the right of the disabled to employment and adequate medical care. In prac-
 tice, however the Government does not require employers to provide physical access
 for the disabled. Financial constraints and the absence of basic technology to assist
 the disabled result, in practice, in high unemployment and widespread discrimina-
 tion. There is no law mandating accessibility for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-The Baha'i community in Dushanbe suffered an arson at-
 tack in the spring. A news paper that had published articles rovided by the Baha'i
 community was pressured by the Government to atop p    iasng them, possibly at
 the instigation of the Iranian embassy.
 Natioral/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-After the civil war, over 90,000 people of pri-
 marily Gharmi and Pamiri origin fled to Afghanistan to avoid reprisals by
 prgovernment forces. Most of these persons returned to Tajikistan in 1994-95, and
 repatriation continued during 1996, with government encouragement. While making
 a good faith effort to assist with the repatriation of refugees, particularly those from
 Afghanistan, the Government did not fulfill many of its pledges, including the pay-
 ment of reconstruction fees for returning refugee families. However, security for re-
 turning refugees improved, with the UNH{CR reporting fewer cases of murder, rape,
 and harassment of returnees than in 1995. Similarly, local procurators took an ac-
 tive stance in investigating alleged crimes against returnees. However, some proca-
 ratrs and judges continued to be subjeted to threats and intimidation for inves-
 tigating or trying charges against militia members, often of Kulobi origin.
 With the exception ol the trilingual (Tajik/UzbkRussian) school structure, Uzbek
 has no official status in Tajikistan, although Uzbeks comprise nearly one-quarter of
 the population. The Government permits radio and television broadcasts in Russian
 andlU-zbk, in addition to Tajik. In practice Russian is the language of inter-ethnic
 communication and widely used in government. Ethnic Russians and related Rus-
 sian spakers, e.g., Ukrainians, now make up less than 2 percent of the population.
 While the Government has repeatedly expressed its desire for the ethnic Russian
 and Slavic population to remanin Tajikistan, economic conditions provide little in-
 centive for them to do so, and some local Russians and other Slays perceive an in-
 crease in negative social attitudes towards them. At the same time, a Slavic univer-
 sity opened in Dushanbe in September, with Russian as the language of instruction;
 Peident Rahimonov attended the opening ceremony. In 1996 President Rahmonov
 and Russian President Yeltsin signed an agreement on dual citizenship, which the
 Russian Duma ratified on December 4 to complete the process.
 Members of the Government, particularly security forces, continued to discrimi-
 nate against Afghan nationals by extorting bribes and not giving crime victims full
 police protection. Afghan spouses of returning Tajik refugees still suffer from the
 unofficial government policy of denying them official status (see Section 2.d.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Law on Social Organization and the Law on
 Trade Union Rights and Guarantees provide all citizens with the right of associa-
 tion, which includes the right to form and join unions without prior authorization,
 to organize territorially, and to form and join federations.
 The Federation of Trade Unions, a holdover from the Communist era, remains the
 dominant labor organization, although it has since shed its subordination to the
 
 
 1152
 
 Communist Party. The Federation consists of 20 professional trade unions and cur-
 rently claims 1,500,000 members, virtually all nonagricultural workers. The sepa-
 rate Trade Union of Non-State Enterprises has registered unions in over 3,000
 small and medium-sized enterprises, totaling about 50,000 employees, although
 many of these enterprises are not functioning due to the general economic depres-
 sion. The sae is true for many members of the Federation of Trade Unions. The
 Council of Ministers formally consults both labor federations during the drafting of
 social welfare and worker rights legislation.
 The Law on Tariff Agreements and Social Partnerships mandates that arbitration
 take place before a union may legally call a strike. Depending on the scale of the
 labor disagreement, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or govern-
 mental level. In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strike, but
 both labor federations have publicly disavowed the utility of strikes in a period of
 deepening economic crisis and high unemployment and espoused compromise be-
 tween management and workers.
 While there were no official, union-sanctioned strikes, several wildcat strikes oc-
 curred. Workers at the aluminum smelter at Tursunzade struck in August to protest
 nonpayment of salaries, and similar demonstrations or brief strikes took place else-
 where during the year. None of these strikes had the sanction of the labor unions
 and were, hence, illegal. However, the Ministry of Labor recognized that nonpay-
 ment of salaries to workers was a violation of International Labor Organization reg-
 ulations.
 The law provides citizens with the right to affiliate with international organiza-
 tions freel.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Employees, members of the trade union, and management participate in
 collective bargaining at the company level. Negotiations involving an industry sector
 include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the union's steering
 committee for that particular sector. As the economic situation worsens, it is becom-
 neasinglydifficult for enterprises to engage in effective collective bargaining.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade
 union membership, nor may a worker be fired solely for union activity. Any com-
 plaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union activist are first con-
 sidered by a local labor union committee and, if necessary, raised to the level of the
 Supreme Court and investigated by the Ministry of Justice. The law compels an em-
 ployer found guilty of firing an employee based on union activity to reinstate the
 employee.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except in cases defined in law. No laws have been passed defining such cases
 since the adoption of the new Constitution. Neither the Law on Labor Protection
 nor the Law on Employment, both predating the 1994 Constitution, specifically pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. The Soviet practice of compelling students to pick
 cotton was officially banned in 1989, although students in the Leninabad region con-
 tinued to be sent to the fields to pick cotton. In previous years there have been re-
 orts of buses being stoped and passengers being sent to pick cotton for several
 hours before being allowe to proceed.
 d Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to labor laws, the mini-
 mum age for the employment of children is 16, the age at which children may also
 legally leave school. ith the concurrence of the local trade union, employment may
 begin at the age of 15. By law workers under the age of 18 may work no more than
 6 hours a day and 36 hours per week. However, children as young as 7 years of
 age participate in agricultural work, which is classified as family assistance. Trade
 unions are responsible for reporting any violations in the employment of minors.
 Cases not resolved between the union and the employer may be brought before the
 Procurator General, who may investigate and charge the manager of the enterprise
 with violations of the Labor Code.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The President, on the advice of the Ministry
 of Labor and in consultation with trade unions, sets the minimum monthly wage.
 The nominal minimum wage of approximately $1.00 (288 Tajik rubles) falls far
 short of providing a minimal standard of living for a worker and family. The Gov-
 ernment recognizes this problem and has retained certain subsidies for workers and
 their families at the minimum wage. Although the Government adopted a wage in-
 dexation law in 1993 and inflation has been high, the law has not been imple-
 mented.
 
 
 1153
 The economy continued to decline, with a majority of industry standing idle by
 the end of the year. As factories and enterprises either remained closed or were shut
 down, workers were laid off or furloughed for extended periods. Some establish-
 ments, both governmental and private, compensated their employees in kind with
 food commodities or the output of the particular concern for which the employee
 worked. The employee could then sell or barter those products in local private mar-
 kets. Citizens in rural areas intensified cultivation of food crops on their private or
 rented plots, while even urban residents started tending small vegetable gardens
 and rsising livestock.
 The legal workweek for adults (over age 18) is 40 hours. Overtime payment is
 mandated by law, with the first 2 hours of overtime to be paid at one and one-half
 times the normal rate and the rest of the overtime hours at double time.
 The Government has established occupational health and safety standards, but
 these fall far below accepted international norms, and the Government does not en-
 force them in practice. The enforcement of work standards is the responsibility of
 the State Teclnical Supervision Committee under the Council of Ministers. While
 new statistics were not available, it is virtually certain, given the continuing eco-
 nomic decline, that 1993 statistics, which reported that over one-fifth of the popu-
 lation worked in substandard conditions greatly underreport the number of persons
 working in substandard conditions. Workers can leave their jobs with 2 months' no-
 tice, but, given the bleak employment situation, few choose to do so. The Law on
 Labor Protection provides that workers can remove themselves from hazardous con-
 ditions without risking loss of employment.
