 TAJIKISTAN
 As a result of the failure of the August 1991 coup in Moscow, the first president
 of Tajikistan, a supporter of the coup, was forced to resign. Elections were subse-
 quently held under the amended Soviet-era Constitution which declared Tajikistan
 to be a secular, multiparty republic with a presidential system of government. In
 the elections, Rahmon Nabiyev won a majority, collecting 58 percent of the votes
 in a field of nine candidates. Although various opposition voices charged that there
 had been serious irregularities, opposition leaders did not challenge the outcome of
 the voting. However, within weeks of the balloting, the opposition began agitating
 against the regime, including street demonstrations in Dushanbe. The young
 Nabiyev administration responded to the public agitation with strong authoritarian
 measures.
 During the March-May period, the opposition mounted large-scale demonstrations
 in Dushanbe. Subsequently thousands of pro-Nabiyev demonstrators assembled in
 Dushanbe outside Parliament. Tensions rose dramatically after the May 10 shooting
 deaths of more than a dozen opposition demonstrators marching on the Committee
 for State Security (KGB) building and the nearby Ministry of the Interior. The Com-
 mander of the President's Guard switched sides, and the demoralized Government
 capitulated to opposition demands. A Government of National Reconciliation was
 formed which limited the powers of the President and placed opposition nominees
 in prominent parliamentary and ministerial positions.
 The conflict in the capital polarized much of Tajikistan, exacerbating longstand-
 ing, intraregional animosities and accentuating divisions between secular and more
 Islamic segments of the overwhelmingly Muslim population. In June communal vio-
 lence erupted in Kurgan Tyube, whose population originates from several regions
 (see Section 1.g.). The fighting, which continued throughout the year, displaced
 scores of thousands of persons and was characterized by brutalities and atrocities
 on both sides. The coalition central Government, paralyzed by internal divisions,
 was slow to respond to the violence.
 President Nabiyev sought involvement by Russian and Commonwealth of Inde-
 pendent States (CIS) forces to quell the fighting. The opposition successfully blocked
 an agreement that would have led to the arrival of additional Russian-CIS troops.
 Youth groups in Dushanbe, under the command of radical opposition second-rank
 leaders, called for the resignation of Nabiyev and kidnaped over 50 senior govern-
 ment officials. After a week of standoff, during which at least one of the hostages
 was tortured and killed, Nabiyev himself was lured to the airport and captured.
 Under duress, he resigned.
 Following the coup d'etat, fighting intensified. The forces of the new Government,
 headed by Akbarsho Iskandarov, were routed and gradually forced out of all major
 positions. The consequences of their defeat were both political and military. Under
 pressure of a thrust by old guard forces into the capital in late October, the
 Iskandarov regime agreed to a parliamentary session in the secure northern re-
 gional capital of Khojand. By an overwhelming majority, Parliament replaced the
 Iskandarov regime with one headed by Kulyabi regional executive chairman Imomili
 Rahmonov, a ppointing him Chairman of Parliament and Head of State. Parliament
 also abolished the positions of President and Vice President, adopting a parliamen-
 tary form of government.
 Following installation of the new Government in Dushanbe, progovernment forces
 launched an offensive against opposition forces retreating from the area around the
 
 
 capital into the Garm valley, homeland of most of the opposition. At the end of 1992,
 those hostilities threatened to close that region off to sources of outside supply of
 food and fuel. More alarmingly, armed progovernment gangs began combing the
 capital for people originating from the regions of Garm or Badakhshan, kidnaping
 and killing many. The new Government spoke out against these acts of retribution
 but did not act effectively to control them. Of equa concern, the continuing hos-
 tilities in the Kurgan Iybe region have driven over a hundred thousand refugees
 from Tajikistan into Aghanistan.
 The Committee for State Security (KGB) and the Ministry of the Interior theoreti-
 cally share responsibility for security and public order. A new "national army" to
 be formed will have responsibility for border defense, a responsibility also held by
 KGB forces and CIS-Russian border forces. The heavily armed Ministry of the Inte-
 rior police has until recently been composed to a large extent of Pamiri personnel,
 who in the past have sided with the opposition. The Rahmonov Government appears
 to be moving to broaden the ethnic-regional makeup of this force. CIS-Russian garri-
 son forces at times took action at the request of Tajikistan's governments to safe-
 guard key facilities and routes and to enforce curfews in the capital. Both old guard
 and opposition elements have been responsible for extensive and continuing viola-
 tions of human rights, including summary executions of captives, disregard for civil-
 ian or noncombatant status, hostage-taking, torture, rape, looting, and wanton de-
 struction of civilian and state property.
 The centrally planned economy, highly dependent on cotton, declined sharply
 owing to the violence. Production in all sectors plummeted, and little progress was
 made toward a market economy. The only exception to this steeply negative trend
 was in the northern region of Leninabad which did not suffer hostilities. There, al-
 though the economy was undermined by structural transition problems and the in-
 flux of refugees, economic activity in 1992 was more normal. Tajikistan is a net im-
 1 orter of food and, prior to independence, had relied on subsidies from the central
 yet government.
 Political instability and expanding and intensifying conflict seriously impeded de-
 mocratization and the protection of human rights. Nevertheless, Parliament's selec-
 tion of a new Government was a positive step which drew qualified acceptance, even
 from some prominent opposition figures. Failure of the new Government to exercise
 control over forces operating in its name or on its behalf, however, has greatly re-
 duced hopes for a genuine national reconciliation. The breakdown of law and order
 the uncontrolled criminal action of vengeance-seeking forces, notably in the capitaf
 and the far south, and the continuing flight of refugees are disturbing. In addition,
 indications that the new Government may resort to authoritarian measures, notably
 in the area of press freedom, are also worrisome.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-The spring demonstrations culminated in
 violence between supporters of the two factions, including assassinations. Unknown
 persons shot and killed Muradullo Sharlizoda an opposition supporter and the edi-
 tor of the Tajik daily newspaper Sardoi Mardum, as he departed the National As-
 sembly building located at Ozodi Square, the site of the progovernment rally. In the
 May takeover of the Dushanbe radio station, opposition supporters killed radio jour-
 nalist Olimi Zarubek.
 In August unknown assailants assassinated Chief Procurator Khovoydollayev,
 who had received death threats, and his bodyguard. He had been a strong adversary
 of the opposition and was responsible for the detention of opposition-supported
 Dushanbe Mayor Ikramov.
 In September the "Youth of Tajikistan* (YT) kidnaped 53 government officials for
 3 days and released the hostages only after forcing statements, some televised, call-
 ing for President Nabiyev's resignation. One hostage, Deputy Chairman Sangarov
 of the Kulyab City Executive Committee, was brutally tortured and killed after he
 refused to comply with the kidnapers' demands. The opposition coalition which sub-
 sequently took power did not open proceedings against the YT.
 In December former Parliament Chairman Aslonov, who had been apointed
 Chairman of the Executive Committee of Kurgan Tyube region by acting President
 Iskandarov, reportedly was killed. He had been taken prisoner by Kulyabi militia
 forces in November following the collapse of his regional government. The killing re-
 portedly was carried out by these forces subsequent to the selection of Imomili
 Rahmonov as Parliament Chairman and Chief of State.
 Also in December, armed groups from among old guard forces in the Hissar began
 the systematic combing of Dushanbe neighborhoods in search of young Pamiri and
 
 
 925
 Garm-Karotegin males. These men were taken hostage, and many were killed, their
 bodies subsequently found in the streets of the capital. The number of such killings
 appears to have reached several score, at a minimum, in December. Finally, in De-
 cember, the Deputy Chief of the KGB was assassinated in Dushanbe. He ad been
 an important factor in designing security policy in the coalition government and the
 Iskandarov regime.
 In December unknown elements, assumed to be sympathetic to the opposition
 side, kidnaped, tortured, and killed three CIS.Russian garrison soldiers. Their bod-
 ies were later discovered in opposition-controlled territory.
 b. Disappearance.-In the spring and summer, conflict in the Kurgan Tyube area
 escalated, with both sides taking civilians hostage. Hundreds of persons disappeared
 from towns and villages, many of whom are either being detained as hostages or
 were executed.
 In addition, following the legal removal of the Iskandarov regime by Parliament
 and both before and after the installation of the new Rahmonov Government in the
 capital, armed groups, apparently principally groups based in the Hissar Valley
 west of the capital, began searching for Garm and Pamir-origin citizens. Victims
 were seized in their homes, from buses, at the capital's airport, and during docu-
 ment searches in the streets. While the Government, including Chairman
 Rahmonov, condemned these actions and pledged police and court action against
 perpetrators, these activities continued. Charges from well-placed individuals, in-
 cluding some in the Tajikistan Government, have contended that these actions by
 the nongovernmental armed groups have the tacit support of senior government offi-
 cials.
 Approximately 15 Russian civilians were kidnaped along with the 3 CIS-Russian
 soldiers in December. As of late 1992, their fate was unknown.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 During the September coup d'etat, YT members kidnaped 53 government officials.
 Several of the government officials were threatened with death and beaten, and at
 least one was tortured and murdered (see Section l.a.). The present Dushanbe re-
 gime, which came to power following President Nabiyev's forced resignation in Sep-
 tember, has not initiated proceedings to bring the YT members to justice.
 There are credible reports that both sides in the civil confict have in some in-
 stances tortured, beaten, and raped civilians presumed to be sympathetic to the op-
 posing side. Prisoners have protested prison conditions in the region of Yavan and
 KurganTyube where civil conflict has resulted in food, water, and elericity short-
 ages.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Code of Tajikistan has not
 been significantly amended since independence, and the abuses endemic to the So-
 viet system are still evident. Persons may be detained arbitrarily and without arrest
 warrants. Within 72 hours, the accused must be officially charged, at which point
 the Criminal Code permits pretrial detention for up to 18 months at the sole discre-
 tion of the procuratorss office. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for
 a preliminary judicial hearing on the charge or the detention. In criminal cases, de-
 tanes maybe released and restricted to their pl  of residence pendino trial. De-
 tained persons have the right to ounsel in princi    n though practice vanes widely.
 In March the mayor of Dushanbe, opposition leader Makud lkramov, was ar-
 rested on the charge of corruption. e Supreme Soviet called for his arrest, and
 the Dushanbe City Executive Council affirmed his removal from office. Ikramov was
 transferred to the city of Khojand and jailed. Following the formation of the Govern-
 ment of National Reconciliation in May, the Dushane  City Executive Council re-
 scinded its decision to remove Ikramov, stating that the decision had been made
 under pressure. Nevertheless, Ikramov remained in prison until October, when the
 authorities released him pending frther investigation of the charge. Ikramov's re-
 leas cae during the Iskandarov regime.
 Nineteen Mebers of Parliament (M P.'s) were kidnaped by opposition supporters
 in at         Dushanbe. These M.P.'s were detained overnight, leading to the deci-
 sion by then Parliament Chairman Kenayev to resign. His agreement to resign, as
 well other concessions to the opposition, secured the release of the 19 M.P.'s who
 were not harmed. However, the concessions offered to the opposition to secure the
 M.P.'s release were withdrawn. This kidnaping was a catalyst for direct confronta-
 tion between pNrand anti-government demonstrations in the capital.
 Ther were no reports of persons being sentenced to exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria u-The Tajik court system remains unmodified from
 the Soviet period. There are several tiers of courts: the district, city, oblast (prov-
 ine), and republic levels. Higher courts serve as appellate courts for lower ones.
 Local, provincial, and republic-level judges are, for the most part, poorly trained and
 
 
 lack an understanding of independent judicial function. The court system at all lev-
 els remains strongly under the influence of local political leaderships.
 Trials are public, and defendants have the right to attend proceedings, confront
 witnesses, and present evidence. The court appoints an attorney for defendants who
 do not have one. The law now provides that a lawyer may be present at the initial
 interrogation of a witness; however, it appears that few defendants have benefited
 from such representation. The procurator's office remains responsible for conducting
 all preliminary investigations of allegations of criminal conduct. If, following the
 completion of an investigation, the procurator's office decides to go to trial, the de-
 fen ant is presumed guilty until otherwise demonstrated.
 In Kurgan Tyube, where civil conflict is centered, judicial proceedings have halt-
 ed, prolonging some defendants' detention in jail and leaving criminals undeterred.
 During the spring demonstrations in Dushanbe and the September coup, opposition
 demonstrators and the YT meted out summary justice with the tacit support of
 some elements of the opposition coalition which subsequently took power. The le-
 gally constituted Rahmonov Government ailed to take effective action against vigi-
 lante groups in Dushanbe and southern districts which sought vengeance against
 groups from the Garm and Pamir regions.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code supports the inviolability of the home and prohibits interference with
 correspondence. Entry and search of a private home by the militia may be conducted
 with the approval of a procurator. In some cases, entry and search may be under-
 taken without permission, but the procurator must be informed within 24 hours.
 In practice, the breakdown of civil order in the capital and the southern regions
 resulted in arbitrary violent actions by criminal and vigilante groups, occasionally
 with the tacit support of senior officials in the Nabiyev, Iskandarov, and Rahmonov
 administrations. Some residents of Dushanbe, particularly Russian speakers or eth-
 nic Tajiks from northern Tajikistan, were ordered at gun oint to give up their
 homes to refugees from the south. Following removal of the Iskandarov regime,
 armed old guard, pro-Rahmonov groups harassed Garm and Pamir-origin civilians,
 exacting retribution for acts by individual and armed elements of these two groups
 in earlier months in a cycle of revenge that continues. In the regions of Kurgan
 Tyube and Kulyab, militia groups destroyed homes, property, crops, and livestock.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The fighting in Tajikistan, concentrated in Kurgan Tyube, has been charac-
 terized by brutalities and atrocities on both sides. Both old guard and opposition ele-
 ments have been responsible for extensive and continuing violations of human
 rights, including summary executions of captives, disregard for civilian and non-
 combatant status, hostage-taking, torture, rape, looting, and wanton destruction of
 civilian and state property.
 In Kurgan Tyube the fighting pitted Garm and Pamiri-origin settlers, aided by
 the predominantly Pamiri Ministry of Interior forces, against settlers from other re-
 gions and indigenous Uzbeks, aided by the remnants of the presidential "battalion,"
 consisting of progovernment Kulyabis. Estimates of the civilian casualties range
 from 1,000 to 3,000. The fighting resulted in shortages of food, water, and elec-
 tricity; destruction of industrial enterprises; and a massive flow of displaced civil-
 ians whose numbers are above a quarter of a million.
 Militia forces which support the opposition coalition that seized power in Septem-
 ber completely blockaded the region of Kulyab, where over 800,000 peole reside
 and where an additional 150,000 internally displaced from Kurgan Tyube had tken
 refuge. All supplies of food and fuel to Kulyab were halted, and requests from the
 Government of Uzbekistan to open a route for the delivery of humanitarian assist-
 ance were refused. Credible reports indicate that opposition forces looted and de-
 stroyed hospitals in Kurgan Tyube. Kulyabi forces also were accused of looting and
 wanton destruction.
 Old guard forces, led by former Parliament Chairman Kenjaev, advanced into
 Dushanbe in late October, provoking fighting within the capital, already swollen
 with displaced persons. There was some relatively minor damage to state and civil-
 ian property as a result of this attack and some deaths in the fighting.
 Following installation of the new Government in Dushanbe, pmgovernment forces
 launched an offensive against opposition forces retreating from the area around the
 capital into the Garm valley, homeland of most of the opposition. At the end of 1992,
 those hostilities threatened to close that region off to sources of outside supply of
 food and fuel.
 Of equal concern, the continuing hostilities in the Kurgan Tyube region have driv-
 en over 100,000 refugees from Tajikistan into Afghanistan.
 
 
 927
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Press and Speech.-Freedom of speech, press, and expression ex-
 panded greatly in the beginning of 1992 but steadil contracted during the public
 demonstrations of the March-May period, the May formation of the Government of
 National Reconciliation, and the September coup.
 The beginning of 1992 saw a continuation of press freedom which blossomed after
 the September 1991 declaration of independence and the period leading to the No-
 vember 1991 presidential election. Independent papers appeared throughout
 Tajikistan, along with a host of professional and socialpublications. Government au-
 thorities relinquished overt control over former state and party publications, al-
 though budgetary contributions continued. The Government maintained control of
 the printing presses but, in contrast to an earlier period of press liberalization in
 1990-1991, did not threaten to deny publications access to publis  acilities.
 The spring demonstrations plarized the poitical situation. Independent reporters
 and papers critical of President Nabiyev received anonymous threats, including
 some threatening death. In April a journaist for Charogi Ruz, Dodojon Atuollo, was
 beaten severely by an assailant, and the windows of hishome were shot out.
 The Nabiyev government attempted to expand Criminal Code provisions by add-
 ing fimes. and imprisonment for new offenses, such as insulting a public figure or
 institution. The Nabiyev government also gave the procurator unchecked powers to
 close newspapers that violated these provisions. Chief Procurator Khovoidollayev
 privately warned several newspapers that they faced imminent closure for printing
 statements by opposition political parties that were critical of the Nabiyev govern-
 ment.
 The government of National Reconciliation abolished the proposed press amend-
 ments, but press freedom continued to diminish, largely through self-censorship.
 This process accelerated after the September coup as editors grew wary of govern-
 ment-supported youth grups and thugs. On several occasions, articles critical of the
 new regime's political figures resulted in threats of physical violence from various
 youth groups which served as unofficial enforcers.
 The State Committee of Radio and Television came under strong criticism for its
 one-sided version of events. The State Committee eliminated Moscow Channel 2 and
 the Uzbekistan Channel, but Moscow Channel 2 was restored by presidential decree
 in October following mounting public resentment of the embargo.
 The government of National Rconciliation and the post-September Dushanbe re-
 Fme severely limited news on the civil war in the south. Moscow correspondents
 fom the Ostankino television station and other foreign correspondents were prohib-
 ited from filing video reports. In reaction to the State Committee's bias in favor of
 the new regime, the northern region of Leninabad alternatively cut and then re-
 duced central television and radio programming and is establishing an independent
 television and radio station.
 Under the Rahmonov administration, both television broadcasting from Russia
 and Uzbekistan resumed. However, the new administration announced that it was
 creating an information office under the joint administration of the Council of Min-
 isters and the Parliament Presidium which would coordinate the flow of information
 to the state-controlled broadcast media.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union lifted de facto bans on academic debate, particu-
 larly on topics dealing with nationalism and language. Academic expression is now
 limited only by the financial inability of many journals to publish regularly.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution ensures free-
 dom of speech, publications, meetings, demonstrations, and rallies. Persons may join
 together, formally or informally, to promote nonviolent causes or protest government
 policies but, according to regulations, must apply for a demonstration permit 10
 days in advance. Societies and organizations, including political parties, are re-
 quired to register with the Minister of Justice, if a republicwide organization, or
 with the appropriate city executive council committee, if the group's activities are
 local in nature. There is no- evidence that organizations face delays or difficulties
 in registering. To date, 129 republicwide organizations have registered with the
 Ministry of Justice. The new Government announced its opposition to the involve-
 ment of religious movements or religious leaders in national politics. It is unclear
 how this will affect the activities of the opposition Islamic Revival Party.
 Public demonstrations changed the political structure of Tajikistan in 1992. For
 51 days in the March-May period, up to 20,000 protestors gathered in a round-the-
 clock vigil in the two central squares of Dushanbe, effectively closing the Cabinet
 of Ministers and Presidential Office Building, shutting down public transportation
 on the central avenue, and erecting semipermanent tents along the main and sub-
 sidiary boulevards. Under the Government of National Reconciliation and following
 
 
 928
 the subsequent ousting of President Nabiyev, demonstrations on a smaller scale con-
 tinued to take place in Dushanbe's central squares.
 The March-May demonstrations were "unsanctioned" in that demonstrators on
 both sides did not seek or receive permits to hold their respective demonstrations
 in the central squares. The Nabiyev re ime was reluctant to use force to disperse
 the  unsanctioned   demonstrators.  Sice   May, no    government   organ   or
 extragovernmental force has had the authority or the means peacefully or forcefully
 to disperse unsanctioned demonstrators.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-According to the Constitution, church and state are sepa-
 rate in Tajikistan. Protection of religious freedom is enshrined in the Law on Free-
 dom of Faith and Religious Organizations passed in December 1990. After independ-
 ence, the Government moved to recognize the important role of Islam in Tajikistan,
 where approximately 90 percent of residents are Muslim. Islam's renaissance is
 manifest in the boom in the construction of mosques around the republic and an
 increase in religious observance. Islamic education has been reestablished through
 the qaziate in Dushanbe (the Islamic center and seat of the chief Islamic judge in
 Tajikistan) which oversees both a male and female madressah (secondary-level reli-
 gious education institutions).
 While Islam is the majority religion, minority religions enjoy both government
 and individual tolerance and several churches are active in Dushanbe, including a
 Jewish synagogue and a Seventh-Day Adventist Society, as well as Russian Ortho-
 dox and German Catholic churches. Official discrimination against religious minori-
 ties has not been detected under any of Tajikistan's successive governments, al-
 though one incident took place involving serious mistreatment of a young Jewish
 man by Dushanbe police. In 1992 there were no restrictions on visits of prominent
 Muslims as well as visitors and proselytizers of different faiths.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Tajikistan does not restrict the movement of people within its borders,
 with one notable exception. Tajiks and foreigners alike are restricted from travel
 into or through a 25-kilometer border zone which, according to Tjik officials, fol-
 lows Tajikistan's borders with Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan, and China. Of-
 ficials state that the exclusionary zone was established in August 1992 for security
 reasons to preclude travel near Tajikistan's disturbed southern border with Afghani-
 stan. There are no restrictions on the ability of a Tajik national to change residence
 or workplace.
 Tajik nationals who wish to travel abroad must obtain an exit visa; there is no
 evidence these are withheld for political reasons.
 The Iskandarov regime on several occasions delayed the issuane of international
 passports to ethnic Russians. In each instance, the Government claimed that the
 Russian passport applicant was unfairly chosen to represent Tajikistan in an inter-
 national scholar exchange or training program in the United States. The Govern-
 ment eventually issued passports to the applicants. Neither the Nabiyev nor the
 Rahmonov regimes took such actions.
 Tajikistan has no law on emigration. For the time being, a person who wishes to
 emigrate must proceed as if applying to travel abroad. Once settled abroad, the per-
 son is required to advise the Tajik interests section of the nearest Russian embassy
 or consulate of the fact of their emigration. That information is then passed back
 to the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Tajikistan which either approves or dis-
 approves the resettlement. Tajik officials add that emigrating nationals rarely make
 this notification.
 Since February 1990, there has been an exodus of Russian-speaking people, in-
 cluding Jews and ethnic Germans. The passage of the Tajik language law, fear of
 the development of an Islamic state, and continued political instability hastened
 their departure (see Section 5). There were credible reports that some Russians
 were denied permission to leave Tajikistan because of their particular professional
 ex pertise.
 Residents who have emigrated and wish to return to live in Tajikistan must sub-
 mit their request to the Tajik interests section of the nearest Russian embassy or
 consulate. The Government adjudicates each request on a case by case basis. There
 are no prohibitions against a Tajik national reclaiming citizenship after emigrating;
 for instance, six Jewish families returned to Tajikistan after emigrating to Israel.
 Tajik citizenship is not known to be revoked for political reasons.
 In recent months, some of the fleeing refugees were driven across the river border
 with Afghanistan by opposition forces seeking to use the civilians as shields. A large
 number were forced across by old guard units, some of which appeared to be operat-
 ing independently of any centralized command. Hundreds reportedly were drowned
 or were shot to death in the chaotic winter crossing of the Amu Dana. As 1992 con.
 
 
 cluded, the forced flight of refugees to northern Afghanistan appeared to be continu-
 ing.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Progress towards establishing the right of citizens to change their government
 through democratic means was interrupted by the outbreak of civil war. The presi.
 dential election of November 1991, won by Rahmon Nabiyev, is the only direct elec-
 tion ever held in this country. It was democratically contested, and, although the
 opposition claimed that the election was fraudulent, it was accepted that Nabiyev
 had won at least a plurality of the votes. At the time, it represented progress in
 democratization, particularly in relation to elections held during the Soviet regime.
 The formation of the government of National Reconciliation was effected by armed
 factions rather than by constitutional procedures for changing governments. The
 resignation of Nabiyev. at gunpoint in September and the extraconstitutional as-
 sumption of power by the opposition coalition brought an end to all efforts at politi.
 cal reform, including the drafting of a new constitution. The escalation of the con-
 flict into civil war destroyed civilian order in much of the country. Parliament's 16th
 session in November-December 1992, in the presence of international observers, in-
 cluding from the International Committee o the Red Crss (ICRC) and the United
 States, selected a new Chairman of Parliament, Immili Rahmonov. With the elimi-
 nation of the presidential system, he became Chief of State.
 The current regime is composed principally of Leninabad and Kulyab regional po-
 litical interests, with participation of former and current Communist official in lead
 roles. The new Government has representation from all regions, though no opposi-
 tion representatives are government ministers. The Prime Minister in the opposi-
 tion-installed Iskandarov regime, Abdul Malik Abdullajanov, has been retained in
 his role as Head of Government, as have a number of officials who served in both
 the Nabiyev and Iskandarov administrations.
 Parliament was last elected in February 1990 under Soviet election laws and prior
 to the emergence of some democratic movements and parties. It therefore reflects
 the Communist-era, old guard power structure to a significant extent. It nonetheless
 remains a legal institution recognized by all sides as a legitimate political body. Its
 meeting in November was only the second time since the key May meeting when
 it was able to achieve a quorum. A brief special session in August initially had dif-
 ficulty in achieving a quorum and deadlocked over opposition-proposed initiatives.
 The Novemr session in Khojand easily achieved a quorum, collecting 197 of the
 230 delegates. Various governments responded to an invitation to send observers to
 the session, as did the ICRC. Senior opposition leaders, though not delegates, and
 international journalists also were present.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Groups that monitor human rights inside Tajikistan include the newly formed
 Helsinki Watch group, the Russian Society, and various ethnic-based groups that
 focus on ensuring the freedom of emigration of minority populations. International
 organizations concerned about human rights have been able to visit the Republic
 during all three administrations, including two visits by senior representatives of
 the United Nations.
 The successive governments of Tajikistan have been willing to discuss human
 rights issues with representatives of such international organizations as the Con-
 ference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the ICRC.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The civil war hastened the exodus of ethnic minorities, in particular the Russian-
 speaking peoples from Tajikistan. While the fighting was primarily among Tajiks,
 civilian populations, including large numbers of ethnic Uzbeks, who comprise 23
 percent of the total population of 5.1 million, were displaced from their homes and
 had their properties destroyed. Subsequent involvement of armed groups composed
 of Uzbeks indigenous to the Hissar Valley and to Kurgan Tyube in support of old
 guard forces has changed the nature of the conflict into one in which non-Tajiks are
 also involved. There are credible reports that armed youth groups harassed both
 Russian-spaking people and northern Tajiks who, as a result, are moving to the
 Leninabad region or emigrating to Uzbekistan or elsewhere in the former Soviet
 Union. There are credible reports that during the Iskandarov regime some Russians
 were being denied permission to leave because of their particular professional exper-
 tise (see Section 2.d).
 At various times since the March-May demonstrations, prominent political leaders
 have warned the Russian population of Tajikistan that they will be held responsible
 
 
 930
 for the actions of the Russian-CIS forces stationed in Tajikistan. Democrat Party
 Chairman Shodman Yusuf implicitly threatened ethnic Russians with retribution in
 May for supposed Russian interference in T *ik domestic affairs. Following 3 days'
 captivity in September, Acting Deputy Prime  inister Karimov urged Russia not to
 take one side or another in the civil conflict or the Russian population would be at
 risk. Followinginaccurate reports that the CIS garrison had fied on unarmed dem-
 onstrators in October, armed groups took ethnic Russians hostage and threatened
 others, including several schoolchildren. The hostages were released.
 The Tajik language law, passed in 1989, stipulates that Tajik will be the sole offi-
 cial language of Tajikistan by 1996 and reserves Russian as the language of
 interethnic communication. A draft revision of the Tajik language law, completed in
 the summer of 1992 but not yet reviewed by the National Assembly, eliminates the
 role of Russian as an interethnic language. While the educational system will con-
 tinue to conduct classes in Tajik, Russian, and Uzbek, all government workers must
 conduct their written and oral business in Tajik by 1994. There is debate about the
 possible revision of this law to eliminate Russian as an interethnic language.
 The collapse of the Soviet Union eliminated unofficial quotas that existed for hir-
 ing women and ethnic minorities at all levels of the Communist party and other
 state organs. As a result, the disproportionate number of Russians in high govern-
 ment posts was eliminated. Concurrently, the proportionate number of women and
 Uzbeks in government disappeared. For example, although there are no legal bar-
 riers to female or ethnic minority participation in the electoral process, female Mem-
 bers of Parliament declined from 150 out of 315 to 9 out of 150.
 The criminal harassment of Afghan citizens residing in Tajikistan was in practice
 sanctioned by the coalition government and the Iskandarov regime. Afghan resi-
 dents, businessmen, and diplomats were the targets of crime, kidnaping, and rape.
 Despite frequent official protests to these governments, security organs overlooked
 crime perpetrated against Afghans. Police units, as a rule, did not respond to Af-
 ghan refugee pleas for assistance.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The flight of Association.-According to the Law on Social Organization and the
 Law on Trade Union Rights and Activity, all citizens are guaranteed the right of
 association. Included in this guarantee is the right to form and to join associations
 without prior authorization, to form and join  erations and afiliate with inter-
 national organizations freely, and to participate in international travel.
 There is no longer any requirement for a single labor union structure. However,
 the Communist-era Confederation of Trade Unions remains the dominant labor or-
 ganization, although it has shed its subordination to the Communist party. The
 Confederation claims 1.6 million members. In April 1990, the Labor Union of Pri-
 vate Sector Enterprises and Organizations was formed, independent of the Confed-
 eration. It claims 40,000 members, some of whom also have dual membership in the
 Confederation. Both labor unions consult with the Cabinet of Ministers on worker
 rights as well as on issues of social welfare. In August the unions worked with the
 Cabinet of Ministers to raise the minimum wage.
 In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strike. In 1991, 3 days
 of negotiations between the unions and the Government averted a nationwide strike
 protesting low teachers' wages and the unpopular "Prsident's Tax." As a matter of
 principle, both labor unions publicly disavow the utility of strikes in a period of eco-
 nomic crisis and high unemployment and espouse compromise between management
 and workers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic Labor Code and
 is the subject of draft legislation. Currently, the Law on Trade Unions prohibits
 antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade union membership.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced and compulsory labor is
 considered to be prohibited, although there is no explicit injunction in the Labor
 Code or in the Law on Employment of the Population. However, this law provides
 that a person has the right to find work of his own choosing. Labor inspectors with-
 in the local trade union structure enforce this law. The Soviet practice of compelling
 students to harvest cotton was outlawed in 1989. There were reliable reports, how-
 ever, that Kulyab militia commander Sangak Safarov forcibly conscripted labor bat-
 talions from among Garm males with ancestral origin in the Garin area who have
 attempted to return to their homes in Kulyabi-controlled, Kurgan Tyube area.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to the Labor Code the
 minimum age for the employment of children is 16. With the concurrence of the
 local trade union, employment may begin at the age of 15. While official data is
 
 
 lacking, children from the age of 7 often work during the harvest, but their work
 is considered 'family assistance."
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-After consultation with union representatives,
 the Government in September raised the minimum wage by decree. It does not,
 however, provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The decree
 affects all workers except those in the armed forces lice, and KGB. The standard
 legal workweek is 40 hours. The Government estabtished occupational health and
 safety standards, but according to official data in 1991, more than a fifth of indus-
 trial workers worked in substandard conditions.
