 TAJIKISTAN
 Tajikistan remains in the hands of a largely authoritarian government, although
 it has established some nominally democratic structures. The Government's narrow
 base of support limits its ability to control the entire territory of the country. The
 Government of President Emomali Rahmonov, which consists largely of natives of
 the Kulob region, continued to dominate the State, even though some Kulobis were
 removed from senior positions in 1998 and opposition members were taken into Gov-
 ernment. The judiciary is not independent.
 Tajikistan took a significant step toward national reconciliation after its 1992 civil
 war with the June 1997 signing of a comprehensive peace accord. Under the provi-
 sions of the accord, the Commission of National Reconciliation (CNR) began work
 in July 1997, and has made some progress in establishing peace. By year's end, the
 Government almost had fulfilled its obligation to name United Tajik Opposition
 (UTO) candidates to 30 percent of senior government positions. The UTO had reg-
 istered virtually all of its fighters in anticipation of their demobilization or re-
 integration into regular military units. The return during the year of virtually all
 
 
 1534
 exiled UTO leaders and Tajik refugees from Afghanistan constituted further
 progress. However, implementation of the peace agreement (originally scheduled to
 be completed during the year) is still behind schedule, and basic issues such as con-
 stitutional amendments, legalization of banned political parties, and the disarming
 or reintegration of fighters remain to be resolved. Parliamentary elections that were
 scheduled under the agreement to take place in June are not expected to be held
 until 1999 at the earliest. In addition the United Nations Mission of. Observers to
 Tajikistan (UNMOT) has reported several cease-fire violations. The killing of four
 UNMOT personnel in July led to the temporary withdrawal of most UNMOT ob-
 servers.
 Internal security is the responsibility of the Ministries of Interior, Security, and
 Defense. The Russian Army's 201st Motorized Rifle Division, part of a Common-
 wealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force established in 1993, re-
 mained in the country. The Russian Border Guard Force (RBF) reports to Moscow
 and has primary responsibility for guarding the border with Afghanistan. It consists
 mostly of Tajiks with some Russians and a limited number of other Central Asians,
 although the officer corps remains principally Russian. The Government depends
 militarily on a handful of commanders who use their forces almost as private ar-
 mies. The soldiers of some of these commanders are the source of serious problems,
 including crime and corruption. Some regions of the country remained effectively
 outside the Government's control, and government control in other areas existed
 only by day, or at the sufferance of local opposition commanders. Some members of
 the security forces and government-aligned militias committed serious human rights
 abuses.
 The economy continued to be extremely depressed, and government revenue re-
 mains highly dependent on the government-dominated cotton and government-
 owned aluminum industries. The economy also suffers from narcotics trafficking,
 other forms of corruption, and crime in general. Most Soviet-era factories operate
 at a minimal level, if at all. Small-scale privatization is over 60 percent complete,
 but medium- to large-scale privatization still is stalled. Government figures show a
 3.8 percent increase in gross domestic product during the first 8 months of 1998,
 but also indicate that as much as one-third of the total population is unemployed
 or underemployed. The Tajik ruble remained stable until its value fell in August,
 mainly as a consequence of the economic crisis in Russia. The inflation rate has sta-
 bilized at 7 percent, and the Government essentially has followed recommendations
 by international financial institutions to establish fiscal and budgetary discipline.
 Many, but not all, wages and pensions are being paid. There were serious shortages
 of natural gas for heating and industry, largely as a result of continued disputes
 with Uzbekistan over natural gas purchases. The Government states that per capita
 gross domestic product is approximately $230 to $300; other estimates are lower.
 The Government's human rights record is poor and made only limited improve-
 ments in a few areas over last year. The Government limits citizens' right to change
 their government. Some members of the security forces were responsible for killings
 and beatings, and frequent abuse of detainees. These forces were also responsible
 for threats, extortion, looting, and abuse of civilians. Certain battalions of nominally
 government forces operated quasi-independently under their leaders. The Govern-
 ment prosecuted few of the persons who committed these abuses. Prison conditions
 remain life threatening, and the Government continued to use.arbitrary arrest and
 detention, and lengthy pretrial detention remains a problem. Basic problems of rule
 of law persist. There are often long delays before trials, and the judiciary is subject
 to political and paramilitary pressure. The authorities infringe on citizens' right to
 privacy.
 The Government severely restricts freedom of speech and of the press, and essen-
 tially controls the electronic media; however, two new opposition newspapers began
 publishing during the year. The authorities strictly control freedom of assembly and
 association for political organizations. One new party was allowed to register in
 1998, but the registration of another was held up by bureaucratic delays. Three op-
 position parties and a branch of a fourth affiliated with the armed opposition re-
 mained suspended. There are some restrictions on freedom of movement. The Gov-
 ernment cooperated to a limited extent with the Organization for Security and Co-
 operation in Europe (OSCE) in Dushanbe and in some field offices, but the officer
 in Pyanj was accused of destabilizing the area and ordered out of the district by
 local officials for a period of 2 weeks in May. The Government still has not estab-
 lished a human rights ombudsman position, despite a 1996 pledge to do so. Violence
 against women is a problem, as is discrimination against the disabled.
 The general weakness of the Government and its limited ability to maintain law
 and order were evident in the armed clashes between the Government and opposi-
 tion forces at various points during the year. The actions led by Mahmud
 
 
 1535
 Khudoiberdiev in November indicated dissatisfaction among those who feel blocked
 from participation in the current inter-Tajik peace process. Other clashes during the
 year involved UTO elements. All of these clashes resulted in civilian deaths, abuse,
 and property damage. There are credible reports of excesses by both opposition ele-
 ments and government forces involved in these clashes. Following the November
 antigovernment action led by Mahmud Khudoiberdiev, there were allegations of
 heavy-handed treatment of civilians in the Leninabad region by government forces
 seeking to identify potential insurgents and locate caches of weapons allegedly left
 behind by Khudoiberdiev's forces. There are credible reports that Ministry of Inte-
 rior troops killed civilians during and after May and July clashes near Dushanbe.
 The armed opposition committed serious abuses, including killings and abduc-
 tions. There were credible reports that UTO units threatened, extorted, and abused
 the civilian populations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Othe, Extrajudicial Killing.-There were scores of extrajudicial
 killings, but it was difficult to attribute responsibility in many individual cases.
 Some killings were committed by competing government forces for varying motives,
 both political and economic; some by the opposition; and some by independent war-
 lords.
 On April 29, fighting broke out between opposition troops and government secu-
 rity forces in Kofarnihon and spread to eastern Dushanbe. Human Rights Watch re-
 ported that, according to witnesses, the opposition troops retreated from the area
 soon after the arrival of government tanks and reinforcements. Subsequently, gov-
 ernment forces burned residential buildings and attacked persons perceived to be
 opposition sympathizers. The OSCE, the UNMOT, and the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) estimate that between 25 and 35 civilians were killed. The
 Government created a commission in May to investigate the incidents, but it has
 not issued a report or taken significant action against the perpetrators by year's
 end.
 On July 1, government forces launched a raid against a renegade opposition com-
 mander east of Dushanbe. The opposition alleged that Ministry of Interior troops
 killed civilians and looted and destroyed houses during the raid.
 A number of local officials, businessmen, and professional figures were killed dur-
 ing the year, for a variety of political, economic, and ethnic reasons. Victims in-
 cluded UTO field commander Usmon Khojaev, Shahrinau district chairman
 Galandar Haidarov, Tursunzade mayor Nurullo Khairulloev, and Mullo Giyomiddin,
 the imam of the central mosque in Dushanbe (see Section 1.b.). Few suspects have
 been identified; the Government has investigated some high profile cases, usually
 without any results. The competence of those efforts as well as their independence
 has been questioned. A number of apparent murders have been essentially con-
 cealed, with official news noting only that the individual had died.
 Harsh prison conditions and lack of food and adequate medical treatment resulted
 in a significant number of deaths in custody (see Section 1.c.).
 Six individuals charged with participating in the April 1997 assassination attempt
 on President Rahmanov in Khujand were sentenced to death in March. The Govern-
 ment asserted that Mahmud Khudoiberdiev's group was responsible for the October
 16, 1997 attack on the Presidential Guards. No progress was reported on investiga-
 tions into the 1997 killings of several Russian servicemen. Also there has been no
 reported progress in the investigations into the 1996 murder of the mufti of
 Tajikistan or the murder of the prominent senior academic, Muhammad Osimi.
 There was no official action against government forces for the deaths of 26 prisoners
 when they retook Khojand prison in 1997.
 Opposition forces also committed extrajudicial killings. After the July 20 killing
 of four UNMOT personnel in the opposition-held Karotegin Valley, United Nations
 observers were withdrawn temporarily from field posts throughout the country.
 Other U.N. and most international nongovernmental organization operations were
 suspended in the Karotegin Valley pending resolution of the case. The Government
 and the UTO appear to have cooperated on the investigation. Three suspects, re-
 ported to be opposition fighters, were arrested in late August. Since then there has
 been no further progress reported on the case, and the trial had not begun by year's
 end. There were also clashes between government and opposition troops that oc-
 curred near the town of Kofarnihon on March 24 and 25, violating the peace ac-
 cords. The fighting resulted in a significant number of casualties and POW's. Rep-
 resentatives of the Commission on National Reconciliation were dispatched to the
 
 
 1536
 
 area and succeeded in negotiating the release of the captured soldiers and restoring
 calm.
 b. Disappearance.-There were a number of disappearances during the year. The
 taking of hostages for revenge or as bargaining chips in negotiations is becoming
 increasingly common. The bodies of a number of persons who were kidnaped and
 killed were found.
 On July 28, the imam of the central mosque, Mullo Giyomiddin, was kidnaped by
 an unknown group near Dushanbe. His body was found some days later. His succes-
 sor, Mullo Khudoiberdi, was kidnaped on September 3, but was released after a few
 days.
 On June 11, UNMOT staff members were detained, beaten, and robbed by an un-
 known armed group near Hoit in the Karotegin Valley. They were released the same
 day.
 Political pressure and a lack of professional resources hamper government efforts
 to investigate disappearances. There were no developments in the 1996 disappear-
 ance of Zafar Rahmonov, the opposition cochairman of the Joint Commission on
 cease-fire observation.
 Opposition forces based near Kofarnihon, just east of Dushanbe, carried out a va-
 riety bf attacks against police checkpoints and kidnaped a number of Tajik officials
 and civilians during the year. Bobojon Murodov, deputy chairman of the Dushanbe
 city government, was taken hostage by a UTO armed group and was released only
 after the chairman of the UTO negotiated with the hostage takers.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits such practices, but in practice the Government violates such pro-
 hibitions. Security officials, particularly those in the Ministry of Interior, regularly
 beat detainees in custody and use systematic beatings to extort confessions. There
 were credible allegations that security forces illegally detained, mistreated, and beat
 members of opposition parties or their relatives (see Section 1.d.). Human Rights
 Watch reported that the Government acknowledged that the security forces were
 corrupted by criminal elements and that most citizens chose to keep silent in the
 face of official mistreatment rather than risk retaliation by the police. In the south-
 ern region of Shaartuz, the Tadjik Border Forces (TBF) control much of the drug
 trade, and the local population made numerous complaints of harassment and
 human rights abuses against the TBF.
 Three bombs exploded in Dushanbe in October. Two wvere at the 'Ministry of Inte-
 rior and the Ministry of Defense. There were no injuries and only minimal property
 damage. There were no reports of any arrests.
 Prison conditions remain harsh and life threatening. Prisons generally are over-
 crowded, unsanitary, and disease-ridden, producing serious threats to many pris-
 oners' health. This problem reflects in part the self-funded status of most prisons,
 under which before 1992 prisoners grew much of their own food or made goods for
 sale. The general collapse of governmental programs and of the economy also meant
 the virtual disappearance of these programs. Although conditions in most prisons
 were alleviated somewhat due to a food program sponsored by the ICRC, the pro-
 gram was discontinued in July. Some food production has resumed, but it is still
 inadequate. Family members are allowed access to prisoners only after a guilty ver-
 dict, in accordance with the law.
 I Abdulhafiz Abdullajonov, the brother of a political opponent of the President, was
 arrested in May 1997 on narcotics charges that appear fabricated. Despite appeals
 for clemency based on a diagnosis of terminal cancer, Abdullajonov remained in
 prison and claimed to have been denied proper medical treatment. He was sen-
 tenced to death on March 12 (see Section I.e.).
 There was no official action against government forces for the deaths of 26 pris-
 oners when they retook Khojand prison in 1997.
 The ICRC succeeded in getting permission for access to convicted prisoners but
 not those in pretrial detention (where most abuses occur) despite written assurances
 from senior government officials (see Section 4).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exilp.-The Criminal Code has not been amend-
 ed significantly since independence, and it therefore retains many of the defects in-
 herited. from Sbviet times. The Government continued to arbitrarily arrest and de-
 tain citizens. The Government claims that revision of the Criminal Code is a high
 priority, but due to the size and complexity of the code, the small parliamentary
 staff, and limited time in session for the Majlisi OHl, progress has been slow. There
 is no projected completion date. The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention
 and provides few checks on the power of procurators and police to arrest persons.
 Public order, Which broke down during the civil war, has yet to be restored fully,
 and the virtual immunity from prosecution of armed militia groups has eroded fur-
 ther the integrity of the legal system.
 
 
 1537
 Police legally may detain persons without a warrant for a period of 72 hours, and
 the procurator's office may do so for a period of 10 days ater which the accused
 must be charged officially. At that point, the Criminal Code permits pretrial deten-
 tion for up to 15 months. The first 3 months of detention are at the discretion of
 the local procurator, the second 3 months must be approved at the regional level,
 and the P rocurator General must sanction the remaining time in detention. The
 Criminal Code maintains that all investigations must be completed 1 month before
 the 15-month maximum in order to allow the defense time to examine government
 evidence. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a preliminary judicial
 hearing on the charge or detention. In criminal cases, detainees may be released
 and restricted to their place of residence pending trial. Once a case is entered for
 trial, the law states that it must be brought before a judge within 28 days. However,
 it is common for cases to languish for many months before trial begins; there is no
 provision for bail.
 The Government made politically motivated arrests, and there are credible allega-
 tions of dozens of cases of illegal government detention of members of opposition po-
 litical parties or their relatives. In most cases, the security officers, princi ally per-
 sonnel from the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the Ministry of Security, o not ob-
 tain arrest warrants and do not bring charges. Those released sometimes claimed
 that they were mistreated and beaten during detention.
 Opposition sources maintain that security forces detained dozens of persons un-
 lawfully without charge. Since the law precludes visits to persons in pretrial deten-
 tion, it is not possible to assess these allegations. There could be as many as several
 hundred political detainees, but the absence of ICRC or other access to these per-
 sons makes any estimate uncertain.
 The OSCE reports that border force units routinely take family members of de-
 serters hostage and hold them until the deserters return to duty.
 The Constitution states that no one can be exiled without a legal basis; no laws
 have been passed so far setting out any legal basis for exile. There were no reports
 of forced exile. Some opposition party activists are in self-imposed exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The 1994 Constitution states that judges are inde-
 pendent and subordinate only to the Constitution and the law, and prohibits inter-
 ference in their activities; however, judicial officials at all levels of the court system
 are influenced heavily by both the political leadership and, in many instances,
 armed paramilitary groups. Under the Constitution, the President has the right,
 with confirmation by the Parliament, both to appoint and to dismiss judges and
 prosecutors. Judges at the local, regional, and republic level are for the most part
 poorly trained and lack understanding of the concept of an independent judiciary.
 The court system, largely unmodified from the Soviet period, includes city, dis-
 trict, regional, and national levels, with a parallel military court system. Higher
 courts serve as appellate courts for the lower ones. The Constitution establishes ad-
 ditional courts, including a Constitutional Court. This court began to function in
 1997.
 According to the law, trials are public, except in cases involving national security
 or the protection of minors. The court appoints an attorney for those who do not
 have one. Defendants may choose their own attorney but may not necessarily choose
 among court-appointed defenders. In practice arrested persons often are denied
 prompt, and in some cases any, access to an attorney.
 Bahrom Sodirov, who was charged in the February 1997 kidnaping of the Min-
 ister of Security, 4 UNMOT personnel, and 11 others, was arrested soon after the
 hostages were released. His trial, from which observers were barred, was suspended
 in late 1997 and has not resumed.
 The procurator's office is responsible for conducting all investigations of alleged
 criminal conduct. In theory both defendant and counsel have the right to review all
 government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence and testimony.
 No groups are barred from testifying, and all testimony theoretically is given equal
 weight, regardless of ethnicity or gender of the witness. Ministry of Justice officials
 maintain that defendants benefit from the presumption of innocence, despite the un-
 modified Soviet legal statute, which presumes the guilt of all persons brought to
 trial. Thus, in practice, bringing charges tends to suggest guilt to most Tajiks.
 Pressure continues to be exerted on the judicial system by local strongmen, their
 armed paramilitary groups, and vigilantes who operate outside of government con-
 trol, sometimes leading to the dismissal of charges and dropping of cases. Bribery
 of prosecutors and judges also is considered to be widespread.
 Abdulhafiz Abdullajonov, who was incarcerated without adequate medical treat-
 ment (see Section 1.c.) on apparently fabricated narcotics charges, was convicted
 and sentenced to death on March 12 on assassination charges. His codefendants
 later stated that they had been forced under duress, including beating, to incrimi-
 
 
 1538
 
 nate Abdullajonov. His trial was closed and the evidence on which his conviction
 was based was-not made public. Abdullajonov's arrest and unfair trial were politi-
 cally motivated and he should be considered a political prisoner. At year's end, his
 circumstances were unknown.
 The Government holds political prisoners, including opposition party activists, al-
 though estimates of the number of prisoners vary widely. The Government and the
 Tajik opposition exchanged multiple lists of prisoners of war (POW's) and political
 prisoners for exchange as a result of the 1997 inter-Tajik talks in Moscow. The larg-
 est opposition list totaled 700 names of political prisoners believed by the opposition
 to be in government custody, while the largest government list totaled over 400 sol-
 diers believed by the Government to be held by the opposition. Both lists undoubt-
 edly include many names of persons missing, dead, or in the case of POW's held
 by the opposition, who had defected. The Government has released the majority of
 the UTO prisoners, although the UTO still claims that about 350 of its supporters
 are in government prisons or other detention. The Government claims that those
 still held are criminals not subject to amnesty. The opposition UTO has stated that
 they have released all government POW's.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and prohibits interference
 with correspondence, telephone conversations, and postal and communication rights,
 except "in cases prescribed by law." The authorities, however, continued to infringe
 on citizens' right to privacy. Except for some special circumstances, police may not
 enter and search a private home without the approval of the procurator. When they
 do enter and search without prior approval, they must then inform the procurator
 within 24 hours. Police also are permitted to enter and search homes without per-
 mission if they have compelling reason to believe a delay in obtaining a warrant
 would impair national security. There is no judicial review of police searches con-
 ducted without a warrant.
 Government forces beat and arrested the relatives of members of opposition par-
 ties (see Sections 1.c. and 1.d.). Security forces also detained relatives of deserters
 in order to compel deserters to return to duty (see Section 1.d.). In April government
 forces burned residential buildings (see Section l.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite the Constitution and the 1991 law pro-
 tecting freedom of speech and the press, the Government severely restricts freedom
 of expression in practice. Journalists, broadcasters, and individual citizens who dis-
 agree with government policies cannot speak freely or critically. The Government
 exercises control over the media both overtly through legislation and less obviously
 through such mechanisms'as "friendly advice" to reporters on what news should not
 be covered. The Government also controlled the printing presses and the supply of
 newsprint and broadcasting facilities, and subsidizes virtually all publications and
 productions. Editors fearful of reprisals exercise careful self-censorship.
 Two new opposition newspapers began publication. Sadoi Majahed (Voice of the
 Mujahad) is published in Gharm and Kofarnihon and calls itself the newspaper of
 the UTO military. Originally published in Afghanistan in the early 1990's, it began
 publishing in Tajikistan in April. Beginning in May, Muzhda (Good News) has been
 published by opposition members of the Commission on National Reconciliation
 using copy machines in their offices in Dushanbe. Both papers have very small cir-
 culation.
 In July the Government revoked the accreditation of Russian television cor-
 respondent Elena Masyuk and expelled her from the country based on the Law on
 Press and Mass Media that prohibits the abuse of freedom of expression. The accom-
 panying government statement accused Masyuk of attempting to discredit the Tajik
 leadership and interfering in the country's internal affairs.
 The number of local newspapers is increasing, but only a handful of them attempt
 to cover serious news. Several are organs of political parties or blocs. There were
 allegations of threats of closures against newspapers critical of the Government.
 There is one national television service with several local offices that cover regional
 and local issues from an official point of view. There are 11 independent television
 stations, 2 of which are not functioning due to financial problems. Some have inde-
 pendent studio facilities and do not have to use official studios.
 Safareli Kenjaev, chairman of the parliamentary committee responsible for broad-
 casting, initially had trouble publishing his Socialist Party newspaper Ittihod. After
 removing an editor, however, he has not had further difficulty.
 To obtain licenses,- independent television stations must work through two govern-
 ment agencies, the Ministry of Communications and the State Committee on Radio
 and Television. At every stage of the very time consuming bureaucratic process,
 
 
 1539
 there are high official and unofficial fees. Nevertheless, no station that wanted a
 license has been prevented from obtaining one.
 Academic expression is limited principally by the complete reliance of scientific in-
 stitutes upon government funding, and in practical terms by the need to find alter-
 nate employment to generate sufficient income, leaving little time for academic writ-
 ing. The assailants of the rector of the Tajik technological university in 1997 were
 not identified or apprehended. He has, however, continued his work without further
 interference.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly; in practice, however, the authorities exercise strict
 control over organizations and activities of a political nature. Nonpolitical associa-
 tions, such as trade unions, are allowed to meet. Registered organizations must
 apply for a permit from the local executive committee in order legally to organize
 any public assembly or demonstration. Sometimes this right is honored, but the
 Government subsequently has been known to take reprisals against organizers.
 There were demonstrations in the Penjikent district in June and Isfara in May in
 which persons gathered to demand the release of the imams of the local mosques.
 Authorities arrested some of the participants in these demonstrations. On February
 28, a scheduled meeting of the members of the Congress of Popular Unity, led by
 prominent politician and businessman Saifuddin Turayev, was prevented from tak-
 ingplace by government troops.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association; however, although this right
 is permitted for nonpolitical associations (including trade unions), freedom of asso-
 ciation is circumscribed by the requirement in the law on nongovernmental associa-
 tions that all organizations first must register with the Ministry of Justice. This
 process often is slowed by the requirement to submit documents in both Russian
 and Tajik. The Ministry of Justice's verification of the text inevitably delays the
 granting of registration. In practice the authorities exercise strict control over orga-
 nizations and activities of a political nature. Once registered an organization may
 apply for a permit to hold a public assembly or demonstration.
 There are 12 political parties officially registered with the Government. The new
 Party of Justice and Progress was allowed to register this year. Three of the four
 political parties suspended in 1993--the Islamic Revival Party, the Rastohez Na-
 tional Movement, and the Lali Badakhshan Movement for the Autonomy of the
 Pamirs-and a branch of the Democratic Party remain suspended (The Democratic
 Party was banned in 1993. In 1994 a splinter group was formed, and in 1995 the
 other part of the party reregistered under the old title of Democratic Party. Thus
 there are two Democratic Parties functioning, one banned and one legal.) The Agrar-
 ian Party has not been able to register, but its application was not refused and it
 was suggested that the party attempt again to register in 1999.
 On May 23, the Parliament passed a law prohibiting the creation of political par-
 ties with a religious orientation. The opposition UTO, intenational organizations,
 and foreign governments strongly criticized the law for violating the spirit and the
 letter of the 1997 peace agreement. On June 2, President Rahmonov established a
 Special Conciliation Commission to resolve the dispute. On June 18, the Commis-
 sion reported that it had devised compromise language for the law, banning political
 parties from receiving support from religious institutions. A new version of the law
 including the compromise language was passed in the November, parliamentary ses-
 sion.
 In some cases, members of suspended political parties have been unable to find
 employment, apparently at the direction of the security services.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and
 neither the law nor the Government places restrictions on religious worship. How-
 ever, according to the Law on Freedom of Faith, the Committee on Religious Affairs
 under the Council of Ministers registers religious communities and monitors the ac-
 tivities of the various religious establishments. While the official reason given to jus-
 tify registration is to ensure that religious groups act in accordance with the law,
 the practical purpose is to ensure that they do not become overly political. Although
 unregistered, recently organized religious communities, such as Baha'i and Hare
 Krishna groups function with no apparent formal restriction and only limited expe-
 riences of prejudice. However, regularly throughout the year, President Rahmanov
 aggressively defended secularism and occasionally criticized Islam as a political
 threat.
 In 1997 the Council of the Islamic Center was subordinated to the Government
 Committee on Religious Affairs. This move took place quietly, and with no apparent
 objection from the observant Muslim community.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose their place
 
 
 1540
 of residence, to emigrate, and to return. In practice the Government generally re-
 spects these rights, with some restrictions.
 The Government has stipulated that both citizens and foreigners are prohibited
 from traveling within a 25-kilometer zone along the republic's borders with China
 and Afghanistan without permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This re-
 striction is not always enforced along the western part of the border with Afghani-
 stan, but a special visa generally is required for travelers, including international
 workers and diplomats, to Gorno-Badakhshan. Travel to border areas in the south-
 west is not restricted significantly, except occasionally at the border, which is closed
 intermittently by one side or the other.
 'Residents of Dushanbe and those travelers who wish to remain longer than 3 days
 are supposed to register with central authorities, and regulations require registra-
 tion at the local Ministry of Interior office upon arrival and departure from a city.
 However, these regulations largely are ignored in practice. There are no legal re-
 strictions on changing residence or workplace.
 The Ministry of Security inhibits freedom of travel by requiring citizens who wish
 to travel abroad to obtain an exit visa. This process sometimes includes lengthy
 interviews. The Ministry of Security sometimes withholds or delays exit visas when
 it believes that other ministries or NGO's are infringing upon its jurisdiction and
 have not adhered to its formalities for foreign travel.
 There is no law on emigration. Persons who wish to migrate within the former
 Soviet Union notify the Ministry of Interior of their departure. Persons who wish
 to emigrate beyond the borders of the former Soviet Union must receive the ap-
 proval of the -relevant country's embassy in order to obtain their passport. Persons
 who settle abroad are required to inform the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan inter-
 ests section of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate.  -
 Persons who wish to return to Tajikistan after having emigrated may do so freely
 by submitting their applications to the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests
 section ofthe nearest Russian embassy or consulate. The Government adjudicates
 requests on a case-by-case basis. There is no indication that persons, other than
 those who fled Tajikistan for political reasons after the civil war, are not permitted
 to return freely. Some persons currently active with the Tajik opposition, whose
 travel documents expired, at times have had difficulty obtaining new documents
 permitting them to return.
 There remain over 12,000 internally displaced persons (IDP's) as a result of the
 1992 civil war; however, the vast majority no longer wish to return to their previous
 residences. The International Organization for Migration estimates that only ap-
 proximately 1,000 IDP's still await resettlement. These persons live throughout the
 country and are not concentrated in a single geographic area. The Government pro-
 vides protection and modest assistance, and actively cooperates with international
 organizations to resettle them. Resettlement is voluntary; IDP's are not returned
 forcibly to dangerous conditions.
 Under the 1994 refugee law, a person granted refugee status is provided with the
 right to work and to move freely throughout the country. The Central Department
 of Refugee Affairs under the Ministry of Labor has responsibility for the registration
 of refugees.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There were no reports of the forced expulsion of persons with a valid claim
 to refugee status.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution. There is no legal basis for forcible repatriation, nor is there any
 evidence to suggest that it was practiced in 1998. The Government, .particularly the
 Ministry of Labor, worked closely with the UNHCR and the International Organiza-
 tion for Migration on behalf of refugees and internally displaced persons.
 The Government provides first asylum, and has provided it to 1,060 refugees from
 Afghanistan since July 1995. There were no instances of first asylum in 1998.
 The Central Department of Refugee Affairs (CDR), under the Ministry of Labor,
 handles the registration of Afghan refugees, in accordance with the 1951 U.N. Con-
 vention Relating to the Status of Refugees and Tajikistan's 1994 Law on Refugees.
 An unresolved problem stems from the unofficial government policy of denying offi-
 cial status to Afghan spouses of returning Tajik refugees. Although the UNHCR has
 aided their admission to the country (avoiding their being jailed as illegal immi-
 grants), their legal status remains uncertain and the Government took no action on
 the problem during the year.
 Following the signing of the 1997 peace accords, all Tajik refugees from northern
 Afghanistan who wished to return as well as thousands from the Commonwealth
 of Independent'States (CIS) returned to Tajikistan. There continue to be delays as-
 
 
 1541
 
 sociated with the occupation of the returnees homes by popular front militia loyal-
 ists; at year's end, 294 families in Khatlon and another 100 in Dushanbe still re-
 quire housing assistance.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Government limits the right of citizens to change their government peacefully
 and freely. Although the peace accords signed in June 1997 called for parliamentary
 elections in 1998, the Commission for National Reconciliation has not yet completed
 necessary preliminary work, and the elections were not expected to be held before
 1999 at the earliest. The Government of President Rahmonov remains dominated
 by Kulobi regional political interests, although several senior Kulobis were removed
 from office during the year. The prime ministers have been from the northern
 Khojand region.
 Some opposition party activists remain either jailed or in self-exile abroad, but
 since the signing of the peace accords, senior members of the United Tajik Opposi-
 tion, including its leader Said Abdullo Nuri, have returned to the country. Nuri's
 deputy within the UTO, Akbar Turajonzoda, also has returned and, under the terms
 of the peace agreement, which allocated 30 percent of government positions to UTO
 candidates, has taken the post of first deputy prime minister.
 The last parliamentary (Majlisi Oli) elections; conducted in 1995, were marked by
 numerous irregularities, such as voter intimidation and ballot-box stuffing, and did
 not result in a truly independent parliament. Nevertheless, a number of Members
 of Parliament lead parties or groups that oppose the Government vigorously on spe-
 cific issues.
 There are no formal barriers to women's participation in the electoral process, al-
 though since the removal of Soviet-era quotas the number of female deputies has
 declined. At year's end, there were five female deputies in the Parliament, one fe-
 male deputy serving as deputy prime minister, one female deputy chairman of the
 Parliament, one female minister, and several female deputy ministers.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government's record on dealing with international and nongovernmental in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights abuses was mixed. Fear of persecution by gov-
 ernment or extragovernmental elements has discouraged efforts by citizens to form
 their own human rights organizations. The Government has not prevented citizens'
 and government officials' participation in international and local seminars spon-
 sored by the OSCE, the ICRC, United Nations agencies, NGO's, and foreign govern-
 ments on such topics as the rule of law, an independent judiciary, and international
 humanitarian law. Discussion at such seminars, including those held in Tajikistan,
 at times has been critical of the Government.
 The Government initially refused to register Human Rights Watch in 1997 as an
 international organization, asserting that it did nothing to benefit citizens, but later
 agreed to its registration.
 The Government, particularly the Ministry of Labor, worked closely with the
 UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) on behalf of refu-
 gees and internally displaced persons. It also worked with the UNMOT and the
 U.N. Secretary General's Special Representative on the return of refugees from Af-
 ghanistan, the CIS, and internally displaced persons from Gorno-Badakshan.
 The OSCE's mission continues to monitor human rights issues with the help of
 three field offices. The level of local government cooperation these offices enjoy var-
 ies. The Shaartuz office has good relations with local authorities, but the field officer
 in Pyanj was accused of destabilizing the region and was ordered out of the district
 in May. He was allowed to return only briefly and his return required advance per-
 mission from the district chairman, who also asked him to obtain prior approval for
 all meetings with local citizens. This requirement was revoked after 2 weeks, and
 he is working in Dusti but does not go to Pyanj. The OSCE has received government
 permission to open two additional field offices in Gharm and Khojand.
 The ICRC intensified contacts with government entities concerned with prisoners,
 but the Government continues to refuse the ICRC unconditional access to prisons
 in accordance with its standard modalities, despite letters from senior government
 officials that such access would be forthcoming.
 While the Government agreed to establish a national human rights institution
 and ombudsman position with OSCE financial support, it decided in 1996 to estab-
 lish such functions itself. However, thus far no institution or ombudsman position
 has been established.
 
 
 1542
 
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the rights and freedoms of every person regardless
 of nationality, race, sex, language, religious beliefs, political persuasion, social sta-
 tus, knowledge, and property. It also explicitly states that men and women have the
 same rights. In practice, however, there is discrimination as a result of cultural tra-
 ditions and the lingering hostilities from the 1992 civil war.
 Women.-Wife beating is a common problem. In both urban and rural areas,
 many cases of wife beating go unreported and many of those cases reported are not
 investigated. There is a widespread reluctance to discuss the issue or provide assist-
 ance to women in abusive situations. In addition abduction of young women, who
 are raped or forced to marry their abductors, is widely reported, and there are reli-
 able reports of young women prevented from leaving the country due to threats
 against their families should they do so.
 The Criminal Code prohibits rape, although it is widely believed that most rape
 cases are unreported. One rape crisis center was established by a local NGO in
 Dushanbe in 1993. There are no special police units for handling these cases. The
 threat of rape is reported reliably as being used to coerce women. The situation is
 exacerbated by a general decline in public order, so that in many cities, including
 Dushanbe, women exercise: particular care in their movement, especially at night.
 Laws exist against keeping brothels, procuring, making or selling pornography,
 infecting another person with a venereal disease, -and sexual exploitation of women.
 However, prostitutes operate openly at night in certain urban areas.
 There are credible reports of trafficking in women, particularly among groups in-
 volved in the narcotics trade with Afghanistan. Although such trafficking is illegal,
 the Government has taken no significant action against it.
 There have been reports of physical harassment of women by conservative Mus-
 lims in rural areas for not wearing traditional attire.
 According to the law, women have equal rights with men. Inheritance laws do not
 discriminate against women. In practice, however, inheritances may pass dispropor-
 tionately to sons. Girls often are pressured to marry men that they do not choose
 themselves. Although illegal polygyny is increasingly common.
 The participation of women in the work force and in institutes of higher learning
 is one of the more positive legacies of the Soviet era. There is no formal discrimina-
 tion against women in employment, education, or housing, and in urban areas
 women can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enterprises.
 However, divorce rates in urban areas are comparatively high, and women tend to
 carry the burden of child-rearing and household management whether married or
 divorced. In rural areas, women tend to marry younger, have larger families, and
 receive less university education than women in cities. In rural and traditional
 areas, women receive less education in general, often leaving school after the eighth
 year. Due to the prevalence of large families, women in rural areas are also much
 less likely to work outside the home. Articles in the Criminal Code protect women's
 rights in marriage and family matters.
 Children.-The extensive government social security network for child welfare
 continued to deteriorate. Women are provided 3 years of maternity leave and
 monthly subsidies for each child; hdalth care is free. Education is compulsory until
 age 16, but the law is not enforced. The Government's lack of financial resources
 left it unable to fulfill many of its obligations for the provision of subsidies and care
 for maternal and child health.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Law on Social Protection of Invalids stipu-
 lates the right of the disabled to employment and adequate medical care. In prac-
 tice, however,- the Government does not require employers to provide physical access
 for the disabled. Financial constraints and the absence of basic technology to assist
 the disabled result, in practice, in high unemployment and widespread discrimina-
 tion. There is no law mandating accessibility for the disabled. There are facilities
 for the mentally disabled, however, funding is limited and the facilities are in poor
 condition. Several international NGO's provided limited assistance.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslim leaders occasionally have expressed concern that
 minority religious groups undermine national unity.
 Muslims have harassed non-Muslim women for-not wearing traditional attire.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-After the civil war, over 75,000 people of pri-
 marily Gharmi and Pamiri origin fled to- Afghanistan to avoid reprisals by
 progovernment forces. Most of these persons returned in 1994, 1995, and 1996, and
 many more returned after the June 1997 signing of the peace accords. All refugees
 in Afghanistan who wished to do so have returned. In general security for returning
 
 
 1543
 refugees was good, and the OSCE reported that the large inflow of returnees that
 began in the summer of 1997 suffered virtually no harassment.
 With the exception of the trilingual (Tajik/Uzbek/Russian) school structure, Uzbek
 has no official status, although Uzbeks constitute nearly one-quarter of the popu-
 lation. The Government permits radio and television broadcasts in Russian and
 Uzbek, in addition to Tajik. In practice Russian is the language of interethnic com-
 munication and widely used in government. Ethnic Russians and related Russian
 speakers, for example, Ukrainians, make up less than 2 percent of the population.
 While the Government repeatedly has expressed its desire for the ethnic Russian
 and Slavic population to remain, economic conditions provide little incentive for
 them to do so, and some local Russians and other Slavs perceive an increase in neg-
 ative social attitudes toward them. A Slavic university and an exclusively ethnic
 Russian high school operate in Dushanbe with Russian as the language of instruc-
 tion. An agreement ratified by the Russian Duma in December 1996 allows for dual
 Russian and Tajik citizenship.
 There is substantial underrepresentation of the Uzbek minority in official posi-
 tions. Uzbek language newspapers, television broadcasts, and schools have declined
 significantly in number since 1992. Since the signing of the peace treaty in 1997,
 there have been multiple murders of ethnic Uzbeks in the Parij district. As a result
 of these attacks, more than 100 ethnic Uzbek families have moved to other locations
 in the district where Uzbeks predominate or to neighboring CIS countries. In an ef-
 fort to reduce ethnic tensions, the local government has organized meetings to ease
 conflicts. A number of suspects for the murders of Uzbeks in July were arrested.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Law on Social Organization and the Law on
 Trade Union Rights and Guarantees provide all citizens with the right of associa-
 tion, which includes the right to form and join associations without prior authoriza-
 tion, to organize territorially, and to form and join federations.
 The Federation of Trade Unions, a holdover from the Communist era, remains the
 dominant labor organization, although it has since shed its subordination to the
 Communist Party. The Federation consists of 20 professional trade unions and
 claims 1.5 million members, virtually all nonagricultural workers. The separate
 Trade Union of Non-State Enterprises has registered unions in over 3,000 small and
 medium-sized enterprises, totaling about 37,000 employees, although many of these
 enterprises are not functioning due to the general economic depression. The same
 is true for many members of the Federation of Trade Unions. The Council of Min-
 isters formally consults both labor unions during the drafting of social welfare and
 worker rights legislation.
 The Law on Tariff Agreements and Social Partnerships mandates arbitration be-
 fore a union legally may call a strike. Depending on the scale of the labor disagree-
 ment, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or governmental level. In
 the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strike, but both labor
 unions have disavowed publicly the utility of strikes in a period of deepening eco-
 nomic crisis and high unemployment and have espoused compromise between man-
 agement and workers.
 There were no official, union-sanctioned strikes, and wildcat strikes, which last
 occurred in 1996, are not known to have occurred during the year.
 The law provides citizens with the right to affiliate with international organiza-
 tions freely
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Employees, members of the trade union, and management participate in
 collective bargaining at the company level. Negotiations involving an industrial sec-
 tor include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the union's steering
 committee for that particular sector. As the economic situation worsens, it is becom-
 ing increasingly difficult for enterprises to engage in effective collective bargaining.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade
 union membership, nor may a worker be fired solely for union activity. Any com-
 plaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union activist are first con-
 sidered by a local labor union committee and, if necessary, raised to the level of the
 Supreme Court and investigated by the Ministry of Justice. The law compels an em-
 ployer found guilty of firing an employee based on union activity to reinstate the
 employee.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except in cases defined in law. No labor laws have been passed since the
 
 
 1544
 
 adoption of the new Constitution. Neither the Law on Labor Protection nor the Law
 on Employment, both predating the 1994 Constitution, specifically prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The Soviet practice of compelling students to pick cotton was
 banned officially in 1989, although high school students in some regions still are
 sent to the fields to pick cotton, particularly in the Leninabad area, sometimes with
 compensation. Residents of state or collective farms still may be required to pick cot-
 ton, although wages usually are not paid and these institutions no longer provide
 the services they once did.
 Although forced or bonded labor by children is not prohibited by law, other than
 traditional family participation in agricultural or home craftsman work, there is no
 pattern of such activity.
 d. Status of 'Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-According
 to labor laws, the minimum age for the employment of children is 16, the age at
 which children also may leave school legally. With the concurrence of the local trade
 union, employment may begin at the age of 15. By law workers under the age of
 18 may work no more   an 6 hours a day and 36 hours per week. However, children
 as young as 7 years of age can perform household-based labor and participate in
 agricultural work, which is classified as family assistance. Many children under 10
 years of age work in the bazaars or sell newspapers or consumables on the street.
 Trade unions are responsible for reporting any violations in the employment of mi-
 nors. Cases not resolved between the union and the employer may be brought before
 the Procurator General, who may investigate and charge the manager of the enter-
 prise with violations of the Labor Code.
 Although forced or bonded labor by children is not prohibited by law, there is no
 societal pattern of such activity (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The President, on the advice of the Ministry
 of Labor and in consultation with trade unions, sets the minimum monthly wage.
 The nominal minimum wage per month of $1.20 (1,000 Tajik rubles) falls far short
 of providing a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The Government
 recognizes this problem and has retained certain subsidies for workers and their
 families at the minimum  wage. Although the Government adopted a wage index-
 ation law in 1993 and inflation has been high, the law has not been implemented.
 Although slightly improved over 1997, the economy remained extremely weak dur-
 ing the year with a majority of industrial operations standing idle. As factories and
 enterprises either remained closed or were shut down, workers were laid off or fur-
 loughed for extended periods. Some establishments, both governmental and private,
 compensated their employees in kind With food commodities or with the products
 produced by the enterprise. The employee could then sell or barter those products
 in local private markets. Citizens in rural areas intensified cultivation of food crops
 on their private or rented plots, while even urban residents started tending small
 vegetable gardens and raising livestock.
 The legal workweek for adults (over age 18) is 40 hours. Overtime payment is
 mandated by law, with the first 2, hours of overtime to be paid at 12 times the
 normal rate and the rest of the overtime hours at double time.
 The Government has established occupational health and safety standards, but
 these fall far below accepted international norms, and the Government does not en-
 force them in practice. The enforcement of work standards is the responsibility of
 the State Technical Supervision Committee under the Council of Ministers. While
 new statistics were not available, it is virtually certain, given the continuing eco-
 nomic decline, that 1993 statistics, which reported that over one-fifth of the popu-
 lation worked in substandard conditions, greatly underreported the number working
 in substandard conditions. Workers can leave their jobs with 2 months' notice, but,
 given the bleak employment situation, few choose to do so. The Law on Labor Pro-
 tection provides that workers can remove themselves from hazardous conditions
 without risking loss of employment.
