Tajikistan
Human rights violations in Tajikistan remain rampant, affecting disparate spheres
of life, from housing to religion, political and media pluralism, and treatment in
custody. As the Tajik government implements a broad urban renewal plan in cities
around the country, it has forcibly evicted residents from their homes, offering little
compensation and often relocating them to remote city outskirts. Due to the
lack of an independent and effective judiciary, those who challenge evictions in
court rarely have access to an effective remedy.
Torture is routinely used by law enforcement officials, and the Tajik government
continues to deny human rights groups access to places of detention. In early
2009 Tajikistan adopted a new religion law that expanded already significant government
restrictions on faith groups and worshippers.
The global economic recession has further weakened Tajikistan’s shaky economy,
which is heavily dependent on remittances from migrant workers working mostly
in Russia. Remittances fell by 30 percent in the first quarter of 2009 compared to
the same period in 2008, pushing even more Tajiks into poverty.
Institutional Human Rights Reform
In March 2008 President Emomali Rahmon signed a law that called for the creation
of a Human Rights Ombudsman’s Office. In May 2009 Zarif Alizoda, the
president’s former legal adviser, was named ombudsman. According to human
rights groups in Tajikistan, Alizoda’s office is still hiring staff and setting up procedures,
and has yet to begin work in earnest. Still, the ombudsman did meet with
representatives of Tajik civil society organizations on June 18, when all sides
agreed to hold regular meetings on human rights issues, according to the Bureau
of Human Rights and the Rule of Law, an NGO.
Property Rights and Forced Evictions
The government’s culture of obfuscation on property rights and on broad public
initiatives has made people vulnerable to eviction as the country’s vast urban
redevelopment projects unfold. The public has no information about the planned projects, no input into them, and individuals have no say about whether they can
even remain in or return to refurbished areas. They receive no information about
the status of their current housing or their future housing options, and residents
of an area where building is set to begin only find out about the loss of their
property when they receive official notification to vacate their home and move to
a new address. Such notification can occur months before an expected move, or
days before. Sergei Romanov of the Bureau of Human Rights and the Rule of Law
estimates that roughly 650 people have been forced from their homes since the
urban renewal process began in 2006.
Residents receive inadequate compensation for their property. Those who lived in
the city centers have been relocated to the outskirts, and often to much smaller
apartments. When property owners seek legal recourse, they almost always lose.
Residents who resist eviction face a range of criminal charges.
A substantial portion of the population in rural areas and in the capital,
Dushanbe, lives in so-called “unauthorized” housing. The maze of bureaucracies
that homeowners have to navigate to build a house is so daunting—in 2008,
building a new home required 49 different government documents—that few people
have the legally binding documents for their residences. As a consequence,
they have no right at all to compensation when the state forces them to move.
Torture
Torture is practiced by law enforcement officers and within the penitentiary system
in a culture of near-impunity. It is often used to extract confessions from
defendants, who during initial detention are often denied access to family and
legal counsel. To date the Tajik government has refused all requests from human
rights groups to visit detention sites, interrogation rooms, and prisons.
In February 2009 Khurshed Islamov was arrested on suspicion of the theft of
US$40,000 from a casino in the Dushanbe suburbs. His attorney was only
allowed to see him after seven days, and then only in the presence of law
enforcement personnel. His mother, Nazokat Islamova, filed a complaint with the
prosecutor’s office alleging that her son had been tortured during his interrogation:
when she saw her son shortly after he had been interrogated, he could not move without help because of his injuries. In July Islamov was sentenced to 23
years in prison.
Tajikistan’s definition of torture does not fully comply with recommendations
made to the country by the United Nations Committee against Torture in
November 2006. In a small sign of progress, local and international human rights
groups recently completed a campaign to document instances of torture in
Tajikistan, as part of a two-year project funded by the European Union. That project,
which was run in Tajikistan by the Bureau on Human Rights and the Rule of
Law, determined that over the past two years there had been more than 90 cases
of torture.
Freedom of Religion
In March 2009 President Rahmon signed a new religion law that heightens state
repression of faith groups. Tajikistan has long curtailed freedom of religion and,
under the pretext of battling terrorism, has banned several peaceful Muslim
organizations. Under the new law, the state tightened its grip on religious groups:
The government now determines where mosques can be built and how many, and
where sermons can be given; has censorship authority over religious literature
(including material from abroad) and control over children’s religious education;
and faith groups in Tajikistan must get government permission to contact foreign
religious groups. The new law cites the primacy of the Hanafi school of Sunni
Islam in Tajik life, which has alienated ethnic minorities such as Uzbeks and
Pamiris, who practice Ismaili Shiism.
Certain Christian denominations, such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, continue to be
banned in Tajikistan. But the Tajik government has focused its restrictions largely
on Muslims. A ban on the Salafi school of Sunni Islam came into effect in
February 2009; Tajik officials have told rights groups that to be an adherent is not
criminalized, but prosecutors have said that they intend to prosecute Salafists
who propagate their beliefs. The state bans the wearing of headscarves in
schools and universities and has expelled students who violate the prohibition.
There continued to be reports of the Tajik authorities prosecuting alleged members
of Hizb ut-Tahrir, an international Islamic organization that is banned in several
countries in the region, and sentencing them to long prison terms on questionable evidence. In April authorities arrested at least 93 members of the Jamaat
Tabligh movement in three cities including Dushanbe. The government has
refused to release the names of the detained, their exact number, or the reason
for their arrest.
Migrant Workers
Tajikistan’s relentless poverty and high unemployment rate have pushed 797,000
Tajiks— one in eight of the population—to leave the country in search of work.
Most have gone to Russia hoping to find work, very often in the construction sector.
Unlike previous waves of migrants from the former Soviet republics, Tajiks
now seeking work abroad are less well-educated, poorer, and have a weaker command
of Russian, making them highly susceptible to exploitation.
In February 2009 Human Rights Watch released a report documenting widespread
abuse of migrant workers in Russia, including Tajiks. While Human Rights Watch
made recommendations in the report to Russian authorities for halting the
exploitation, it has also urged the government of Tajikistan to take action against
the employment agencies that have sent migrants into forced labor in Russia. To
date, Human Rights Watch has not received a response from the government, and
the employment agencies continue to operate as before.
Key International Actors
Tajikistan’s new religion law drew criticism from the United Nations special rapporteur
on freedom of religion or belief and the United States Commission on
International Religious Freedom (USCIRF). The special rapporteur told the UN
Human Rights Council on March 12 that the law “could lead to undue limitations
on the rights of religious communities and could impermissibly restrict religious
activities of minority communities.” In its 2009 report the USCRIF criticized the
law as “highly restrictive,” and added Tajikistan to its Watch List because of its
“marked decline in respect for and protection of freedom of religion or belief.”
In addition to its annual human rights dialogue on September 23, the European
Union held a civil society seminar in Dushanbe in July on the right to a fair trial
and the independence of the judiciary. Civil society put forth a number of recommendations to bring Tajikistan’s law and practice into compliance with international
standards. At year’s end the EU appeared to be moving ahead with a
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Tajikistan, which had been frozen
for years because of the civil war there.