Tajikistan
The human rights situation in Tajikistan is fragile. Despite reforms on
paper—including a new election law and a moratorium on capital punishment—
the government continues to put pressure on political opposition,
independent media, and independent religious groups. The political
climate has deteriorated as President Emomali Rakhmonov attempts
to consolidate power in advance of 2005 parliamentary and presidential
elections.
Political Opposition
Hizbi Demokrati-Khalkii Tojikston (the People’s Democratic Party of
Tajikistan), led by President Rakhmonov, dominates political life. Under
1997’s power-sharing arrangement, opposition parties are guaranteed 30
percent of top government posts. In January 2004, Rakhmonov replaced
senior government officials from other political parties with members of
his own party, reducing the other parties’ share of top posts to 5 percent.
Rakhmonov’s opponents are vulnerable to prosecution on politicallymotivated
charges. In January 2004, the Supreme Court sentenced
Shamsuddin Shamsuddinov, deputy chairman of Nahzati Islomi
Tojikiston (the Islamic Renaissance Party, IRP)—which participates in
the power-sharing government—to sixteen years in prison on charges of
polygamy, organizing an armed criminal group during the civil war, and
illegally crossing the border. Three other IRP members were given
lengthy prison terms for alleged complicity in Shamsuddinov’s armed
group. Shamsuddinov, who has maintained his innocence since his
arrest in May 2003, alleges he was beaten and tortured with electric
shocks while awaiting trial.
Other opposition parties enjoy limited resources and popular support.
In principle, they are allowed to exist. In practice, the parties face significant obstacles in registering with the Ministry of Justice. In early
2004, the ministry refused to register the charter of the Taraqqiyot
(Tajikistan Development) party, citing violations of the Law on Political
Parties. In March, four party members went on a six-day hunger strike
in protest. The Vakhdat (Unity) party also encountered difficulties registering.
Electoral Reform
Tajikistan has a history of flawed elections. Neither the 1999 presidential
vote nor the 2000 parliamentary elections met international standards.
The June 2003 presidential referendum (allowing Rakhmonov to
stand for another two seven-year terms as president) was also marred by
allegations of vote fraud.
The government has come under increasing pressure to reform the
electoral system. In November 2003, the Socialist and Socialist
Democratic parties organized the Coalition for Fair and Transparent
Elections. The IRP and the Democratic Party joined the coalition in
calling for an overhaul of national election law. The Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and United Nations also
advocated electoral reform. In July 2004, the president signed a new
election law. The amended law has drawn criticism from the United
States, European Union, and opposition parties, however. The introduction
of a U.S.$500 registration fee for each election candidate is particularly
troubling. Critics fear it will prevent opposition politicians
from running in upcoming parliamentary elections.
Freedom of Expression
Freedom of expression remains under threat in Tajikistan, despite the
growing popularity of independent newspapers. While independent
newspapers and magazines are technically legal, state-run publishing
houses refuse to print them, making production difficult or impossible.
The state-controlled printing house Sharq-i-Ozod in Dushanbe decided
in November 2003 to stop publishing Ruzi Nav (New Day), a major
independent newspaper. No explanation was given.
The independent printing house Jiyonkhon continued to print Ruzi Nav
and other independent newspapers in Dushanbe, including Nerui
Sukhan (Power of the Word), Odamu Olam (People and the Word), and
Najot (Salvation), a publication of the IRP. In August 2004, authorities
closed the Jiyonkhon printing house for alleged tax violations. Other
independent and state-owned printing houses have refused to take on
publication of the four papers. A printing press in neighboring
Kyrgyzstan offered to carry Ruzi Nav, and it issued one print run in
November. However, the papers were confiscated by Tajik transportation
tax police upon arrival in Dushanbe. Ruzi Nav is filing charges.
Obtaining official registration is the main obstacle for independent television
and radio stations. In September 2003, the State Radio and
Television Committee refused to grant the Asia Plus news agency a television
broadcast license, stating that the agency lacked the necessary
technical equipment and qualified personnel. Asia Plus claims that the
committee never examined its equipment or personnel.
Harassment of independent and opposition journalists is a serious concern,
although physical attacks on journalists have declined. There have
been at least twelve cases of harassment of journalists since January
2004, according to the National Association of Independent Media in
Tajikistan. Mavluda Sultonzoda, a reporter for Ruzi Nav, received
numerous anonymous telephone calls threatening her and her family
with violence unless she stopped writing articles critical of President
Rakhmonov. Turko Dikayev, an Asia Plus correspondent, reported
receiving similar calls. In July 2004, unidentified assailants attacked
Rajab Mirzo, an editor for Ruzi Nav.
Capital Punishment
Tajikistan’s use of the death penalty has long been of international concern.
In 2003, four men—Rachabmurod Chumayev, Umed Idiyev,
Akbar Radzhabov, and Mukharam Fatkhulloyev—were sentenced to
death for membership in a criminal gang. The cases of Mr. Chumayev
and Mr. Idiyev were considered by the U.N. Human Rights Committee
as potential breaches of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. Despite the requests by the Committee to the Tajik
government issued on January 22, 2004, and on April 13, 2004, to stay
the men’s executions while it examined their claims, all four were executed
in April 2004. On April 30, 2004, President Rakhmonov introduced
a proposal to outlaw the death penalty. As of November, the
resulting bill has been approved by both houses of Parliament, but
awaited Rakhmonov’s signature.
Religious Freedom
The Tajik Constitution guarantees freedom of religion. In practice, government
officials monitor, and interfere with, the activities of religious
groups. All religious organizations must register with the State
Committee on Religious Affairs. Independent religious groups considered
extremist or politicized—including the banned group Hizb ut-
Tahrir, or Party of Liberation—face government scrutiny and harassment.
During 2003, approximately 160 suspected Hizb ut-Tahrir members
were arrested and thirty-four were convicted on subversion
charges. In 2004, more than seventy alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir
were arrested. In September, twenty suspected members were convicted:
nine received prison sentences from thirteen to fifteen years for
crimes including: “organizing a criminal group, inciting national, racial,
religious and ethnic strife.” The rest were given short prison terms.
Some of those detained on suspicion of involvement in Hizb ut-Tahrir
allege beatings, sexual violence, and electric shocks in police custody.
Human Trafficking
Human trafficking is a significant problem in Tajikistan. According to
the International Organization for Migration, Tajikistan is a major
country of origin for trafficked women and children. Tajik authorities
have undertaken some positive steps to curb trafficking, including the
creation of new anti-trafficking department in the Ministry of Internal
Affairs. In August 2003, Parliament adopted a bill criminalizing human
trafficking, with sentences from five to fifteen years. In December 2003,
a Tajik woman was sentenced to fourteen years in prison, and her property
confiscated, following conviction for trafficking women into the sex
industry in the United Arab Emirates. Four members of a trafficking
group were convicted in April 2004, and another fourteen cases have
been opened by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Key International Actors
Russia has been a dominant influence on Tajikistan’s economy and military
since the country’s independence in 1991. Tajikistan continues to
host Russian soldiers under Moscow’s direct control. During 2004,
Presidents Putin and Rakhmonov negotiated the partial withdrawal of
Russian troops by 2006. Tajikistan owes approximately U.S. $300 million
to Russia, and its fragile economy is dependent upon remittances
sent home by Tajik migrant workers in Russia. Russia has promised to
forgive a large portion of Tajikistan’s debt in return for permanent
rights to maintain a military base on Tajik soil.
Tajikistan has assumed a heightened importance for the United States
government since the 2001 military operation in Afghanistan. The U.S.
military provides technical assistance and training to Tajik armed forces.
The U.S. contributed $50.7 million in assistance during 2004. While
the majority of U.S. non-military economic assistance to Tajikistan is in
the form of humanitarian aid, it increasingly funds democratization, law
enforcement, and market development efforts. The February 2004 State Department country practices report is critical of the Rakhmonov
administration’s record of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, its suppression
of political opposition, and violations of free speech.
On October 11, 2004, Tajikistan became the final Central Asian state to
sign a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with the
European Union. While the PCA contains human rights conditionality,
E.U. policy toward Tajikistan continues to be defined primarily by security
and terrorism concerns. Tajikistan receives more E.U. aid per capita
than any other Central Asian country. During 2003, the E.U. provided
?10 million in humanitarian aid. In 2004, it scaled down its aid projects
to about ?8 million, while focusing more on reconstruction loans.
In August 2004, OSCE voiced concern over the closure of the
Jiyonkhon printing press and the attack on newspaper editor Rajab
Mirzo, and called on the Tajik authorities to respect media freedom in
the run-up to elections. The OSCE advised the government on the
conditions necessary for free and fair elections and campaign finance
regulations. The widely criticized final version of the election law did
not reflect its recommendations.