Tajikistan
President Emomali Rahmon was re-elected to a fourth term in office in
November in an election that lacked meaningful political competition. Oinihol
Bobonazarova, the only genuine independent candidate, was forced to exit the
race prematurely in October after the authorities interfered with her campaign
and intimidated her relatives and supporters. During the lead-up to the election,
authorities widened a crackdown on freedom of expression, imprisoned
opposition leaders, shut down a leading nongovernmental organization (NGO),
and stepped up efforts to extradite political opponents from abroad.
The government also persisted with enforcing a repressive law on religion,
restricting media freedoms, and pressuring civil society groups. There were
widespread complaints by NGOs of the authorities’ use of torture to obtain confessions.
In positive developments, Tajikistan passed a long-awaited law on domestic
violence and committed to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the elimination of the
death penalty.
Government Opponents and Other Critics
Authorities cracked down on government critics and the political opposition
ahead of November’s presidential election.
In February, former Prime Minister and one-time presidential candidate
Abdumalik Abdullanjanov, a refugee in the United States since 1994, was
detained in Kiev on an Interpol warrant. Tajikistan sought his extradition on
charges ranging from embezzlement to involvement in a plot to assassinate
President Rahmon. Abdullanjanov was released following an intervention by
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In March, Salimboy Shamsiddinov, head of the Uzbek society of the Khatlon
region, was reported missing after leaving his home in Qurghonteppa. The
authorities declared that there was no sign that Shamsiddinov was beaten or
kidnapped. In July, officials claimed that a body resembling Shamsiddinov’s was found in a river in neighboring Uzbekistan, but Shamsiddinov’s family stated
they did not recognize the body from the picture they were shown.
In April, unknown assailants attacked Mahmadali Hayit, deputy head of the
Islamic Revival Party of Tajikistan (IRPT), outside his home in Dushanbe. The
attack happened days before the IRPT’s planned 40-year anniversary convention.
Hayit told Human Rights Watch that he had been under surveillance before
the attack, and that unknown individuals in plain clothes were regularly coming
to his home to inquire about his whereabouts.
In May, businessman and former Minister of Industry Zaid Saidov was detained
at the Dushanbe airport on returning from a trip abroad. In April, Saidov had
announced the creation of an opposition political party, New Tajikistan. Fellow
New Tajikistan members believe that Saidov, currently on trial in a security
services detention center on corruption, embezzlement, polygamy, and rape
charges, was targeted for his opposition activity.
Also in May, Sherik Karamkhudoev, an IRPT leader from the autonomous
province of Gorno-Badakhshan, was sentenced to 14 years’ imprisonment for
“participating in mass disorders” in a closed trial. Karamkhudoev was reported
missing in April 2012 after government troops launched a military operation in
his home region. He resurfaced two weeks later in security services custody in
Dushanbe. His lawyers and family publicly stated that he was tortured in pretrial
detention.
In September, authorities in Dubai pardoned Umarali Kuvvatov, head of the
opposition movement Group of 24, following 10 months of detention on a Tajik
extradition request. Kuvvatov, who was detained in Dubai’s airport in December
2012, stated that he feared assassination were he to be returned to Tajikistan
and is now in hiding outside Tajikistan. A former businessman with close ties to
the Rahmon family, Kuvvatov believes he is being pursued because of his
opposition activities and his knowledge of high-level corruption.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Despite reforms in 2012 to make the criminal code’s definition of torture comply
with international standards, torture remained an enduring problem in 2013.
Torture is often used to coerce confessions and the right to counsel is routinely denied in pretrial custody. In January, UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan
Mendez stated in his report on his May 2012 visit to Tajikistan that with regard
to torture, “numerous loopholes and inconsistencies” persist in criminal procedure
and law enforcement practices. In July 2013, the Coalition against Torture,
a group of Tajik NGOs, reported that despite some reforms, claims of torture by
detainees have increased since the beginning of 2012.
In January, a Sughd region appellate court upheld a lower court’s decision to
shut down a leading human rights organization on charges that appeared politically
motivated. The group, the Association of Young Lawyers “Amparo,” had
investigated torture and advocated for the rights of army conscripts. The Justice
Ministry filed a motion to liquidate Amparo in June 2012, only weeks after an
Amparo representative spoke publicly about the need to monitor severe torture
and hazing in Tajikistan’s army.
While impunity for torture was still the norm, authorities took a few positive
steps to hold perpetrators accountable. In May, an appellate court upheld a ruling
requiring the Interior Ministry to compensate the widow of Safarali Sangov
approximately US$10,000 for damages relating to Sangov’s death in police custody
in March 2011, which human rights groups deemed to be the result of torture.
In May, a prison official was convicted of negligence in connection with the
death of Hamza Ikromzoda, who had died as a result of torture in a Dushanbe
prison in September 2012. Investigations against three others accused of
involvement are still pending. Relatives reported that Hamza’s body bore traces
of torture, including burns from a heated iron.
Freedom of Media
Tajikistan further restricted media freedoms in 2013. Authorities periodically
blocked access to independent websites and filed defamation suits against, or
otherwise intimidated, critical journalists. While the 2012 decriminalization of
libel was a step forward, Tajik law retains criminal sanctions for insulting the
president or any government representative, creating a chilling effect on the
freedom of speech.
In January, according to Internet service providers, the state telecommunications
agency ordered the blocking of several websites, including Facebook and
Radio Ozodi, the Radio Free Europe Tajik service. State Telecommunications
Chief Beg Zukhorov stated that the sites were blocked at “the request of the
public” and accused social media users of insulting “respectable people.”
Throughout the year there were also reports that access to YouTube had been
blocked, including for several days in May after a video appeared on the site
showing President Rahmon singing and dancing at his son’s wedding.
In February, authorities denied journalistic accreditation to veteran journalist
and former Radio Ozodi correspondent Abdukayumov Kayumzoda, known for
his journalistic independence.
Also in February a Dushanbe court ordered the independent weekly Imruz News
to pay approximately $10,500 in civil libel damages and publicly apologize to
the son of a high-ranking government official after the paper published a story
questioning his early release from prison where he had been serving a nineand-
a-half-year sentence for drug trafficking.
On April 25 IPRT’s website became unavailable to Tajik users for several weeks.
In response to an inquiry regarding the blocking of the site,
Telecommunications Chief Zukhurov denied government involvement. But a
spokesperson for the Internet provider told an IRPT representative, “You represent
a political party; therefore, we can only say that the problem isn’t with us.”
Freedom of Religion
Tajik authorities maintained tight restrictions on religious freedoms, including
on religious education and worship. Authorities suppress unregistered Muslim
education throughout the country, bring administrative charges against religious
instructors, and have closed many unregistered mosques.
The government has increased the powers of the State Committee for Religious
Affairs to enforce the country’s restrictive religion law and impose large administrative
fines without due process. Authorities also maintained tight controls
on those seeking to receive religious education abroad.
Rights groups, religious communities, and international bodies continued to
criticize the 2011 highly controversial Parental Responsibility Law, which stipulates that parents must prevent their children from participating in religious
activity, except for state-sanctioned religious education, until they turn 18.
Under the pretext of combating extremism, Tajikistan continues to ban several
peaceful minority Muslim groups. Some Christian minority denominations, such
as Jehovah’s Witnesses, are similarly banned.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Although Tajikistan decriminalized same-sex sexual activity in 1998, lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people are subject to wide-ranging discrimination
and homophobia. In 2013, Tajik NGOs documented several cases of
police violence against LGBT people. LGBT people are especially vulnerable to
extortion, fearing that their sexual orientation could be revealed to their family
or employers.
The Rights of Women and Children
In March, President Rahmon signed a law on the prevention of domestic violence.
The law allows law enforcement officers, not solely victims, to initiate
criminal charges. For years, civil society groups had been pushing the government
to adopt such a law because of their concerns of the seriousness of the
problem of domestic violence in Tajikistan.
Key International Actors
In November, following the re-election of President Rahmon by an overwhelming
majority, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe election
observer mission issued a statement finding that while the election had taken
place peacefully, restrictive registration requirements resulted in a lack of genuine
choice. The report also found that extensive positive state media coverage
of President Rahmon provided him with a “significant advantage,” with widespread
reports on election day of “group voting, and indications of ballot box
stuffing.”
In a May visit, UN Assistant Secretary General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic
welcomed the country’s preparations to abolish the death penalty and
expressed concern over the widespread problem of violence against women.
While welcoming the Tajik government’s willingness to cooperate with UN
human rights mechanisms and to bring national legislation in line with international
standards, Simonovic specifically called on the Tajik authorities to
empower women by increasing their representation among the ranks of police
officers and prosecutors.
During her November 2012 visit to Dushanbe, EU High Representative Catherine
Ashton raised public concern with President Rahmon about the government
forcing the closure of Amparo, the anti-torture NGO.
The United States embassy issued a statement in April regarding the beating of
opposition leader Mahmadali Hayit, urging the authorities to conduct a thorough
and impartial investigation. Also in April, for the second year in a row, the
US Commission on International Religious Freedom designated Tajikistan a
“country of particular concern” based on the government’s “systematic, ongoing,
and egregious violations of religious freedoms.”