Tajikistan
Human rights conditions continued to worsen in Tajikistan in 2006. In the months
preceding the November presidential election, the government cracked down on
independent media and arrested political opposition members. Five political parties
fielded candidates in the election, but the opposition remained weak and
fractured and was unable to pose a serious threat to the re-election of the incumbent,
Emomali Rahmonov. Said Abdullo Nuri, former Islamic Renaissance Party
(IRP) chairman and once a prominent political figure in Tajikistan, died on August
9, leaving the IRP without solid unified leadership, and in September the party
decided not to field a candidate in the presidential election. Two other major
opposition parties, the Democratic Party of Tajikistan and the Social Democratic
Party, also denounced the election and did not run candidates.
A crackdown on independent media continued, with applications for new and
renewed broadcast licenses arbitrarily denied, and private television stations
crippled by huge license and operating fees. Government concerns over foreign
funding to nongovernmental organizations and the alleged increase in followers
of extremist Muslim factions in Tajikistan led to two new draft laws that jeopardize
freedom of association and religion.
November Presidential Elections
Despite President Rahmonov’s claim that the November presidential election
would be free, transparent, and democratic, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) concluded that elections “were characterized by a
marked absence of real competition.” The OSCE also noted that “proxy voting and
family voting remained a serious problem.” Rahmonov has been in power since
he was first elected president in 1994. A June 2003 referendum gave Rahmonov
the possibility to stand for re-election for third and fourth terms, paving his way
to rule the country up to 2020.

Political Arrests
Government pressure on the opposition continued in 2006 with several arrests
and the suspicious death of a member of the IRP. In February a court sentenced
former opposition member Tojiddin Abdurakhmonov to 16 years’ imprisonment
for alleged involvement in a criminal group, murder, possession of weapons, and
possession of forged documents. He denies these charges. In May Sadullo
Marupov, a member of the IRP, allegedly committed suicide by jumping from the
third floor of a police station in the northern town of Isfara. To date it remains
unclear why Marupov was arrested. The IRP claimed the autopsy showed he had
been ill-treated before his fall. Two officers were later arrested on suspicion of
involvement in his death.
IRP leader Said Abdullo Nuri was at the time of his death in August reportedly facing
slander charges brought in May for having alleged official corruption at a public
utility.
Incommunicado Detention of Jailed Opposition Leader
In October 2005 Democratic Party of Tajikistan leader Mahmadruzi Iskandarov
was sentenced by a Dushanbe court to 23 years’ imprisonment on terror-related
charges. At the end of June 2006 party deputy chairman Jumaboi Niyozov accused
the Tajik authorities of trying to hold Iskandarov in incommunicado detention;
according to Niyozov, Iskandarov has not been allowed to see his relatives or his
attorneys since his trial. Iskandarov is supposed to serve his sentence in a penal
colony, but as of June was still being held in a Justice Ministry cell.
Nongovernmental Organizations
The government continued to clamp down on the activities of nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) that receive foreign funding, particularly in the wake of the
2005 Andijan uprising in neighboring Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyzstan’s “tulip revolution.”
On December 2, 2005, the government introduced a draft law further reducing
the freedom of NGOs to operate in Tajikistan. The law would impose mandatory
state registration of public organizations and require all existing public organizations
to re-register within three months. It would also grant the government  excessive powers to monitor the activities of public organizations. At this writing,
the draft law is pending in parliament.
Media Freedom
In February 2006 the Ministry of Communications announced a plan (unimplemented
at this writing) to establish a single government-controlled communications
center to which all existing internet and cell phone providers must be connected.
On October 5 the ministry blocked access to five websites, claiming they
were a threat to “information security in the Republic of Tajikistan.” The five sites
affected—centrasia.ru, ferghana.ru, tajikistantimes.ru, charogiruz.ru, and arianastorm.
com—frequently carry articles critical of the government. Many believe this
move was politically motivated. After much pressure from NGOs and the international
community, the sites were unblocked on October 11.
Somonion TV, the only independent television station in the capital, Dushanbe,
was effectively shut down in January because it failed to pay licensing fees 80
percent greater than stipulated by the original contract. The owner, Ikrom Mirzoev,
claimed his company was being punished for having given fair access to opposition
parties in the February 2005 parliamentary elections. According to the
London-based Institute for War and Peace Reporting, other independent television
stations have also been brought to court by the communications ministry to
recover licensing fees of up to US$4,000; three TV stations in northern Tajikistan
have already gone bankrupt. By contrast, state-run news agencies received a 25
percent increase in funding from the government.
On January 10 the government suspended BBC FM radio services to Tajikistan following
a new law requiring international FM broadcasters to receive a license
from the Ministry of Justice. The BBC was given 20 days to register, a procedure
that usually takes up to six months. The Ministry of Justice denied that the BBC’s
suspension had been politically motivated. In June the registration problems were
reportedly resolved, but when the BBC applied for a broadcasting license in
August, the Tajikistan Committee for Television and Radio Broadcasting rejected
the application, citing the absence of an applicable reciprocal agreement with the
United Kingdom.
On September 18 Radio Liberty reporter Nosir Mamurzoda and Jamoliddin
Sayfiddinov of Tajikistan’s Avesta news agency were detained and taken in for
questioning in the southern city of Qorghan-Teppa while reporting on students
forced to work in cotton fields. Mamurzoda said they were released after a warning
not to report news that “could destabilize the country.”
Freedom of Religion
In March the government drafted a religions law that would seriously restrict religious
freedoms, although at this writing parliament had postponed voting on the
bill due to heavy criticism from religious communities. The law would make registration
of all religious associations (a procedure requiring 200 signatures) mandatory.
The law would impose state control over religious education, require stateapproved
higher education for all religious leaders, limit the number of mosques
in Tajikistan, and impose state control over pilgrimages to Mecca. It would also
ban teaching religion to children younger than seven, proselytism, and the leading
of religious communities by foreigners.
In February 2006 the government announced that it would demolish the only
remaining synagogue in Tajikistan, to make way for the Palace of the Nations, the
intended residence of the Tajik president. The synagogue serves the Bukharian
Jewish community in Dushanbe. Authorities demolished the ritual bathhouse,
classroom, and kosher butchery, but halted further demolition after international
outcry. The government has made no reparations for the damage, and it remains
unclear whether it intends to resume demolition.
Key International Actors
Tajikistan and China strengthened their relationship during a visit from Chinese
Premier Jen Jaibao to Dushanbe in September 2006 for an economic meeting of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, with the signing of various bilateral
cooperation agreements. In June 2006 Tajikistan and China signed a deal for the
reconstruction of the Dushanbe-Chanak highway, and China provided Tajikistan
with a long-term loan of $281 million for implementation of the project.
The United States offered security and development assistance to Tajikistan in an
attempt to increase its presence in Central Asia. Assistant Secretary of State
Richard Boucher visited Tajikistan in May, and then-Secretary of Defense Donald
Rumsfeld visited in July. Both failed to highlight human rights concerns and
instead emphasized the US government’s interest in expanding security and economic
cooperation. In March the United States and Tajikistan signed an agreement
to increase border security and law enforcement cooperation.
Sergei Mironov, chairman of Russia’s Federation Council (upper house of parliament),
visited Dushanbe in August 2006 to attend an inter-parliamentary forum.
Many viewed the visit as a sign of Russia’s support for Rahmonov in the
November presidential election. At the parliamentary forum, Rahmonov commented
that Russia is Tajikistan’s main strategic ally. Also in August, Russian President
Vladimir Putin met Rahmanov.
Tajikistan remains the greatest per capita beneficiary of European Commission
assistance in Central Asia. However, the commission ended its humanitarian aid
program to Tajikistan in June, making a final donation of US$6.4 million. In May
the European Union issued a statement during an OSCE Permanent Council meeting
in Vienna welcoming President Rahmonov’s commitment to holding free,
transparent, and democratic elections in November, but noting with concern that
consolidation of power in Tajikistan had come at the expense of transparency,
democratic freedoms, and independent civil society.