 TAJIKISTAN
 The Government of President Emomali Rahmonov, composed of a coalition domi-
 nated by Tajiks from the Kulyab region who were victorious in the 1992 civil war,
 continued in power. However, Rahmonov appointed several non-Kulyabis to key gov-
 ernment positions. Elections for the Majlisi Ol, the new Parliament created under
 
 
 1050
 the 1994 Constitution, were held in February. For the first time candidates were
 nominated by political parties. The opposition coalition of nationalists and Islamic
 groups defeated in the 1992 civil war boycotted the elections. Intimidation and a re-
 stricted nomination process also limited voters' choice of candidates. There were
 credible re rts of electoral fraud. Consequently, a Majlisi Oli dominated by sup-
 porters of the Government was elected.
 Under U.N. auspices, the Government and the external opposition continued to
 en        peace talks aimed at ending the civil conflict. A May round of talks re-
 sute   in agreement on several confidence-building measures which remained
 unimplemented at year's end. Shuttle diplomacy by the United Nations assisted the
 two sides' top leaders, President Rahmonov and Mullah Abdullah Nur, Chairman
 of the United Opposition Forces of Tajikistan, to conclude an August 17 protocol on
 principles for achieving national reconciliation. At a December round of talks in
 Ashgabat, the parties initiated discussion on key  litical issues but reached no
 agreements, and their positions remained far a art.Earlier the two sides agreed to
 extend the standing cease-fire until February 16, 1996. However, the Government,
 the opposition, and the Russian border forces reported several alleged violations of
 the cease-fire to the U.N. of Observers to Tajikistan (UNMOT).
 Internal security is the responsibility of the Ministries of Interior, Security, and
 Defense. The Russian Army's 201st Motorized Rifle Division remained in the coun-
 try, as part of a Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force es-
 tablished in 1993. This unit, along with Border Guards from Russia and other CIS
 members, and a newly created TaJikistan Border Guard, were responsible for guard-
 ing Tajikistan's border with Afghanistan. Some regions of the country, however, re-
 mainedeffectively outside the Government's control. Opposition forces, supported by
 Afghan and Arab Islamic mercenaries, and localized bandit units used parts of the
 Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast (GBAO) and the Gharm Valley for training
 and as a base for launching isolated, low-intensity attacks. Members of the security
 forces and government-aligned militias committed numerous serious human rights
 abuses.
 The economy, which is largely centrally planned and highly dependent on cotton
 and aluminum, continued to decline. Much of the country's industry stood idle at
 year's end. The Government implemented some initial economic reforms. Despite
 the introduction in May of its own national currency, the Tajik ruble, the Govern-
 ment remained behind in paying salaries and pensions. There were critical short-
 ages of fuel for heating, transport, and industry. Uzbekistan periodically suspended
 natural gas sales to Tajikistan because of nonpayment of bills and for political rea-
 sons. Shortages of wheat and flour, although less severe than in 1994, remained a
 social and p6litical problem. Responding to earlier food shortages, some farmers in-
 creased food production on their private plots and rented land. Incomes have de-
 clined significantly since the Soviet period, with annual per capita income estimated
 at $400.
 The Government's human rights record improved slightly, although serious prob-
 lems remain. Members of the security forces and government-aligned forces commit-
 ted several extrajudicial killings, were responsible for disappearances, and regularly
 tortured and abused detainees. The Government prosecuted few perpetrators of
 these abuses, although in some cases the security officials responsible were rep-
 rimanded and transferred to other areas. A new Minister of Interior took steps to
 remove from his Ministry some of the professionally unqualified and worst human
 rights abusers. Prison conditions remained life threatening, and the Government
 continued to use arbitrary arrest and detention. There are often long delays before
 trials, and the judiciary is subject to political and paramilitary pressure. The au-
 thorities infringe on citizens' right to privacy.
 The Government restricts freedom of speech and freedom of the press and largely
 controls the electronic media. No genuine opposition media existed. The Government
 limits citizens' rights to change their government. The authorities strictly control
 freedom of assembly and association for political organizations. One new political
 party and a branch of one of the four banned opposition parties were allowed to re-
 ister in 1995. Three opposition parties and a branch of the fourth, affiliated with
 the armed opposition, remained suspended. The Government cooperated cautiously
 with the offices of Human Rights Watch/Helsinki and the Organization on Security
 and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Dushanbe.
 The external opposition also committed serious human rights abuses. An opposi-
 tion commander killed a journalist; he was later removed from his command. Oppo-
 sition forces reportedly murdered several Russian army officers and government mi-
 litia officers in Dushanbe, Gharm, and Gomo-Badakhshan. Also, representatives of
 the armed opposition forcibly prevented repatriation of Tajik refugees from northern
 Afghanistan.
 
 
 1051
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-There were a number of extrajudicial
 killings--perhaps as many as 50-but fewer than in 1994. Ministry of Interior mili-
 tia members killed five supporters of the oplsiton from Fayzabod, one of whom
 was tortured in detention before being klled. Their deaths may have been revenge
 killing for an earlier ambush of eight militia men by unidentified persons. There
 were also several credible reports that Ministry of Interior forces killed detainees
 in the Gharm valley, several after being tortured. Similarly, there were reports that
 the Faizali brigade, a militia gup nominally incorporated within the Ministry of
 Defense and dominated by Kuyais, committed murders in the Kurgan Teppe area
 of Khatlon region.
 According to credible reports, the security forces and government-affiliated mili-
 tias operated with the tacit approval of some high-ranking government officials.
 However, President Rahmonov publicly spoke out against the a uses of the security
 forces, ordered the professional credentials of members of the security forces to be
 examined as a means of dismissing unqualified staff, and removed fellow Kulyabi
 Y aqubjon Salimov as Interior Minster and transferred him to Ankara as Ambas-
 sador. The new Interior Minister, Saidamir Zuhurov, dismissed some of the non-
 professionals brought into the Ministry by his predecessor, some of whom are ac-
 cused of the worst human rights abuses in the Ministry. Although some Interior
 Ministry officers were arrested for killings in the Kolkhozobad, Parj, and Bokhtar
 districts of Khatlon region, none has been arrested in the Gharm vailey. However,
 the ranking responsible Interior Ministry officer in the Gharm Valley was trans-
 ferred out of the area in December, along with hundreds of other security officers.
 Also, some of the Interior Ministry checkpoints at which some of the worst human
 rights abuses in Gharm occurred were dismantled.
 Three deputies of the Majlisi OR were assassinated-Izzat Kuganov, the com-
 mander of the Faizali Brigade- Zainiddin Muhiddinov, a collective farm director, and
 Ainullo Negmatov, Chief of Adinistration for the Parliament-and an attempt was
 made on a fourth, Abdulmalik Salihov, chairman of the Shahrinau district govern-
 ment. Members of a rival militia, "the Mahmoud Brigade," are widely blamed for
 the first, and unidentified persons for the second and third. In another case, a bu-
 reau chief of the Ministry of Interior reportedly went into hiding after a criminal
 investigation was launched against him for the killing of a driver involved in a traf-
 fic accident in which the Interior Ministry official's brother died.
 The assassination of Faizali Brigade Commander Kuganov in June initiated a
 tense period of relations between this brigade (the Eleventh, under nominal control
 of the Ministry of Defense) and a rival brigade "the Mahmoud Brigade" (the First,
 also under nominal control of the Ministry of Defense). Tensions came to a head in
 September, when the First attacked a headquarters of the Eleventh in the Kurgan
 Teppo area. Up to 40 combatants and some civilians were killed in the resultant
 fighting. Also, an UNMOT officer was killed in connection with the brigades' rivalry.
 Government efforts to redeploy, disband, or disarm the two brigades have been
 largely ineffectual.
 Approximately 24 Russian Army officers, soldiers, and staff were killed in
 Tajikistan in 1995. About six died in January from a New Year's Eve champagne
 poisoning, widely attributed to the opposition. Others were shot or stabbed to death
 in Dushanbe, including three in September. A mini-bus transporting Russian mili-
 tary medical staff was hit in February by a rocket-propelled grenade in Dushanbe-
 two nurses died and five were injured. In most cases, the Russian border forces and
 the Government blamed the opposition, while the armed opposition usually denied
 the charges. Few have been arrested and prosecuted in the individual cases. The
 opposition probably killed many of the Russian army staff; however, there is some
 evidence that interservice rivalry and drunken rowdiness resulted in some of the
 Russian deaths.
 Similarly, about a dozen Ministry of Interior militia staff, local government offi-
 cials, teachers, and collective farm officials were murdered in the Gharm valley.
 Again, the Government blamed either the opposition or bandits while the armed
 Tajik opposition headquartered in northern Afghanistan usually denied these
 charges. Some were probably committed by the opposition, some by independent
 warlords, and some by competing government militias for varying motives, including
 political.
 According to opposition sources, opposition commander Rizwan killed Nafasbek
 Rahmonov, the former editor of the Muftiyat's weekly, Minbar-I Islam, in northern
 Afghanistan in May or June. For this and other murders, Rizwan was reportedly
 removed from his command.
 
 
 1052
 
 b. Disappearance.--Some Gharmi- and Pamiri-origin men disappeared, although
 many fewer than in 1994, at the hands of the security forces. The Government has
 not been active in investigating claims of previous disappearances, claiming insuffi-
 cient resources for this purpose. Also, some young men thought to have disappeared
 had, in fact, been forcibly conscripted.
 There were no developments in the 1993 disappearances of the sitting judge
 Tagobek Shukurov or the surgeon and Democratic Party Dushanbe branch chair-
 man Dr. Ayniddin Sadukov.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Security officials, particularly those in the Ministry of Interior, regularly beat de-
 tainees in custody. Security forces were responsible for the widespread use of sys-
 tematic beatings and, in some instances, the torture of prisoners and detainees. In
 some cases, mistreatment increased if victims made formal allegations of abuse. Se-
 curity officials sometimes planted drugs on beaten detainees and threatened arrest
 for the more serious charge of drug possession if the detainees did not sign state-
 ments absolving their captors of charges of abuse.
 In contrast to previous years, there were no reports of rape or threat of rape of
 women in prison or detention.
 Prison conditions improved slightly, as a result of better rations and the donation
 of medicines by international reliefgroups. However, prison conditions remained
 harsh and life threatening. Most prisons are still overcrowded, unsanitary, and dis-
 ease ridden, resulting in serious threats to many prisoners' health. Family members
 are allowed access to prisoners. The Government continues to dony the Inter-
 national Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) requests for full access to prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Code has not been signifi-
 cantly amended since independence, and it therefore retains many of the defects in-
 herited from Soviet times. Revision of the Criminal Code is a high priority of the
 M'flisi Oli. The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention and provides few
 checks on the power of procurators and police to arrest persons. The Government
 continued to arrest political opponents arbitrarily, although in fewer numbers than
 in 1994, and is known to hold prisoners in incommunicado detention. Public order,
 which broke down during the civil war, has yet to be fully restored, and the virtual
 immunity from prosecution of armed militia groups has further eroded the integrity
 of the legal system.
 Nonetheless, some progress was made toward establishing public order and the
 rule of law in 1995. Some persons were disarmed. A new, more progressive General
 Prosecutor sought more vigorously than his predecessor to apply the rule of law.
 Five of seven members of opposition parties arbitrarily arrested in Fayzabod in May
 were later released under international pressure. Similarly, a journalist, Mirzo
 Salimpur, arrested in May for articles he wrote in an opposition newspaper in 1993,
 was conditionally released by the Procurator General's office after the international
 community took an interest in the case.
 Legally, police may detain persons arbitrarily and without a warrant for a period
 of 72 hours, and the procurator's office may do so for a period of 10 days after which
 the accused must be officially charged. At that point, the Criminal Code permits
 pretrial detention for up to 15 months. The first 3 months of detention is at the dis-
 cretion of the local procurator, the second 3 months must be approved at the re-
 gional level, and the rocurator General must sanction the remaimng time in deten-
 tion. The Criminal Code maintains that all investigations must be completed 1
 month before the 15-month maximum in order to allow the defense time to examine
 government evidence. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a prelimi-
 nary judicial hearing on the charge or detention. In criminal cases, detainees may
 be released and restricted to their place of residence pending trial.
 There are credible allegations of illegal government detention of members or rel-
 atives of members of opposition political parties. In most cases, the security officers
 do not obtain arrest warrants and do not bring charges. Some of those released
 claimed that they were mistreated and beaten during detention.
 Once a case is entered for trial, the law states that it must be brought before a
 judge within 28 days. However, it is common for cases to languish for many months
 fore the trial begins. One such case, however, was resolved in 1995 when the
 Procurator General dropped the case against Onihol Bobonazarova, who was placed
 under house arrest in 1993 pending resolution of the continuing investigation of al-
 leged antigovernment activities during 1992. As a result, she was permitted to trav-
 el abroad again.
 Opposition sources maintain that security forces detained dozens of persons un-
 lawfully and without charge. The law precludes visits to persons in pretrial deten-
 tion.
 
 
 1053
 Article 19 of the Constitution states that no one can be exiled without a legal
 basis; no laws have been passed so far setting out any legal basis for exile. There
 were no reports of the use of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The November 1994 Constitution states that
 judges are independent and subordinate only to the Constitution and the law; it pro-
 hibits interference in their activities. However, judicial officials at all levels of the
 court system are heavily influenced by both the political leadership and, in many
 instances, armed paramilitary groups. Local-, regional-, and republic-level judges
 are, for the most part, poorly trained and lack understanding of an independent ju-
 dicial function. Parliament passed three laws in November codifying the new Con-
 stitution's provisions on the judicial system. However, these new laws had not been
 completely implemented by year's end.
 The court system remains unmodified from the Soviet period. There are several
 tiers of courts: city, district, regional, and republic levels, with a separate but par-
 allel military tribunal. Higher courts serve as appellate courts for lower ones. The
 November 1994 Constitution establishes additional courts, including a Constitu-
 tional Court.
 According to the law, trials are public, except in certain cases involving national
 security or the protection of minors. The court will appoint an attorney for those
 who do not have one. A defendant may choose his or her own attorney but may not
 necessarily choose among court-appointed defenders. Arrested persons are often de-
 nied prompt, and in some cases any, access to an attorney.
 The prosecutor's office is responsible for conducting all investigations of alleged
 criminal conduct. In theory, both defendant and counsel have the right to review
 all government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence and testi-
 mony. No groups are barred from testifying and all testimony is theoretically given
 equal weight, regardless of ethnicity or gender. Ministry of Justice officials maintain
 that defendants benefit from the presumption of innocence, despite the unmodified
 Soviet legal statute which presumes the guilt of all brought to trial.
 Although the pressure exerted on the judicial system by armed paramilitary
 groups and vigilantes operating outside of government control diminished in 1995,
 it still was sufficient to lead in some cases to the dismissal of charges and dropping
 of cases.
 The Government holds political prisoners, although estimates of the number vary
 widely. According to one international human rights organization, scores of political
 prisoners remain in government custody. The Government and the Tajik opposition
 agreed at the fourth round of inter-Tajik talks in Almaty to exchange prisoners and
 subsequently exchanged several lists of prisoners of war and political prisoners. The
 largest opposition list totaled 171 names of political prisoners believed by the oppo-
 sition to be in government custody, although the list likely includes many names
 of persons who were missing, dead, or had defected. No prisoners were exchanged
 in 1995.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Articles
 22 and 23 of the Constitution provide for the inviolability of the home and prohibit
 interference with correspondence, telephone conversations, and postal and commu-
 nication rights, except "in cases prescribed by law." Police may not enter and search
 a private home without the approval of the procurator. In some cases, police may
 enter and search a home without permission, but they must then inform the procu-
 rator within 24 hours. Police are permitted to enter and search homes without per-
 mission if they have compelling reason to believe a delay in obtaining a warrant
 would impair national security. There is no judicial review of police searches con-
 ducted without a warrant.
 There are continuing credible reports of arbitrary illegal search and seizure by
 government forces.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flict.-As a result of the extensions of the September 17, 1994, cease-fire and the
 continuation of the inter-Tajik talks under U.N. auspices, the level of conflict in
 Tajikistan during 1995 was much lower and geographically much more limited than
 in 1994. Nevertheless, there was a series of small-scale incidents along the
 Tajikistan/Afghanistan border, particularly along the Gorno-Badakhshan section,
 usually involving the Russian border forces and the Tajik opposition. Often the
 initiator of the escalation in hostilities was obscure.
 In one series of incidents in January, the Russian border forces killed an opposi-
 tion field commander, triggering retaliation by the opposition, who kidnaped and
 later killed a school teacher, kidnaped and later released under U.N. mediation four
 local truck drivers, and killed and beheaded nine Russian border forces troops. In
 another series of incidents in April, a Russian border force convoy was ambushed
 by the opposition east of Kalai Khumb, resulting in an escalation of activities by
 
 
 1054
 both sides. Ultimately, 42 Russian border troops, including 4 Russians, 17 Kazaks,
 and 21 Tajiks and several times that number of opposition troops were killed. In
 retaliation, Russian border forces shelled Afghan villages across the border, and
 Russian planes bombed the opposition's headquarters and other   gets in Taloqan,
 northern Afghanistan, resulV  in scores of dead and wounded, including many Af-
 ghan civilians. An opposition faction kidnaped briefly the chairman of the Gorno-
 Badakhshan autonomous oblast government in April in Khorg but released him in
 exchange for an opposition prisoner.
 From October to December there was sporadic, low-level fighting in the Miandu
 Valley east of Tavildra, where the oppsition infitrated additional -orces from the
 nearby Vani Valley and Afghanistan. The Government also reinforced its positions
 with troops from the firs  igade from Kurgan Teppe. The Government side used
 air power to bomb opposition positions and villages. Approximately 25 government
 soldiers, an unknown number of opposition troops, and a few civilians died in the
 ighting. The opposition unilaterally released 17 prisoners of war of Pamiri origin
 o an original 54captured or defected during the fighting in October in Tavildara.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite Article 30 of the Constitution and the
 1991 law protecting freedom of speech and press, the Government severely restricts
 freedom of expression in practice.
 .Journalists, broadcasters, and individual citizens who disagree with government
 policies may not speak freely or critically. The Government exercises control over
 the media, both through legislation and through the dismissal and harassment of
 journalists and broadcasters for their political or ethical convictions. For example,
 one journalist was dismissed upon his return to the country for speaking critically
 of the Tajikistan Government while in the United States. Also, the head of the
 Khorog local television station was fired after the station broadcasted a written
 statement by the head of the Tajik opposition: Some journalists were threatened
 with violence by armed men for writing or publishing articles critical of the Govern-
 ment. The U.S. nongovernmental organization (NGOICommittee to Protect Journal-
 ists (CPJ) reported that many Tajik journalists were afraid to meet with a visiting
 CPJ group in September.
 The Government also controls the printing presses and the supply of newsprint
 and broadcasting facilities, and subsidizes virtually allpublications and productions.
 Some newspapers were threatened with heavy fines for various, sometimes spuri-
 ous, violations of financial rules and regulations. Editors fearful of reprisals exercise
 careful self-censorship. Nevertheless, several new, semi-independent publications
 appared.
 To journalists were killed in 1995. In addition to Minbar-I-Islam editor Nafezbek
 Rahmonov, killed by an opposition commander (see Section l.a.), the local British
 Broadcasting Corporation stringer and cultural figure Muhiddin Olimpur, was
 killed by unknown persons in Dushanbe in December. The new Procurator General
 opened investigations of at least three previous murders of journalists.
 The February 1994 Supreme Soviet decree remained in force; it suspended the ac-
 tivity of all independent electronic media until a new law on the media was adopted.
 However, it was not strictly enforced; 9 of 14 independent television stations broad-
 cast periodically during 1995.
 Academic expression is limited to some extent by fear of reprisals, but much more
 so by the complete reliance of scientific institutes upon government funding. There
 were no new reports of professors going into hiding or being arrested.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of association and peaceful assembly. In practice, the authorities exercise
 strict control over organizations and activities of a political nature, while free as-
 sembly and association are permitted for nonpolitical associations, including trade
 unions. Freedom of association is circumscribed by the legal requirement that all
 organizations must first register with the Ministry of Justice. This process is often
 slowed by the cumbersome requirement to submit all documents in both Russian
 and Tajik. The Ministry of Justice's verification of the text inevitably delays the
 final granting of registration.
 Once registered an organization must apply for a permit from the local executive
 committee in order legally to organize any public assembly or demonstration. In the
 spring, there were work actions by teachers in the Leninabad region, by workers
 at the Dushanbe silk factory, by workers at the central government printing factory
 in Dushanbe, and by workers at the Yavan heat and power company. one was
 sanctioned by the trade unions or local executive committees. Most protested the
 Government's failure to pay full salaries and poor working conditions (see Section
 6). Also, in August, citizens demonstrated peacefully in Kulyab against the Govern-
 
 
 1055
 ment's lifting of price controls on bread and wheat and the incompetence of some
 political appointees. The Government neither sanctioned nor tried to suppress these
 demonstrations.
 There are six political parties officially registered with the Government. According
 to the law, a political party must have at least 500 members to register. Three of
 the four political parties suspended in 1993-the Islamic Revival Party, the
 Rastokhez National Movement, and the Lali Badakhshan Movement for the Auton-
 omy of the Pamirs--remained suspended. In July a branch of the fourth suspended
 party, the Democratic Party of Tajikistan, headed by Shodmon Yusef-who re-
 mained in exile pending the dropping of criminal charges against him-was allowed
 to register as a political party. Followers of the other branch of the Democratic
 Party which remained aligned with the armed opposition were not allowed and did
 not attempt to reregister as a political party.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Church
 and state are separate in Tajikistan and neither the law nor the Government places
 restrictions on religious worship. Aowever, according to the Law on Freedom of
 Faith, the Committee on Religious Affairs under the Council of Ministers registers
 religious communities and monitors the activities of the various religious establish-
 ments. While the official reason given is to ensure that they are acting in accord-
 ance with the law, the practical purpose is to ensure that they do not become overtly
 political.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose their place
 of residence, to emigrate, and to return. In practice, the Government generally re-
 spects these rights, with some regulation.
 The Government has stipulated that both citizens and foreigners are prohibited
 from traveling within a 25-kilometer zone along the Republic's borders with China
 and Afghanistan without permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In prac-
 tice, however, international aid workers and diplomats travel freely in these regions
 without prior Government authorization. Residents of Dushanbe and those travelers
 wishing to remain in restricted areas longer than 3 days no longer need to hold a
 permit, although they must still register with central authorities. There are no legal
 restrictions on changing residence or workplace. Current regulations require reg-
 istration at the localMinistry of Interior office upon arrival and departure. The city
 of Dushanbe introduced a special registration system and tax on citizens visiting the
 capital for periods longer than 72 hours. Citizens who wish to travel abroad must
 obtain an exit visa. There is no evidence that these are withheld for political rea-
 sons.
 Tajikistan does not yet have a law on emigration. Currently, those wishing to emi-
 grate to countries formerly within Soviet Union notify the Ministry of Interior of
 their departure. Persons wishing to emigrate beyond the borders of the former So-
 viet Union must receive the approval of the relevant country's embassy in order to
 obtain a passport. Persons who settle abroad are required to inform the Tajikistan
 embassy or Tajikistan interests section of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate.
 Persons who wish to return to Tajikistan after having emigrated may do so freely
 by submitting their applications to the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests
 section of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate. The Government adjudicates
 requests on a case by case basis. There is no indication that people, other than those
 who fled Tajikistan for political reasons after the civil war, are prevented from re-
 turning.
 Under the 1994 refugee law, a person granted refugee status is guaranteed the
 right to work and move freely throughout the country. In July the Central Depart-
 ment of Refugee Affairs (CDR) under the Ministry of Labor took over the registra-
 tion of refugees from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refgees
 (UNHCR), in accordance with the 1951 Convention on Refugees and Tajikistan's
 1994 Law on Refugees. The CDR registered some 200 Afghan refugees. An unofficial
 policy of denyig residence permits to Afghan spouses of Tajik returnees allowed the
 Government to deny any official status to these persons or their children. Also, the
 closure of the Afghan bazaar in Dushanbe denied a livelihood to many registered
 Afghan refugees (see Section 5).
 Tajik refugees continued to return from northern Afghanistan, as did internally
 displaced persons from Gorno-Badakhshan, to the Dushanbe and Khatlon regions,
 leaving approximately 19,000 refugees in Afghanistan and 6,000 internally displaced
 persons in Gorno-Badakhshan. While significant problems remain with illega occu-
 pation of returnees' homes by those loyal to the victorious Popular Front militias,
 significant progress was made, particularly in the Khatlon region, in evicting the
 occupiers. Less progress was made in Dushanbe. Ministry of Interior forces beat
 three Pamiri internally displaced persons, who had returned to Dushanbe from
 
 
 1056
 Gorno-Badakhshan in August, and threatened them with trumpedup drug charges.
 News of this incident spread quickly to Gorno-Badakhshan, perhaps dam ening the
 enthusiasm of some Pamiris to return to Dushanbe. The Ministry launched an in-
 vestigation into the incident. Representatives of the armed opposition in Afghani-
 stan continued their efforts to dissuade Tajiks from returning, using threats,
 disinformation, and physical force in the refugee camps.
 There is no legal basis for forcible repatriation, nor is there any evidence to sug-
 gest that it was practiced.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Right&- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Government limits the right of citizens to change their government peacefully
 and freely. The Government of President Rahmonov remains dominated by a coali-
 tion composed of Kulyabi regional political interests, although the base of the Gov-
 ernment was broadened slihtly when some non-Kulyabis were appointed to several
 key government positions in 1995. Three of the four opposition parties suspended
 in 1993 remain suspended; a branch of the fourth, the Democratic Party of
 Tajikistan, reregistered in 1995. This party joins five other legal parties. Most of the
 opposition party leaders and party activists remained either jailed or in exile
 abroad, waiting for the U.N.-mediated inter-Tajik talks on national reconciliation to
 produce agreements on wider political participation.
 The 1994 Constitution provides for three branches of government: an executive,
 with a president elected to a 5-year term, a 181-member parliament (Majlisi Oli)
 also elected every 5 years, and a semiindependent judiciary.
 In accordance with the Constitution and under a parliamentary election law
 adopted in December 1994, elections for the Majlisi Oli were conducted on February
 26. The elections were seriously flawed by the restriction of nominations, voter in-
 timidation, ballot box stuffing, and the practice of "family" voting. In contrast to the
 November 1994 presidential election, there was low interest and low turnout for the
 February parliamentary elections. The deputies elected to the Majlisi Oli were over-
 whelmingly progovernment. Although the Government invited international observ-
 ers international organizations such as the OSCE declined to send monitors.
 he February elections marked the first time political parties were able to nomi-
 nate candidates. Although the suspended external opposition parties boycotted the
 election, all four registered political parties nominated candidates and each suc-
 ceeded in electing some. Most successful candidates, however, were nominated by
 workplaces and local councils in the old, Soviet-era practice. Since all the chairmen
 of regional and district governments were presidential appointees, government offi-
 cials exerted considerable influence over the nomination process at the council and
 workplae level. Consequently, many district government chairmen themselves as
 well as other progovernment commanders of popular front militias and state enter-
 prise officials were nominated. Pressure and intimidation were used in some cases
 to ensure that such candidates were unopposed,
 A restrictive interpretation of the elections law by the Central Election Commis-
 sion (CEC) permitted each political party a theoretical maximum of 64 nominees
 (one for each of Tajikistan's administrative districts), rather than 181 (one for each
 electoral district), thus reducing the possibility of choices before the electorate. The
 Party of Popular Unity, the party of defeated presidential candidate Abdumalik
 Abdullajanov, was singied out for special harassment and pressure in the nomina-
 tion process. The CEC disqualified several of the party's nominees, including
 Abdullajanov. These actions later were upheld by the Supreme Court in what some
 observers believed was a foreordained decision.
 There are no barriers to female participation in the electoral process, although
 since the removal of Soviet-era quotas the number of female deputies has declined.
 At year's end, there were 5 female deputies in the Majlisi Oi, a female deputy
 prime minister, 2 women serving in positions with the rank of minister, and 18
 women with the rank of deputy minister.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government's record on dealing with international and nongovernmental in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights abuses was mixed. Lingering fear of persecution
 by government or extragovernmental elements has precluded efforts by citizens to
 form their own human rights organizations. The Government has not interfered,
 however, with citizens' and government officials' participation in international and
 local seminars sponsored by the OSCE, ICRC, U.N. agencies, NGO's, and foreign
 governments on such topics as the rule of law, an independent judiciary, and inter-
 national humanitarian law. Chairman Safarali Kenjaev of the Majlisi OR Law Leg-
 
 
 1057
 
 islation, and Human Rights Committee conducted several committee hearings out-
 side Dushanbe on human rights abuses.
 The Government, particu ary the Ministry of Labor, worked closely with the
 UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration on behalf of refugees and
 internally displaced persons and with UNMOT and the U.N. Secretary General's
 Special Representative in the course of the inter-Tajik talks. The UNHCR reported
 tlat the Government's responsiveness, including that of local authorities, was great-
 er than in 1994 in investigating cases of illegal housing occupation and accusations
 of crimes against returnees, although not all cases were brought to successful con-
 clusions.
 The OSCE's mission in Tajikistan expanded in September to include four addi-
 tional staff to assume the human rights monitoring function of the UNHCR, as the
 latter phased down its operation in the Khatlon region. The Government cooperated
 in this handover of responsibilities. Similarly, the Government supported the
 OSCE's decision to establish a national human rights institution. It proposed an om-
 budsman appointed by the President in consultation with the OSCE and engaged
 in extensive discussions with the OSCE on the mechanisms to do so. However, when
 the OSCE brought complaints of parliamentary election irregularities to the authori-
 ties' attention, the Government's cooperation with the organization was mixed. Simi-
 larly, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, although allowed to continue to operate its of-
 fice and generally given access to officials, reported that such access did not always
 lead to government responsiveness. The ICRC intensified contacts with government
 entities concerned with prisoners but still was not given full access to prisoners. The
 Committee to Protect Journalists was permitted to travel to Tajikistan and met with
 journalists and Government officials.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the rights and freedoms of every person regardless
 of nationality, race sex, language, religious beliefs, political persuasion, social sta-
 tus, knowledge, and property. It also explicitly states that men and women have the
 same rights. In practice, however, some discrimination continued as a result of con-
 servative cultural traditions and the lingering hostilities from the 1992 civil war.
 Women.-No official data are available on the prevalence of spousal abuse, nor are
 there NGO's that monitor this problem. Wife beating, however, is a common prob-
 lem. Conservative Muslim traditions, especially in rural areas, resulted in many
 cases of wife beating going unreported. There is no evidence that police officials and
 government organs do not prosecute responsibly those complaints that are filed.
 In each of the past few years more than 100 cases of rape have been investigated.
 The threat of rape is used to coerce women, who rarely go out alone and amost
 never at night.
 Laws exist against keeping brothels, acting as a procurer, making or selling por-
 nography, infecting another person with a venereal disease, and sexual exploitation
 of women. Inheritance laws do not discriminate against women. However, in prac-
 tice inheritances are usually handed down to the sons because of tradition and Is-
 lamic law.
 The participation of women in the work force and in institutes of higher learning
 is one of the more positive legacies of the Soviet era. There is no formal discrimina-
 tion against women in employment, education, or housing, and in urban areas
 women can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enterprises.
 However, in rural areas, women tend to marry young, have large families, and only
 rarely receive university education. Due to the prevalence of large families, women
 in rural areas are also much less likely to work outside the home. Articles in the
 Criminal Code protect women's rights in marriage and family matters, but often are
 not enforced, particularly in rural areas.
 With the assistance of the U.N. Development Program, the Government estab-
 ished a small Women in Development Unit toegalvanize other government agencies
 and enterprises to consider women's needs and encourage greater women's partici-
 pation in development activities and projects.
 Children.-The Government is ommitted to chldren's rights, having acceded to
 the Convention on the Rights of the Child and helped organize seminars with U.N.
 Children's Fund to publicize the obligations under this international treaty. How-
 ever, due to the faltering eonomy the extensive official social security network for
 child welfare continued to deteriorate. For each child, women are provided 3 years
 of maternity leave and monthly subsidies, which were increased at the time price
 controls on bread were lifted. Education is compulsory up to the age of 16, although
 this law is not currently enforced. All health care is free. However, the Govern-
 ment's lack of financial resources left it unable to fulfill many of its obligations for
 
 
 1058
 the provision of subsidies and care for mother and child health. UNICEF became
 interested in a new phenomenon in Tajik society, street children in the capital
 Dushanbe caused by the depressed economic situation.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Law on Social Protection of Invalids stipu-
 lates the right of the disabled to employment and adequate medical care. In prac-
 tice, however the Government does not require employers to provide physical access
 for the disabled. The absence of basic technology and the financial means to imple-
 ment the technology available to assist the disabled results, in practice, in high un-
 employment and widespread discrimination for disable persons. There is no law or
 regulation mandating accessibility for the disabled.
 Natiornl/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-After the civil war, over 90,000 people of pri-
 marily Gharmi and Pamiri origin fled to Afghanistan to avoid reprisals by
 progovernment forces. The repatriation of Tajiks continued during 1995, with gov-
 ernment encouragement. While making a good faith effort to assist with the repatri-
 ation of refugees, particularly those from Afghanistan, the Government did not ful-
 fill many of its pledges, including the payment of reconstruction fees for returi
 refuge families. However, in general, security for returning refugees improved,t
 the U   CR reporting far fewer cases of murder, rape, and harassment of returnees
 than in 1994. Similarly, according to the UNHCR, local procurators took a mere ac-
 tive stance in investigating alleged crimes against returnees. However, some procu-
 rators and judges continued to be subjected to threats and intimidation for inves-
 tigating or trying charges against militia members, often of Kulyabi origin.
 The Government, with limited effectiveness, conducted another disarmament cam-
 paign during 1995, aimed at the general population throughout Tajikistan and local
 militias and warlords, particularly those around Dushanbe and in the Kurgan Teppe
 area.
 In southern Tajikistan, Dushanbe, and even some parts of the northern
 Leninabad region, Kulyabi-origin Tajiks continued to displace other ethnic groups
 in local government positions. However, in the Ministry of Interior, the new Min-
 ister started removing professionally unqualified sta, who frequently were of
 Kullyabi origin.
 With the exception of the trilingual (TajiklUzbeklRussian) school structure, nei-
 ther the Uzbek nor the Russian language is afforded any official status in
 Tajikistan, despite the large numbers these ethnic minorities represent. The Gov-
 ernment permits radio and television broadcasts in Russian and Uzbek, in addition
 to Tajik. In practice, Russian, fis the language of interethnic communication and still
 widely used in government. Uzbek spe akers represent approximately 26 percent of
 the population, and Russian speakers less than 2 percent. The lack of official status
 for the Russian language was a contributing factor to the steady exodus of Russian
 speakers from Tajikistan. While the Government has repeatedly expressed its desire
 for the Russian-speaking population to remain, economic conditions provide little in-
 centive for them to do so. Plresident Rahmonov and Russian President Yeltsin signed
 an agreement on dual citizenship, which the two Parliaments must still ratify.
 Members of the Government, particularly security forces, continued to discrimi-
 nate against Afghan nationals by extorting bribes and not giving those who were
 victims of criminal elements even minimal police protection. Furthermore, the Gov-
 ernment closed down the Afghan bazaar in Dushanbe, thereby depriving many reg-
 istered Afghan refugees of a livelihood. The Central Department of Refugee Affairs
 under thelinistry of Labor in July took over from the UNHCR the registration of
 refugees. An unresolved problem stems from the unofficial Government policy of de-
 nying official status to the Afghan spouses of returning Tajik refugees (see Section
 2.).
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Law on Social Organization and the Law on
 Trade Union Rights and Guarantees provide all citizens with the right of associa-
 tion. This includes the right to form and join associations without prior authoriza-
 tion, to organize territorially, to form and join federations and affiliate with inter-
 national organizations freely, and to participate in international travel.
 The Federation of Trade Unions, a holdover from the Communist era, remains the
 dominant labor organization, although it has since shed its subordination to the
 Communist Party. The Federation consists of 20 professional trade unions and cur-
 rently claims 1,500 000 members, virtually all nonagricultural workers. The sepa-
 rate Trade Union of Non-State Enterprises has registered 3,245 small- and medium-
 sized enterprises, totaling 49,578 members. This union's membership has declined
 since 1994 due to the economic difficulties and bankruptcies of some member enter-
 prises. The Council of Ministers formally consults both labor unions during the
 drafting of social welfare and worker rights legislation.
 
 
 1059
 The Law on Tariff Agreements and Social Partnerships mandates that arbitration
 take place before a union may legally call a strike. Depending on the scale of the
 labor disagreement, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or govern-
 mental level. In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strike but
 both labor unions have publicly disavowed the utility of strikes in a period of deep-
 ening economic crisis and high unemployment and espoused compromise between
 management and workers.
 While there were no official, union-sanctioned strikes several wildcat strikes oc-
 curred. Workers in the Dushanbe silk factory struck in March, protesting the large
 number of Kulyabi appointments, particularly in the factory's security force, and the
 dismissal of the factory's director. Workers returned to work when the militia re-
 placed the Kulyabi guards and the director returned to his office. Also in March,
 workers of the Yavan heat and power station struck for payment of delinquent sala-
 ries. Local Ministry of Interior militia beat organizers and strike activists, forcing
 them to return to work after 1 day. Some 600 workers of the government printing
 house in Dushanbe, where all newspapers and magazines are located, engaged in
 a walkout in March, protesting nonpayment of salaries. After being threatened with
 violence by Ministry of Security (KNB) officers, the workers returned to work.
 Teachers in various districts of Leninabad region struck in April for nonpayment of
 salaries by the Government. Partial salaries were paid and the teachers returned
 to work. None of these strikes had the sanction of the labor unions and so were ille-
 gal. However the Ministry of Labor recognized that nonpayment of salaries to work-
 ers was a violation of International Labor Organization regulations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Participating in collective bargaining at the company level are employ-
 ees, members of the trade union, and management. Negotiations involving an indus-
 try sector include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the union's
 steering committee for that particular sector. As the economic situation worsens, it
 is becoming increasingly difficult for enterprises to engage in effective collective bar-
 gaining.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade
 union men    rship and a worker may not be fired solely for his or her union activ-
 ity. Any complaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union activist
 are first considered by a local labor union committee and, if necessary, raised to the
 level of the Supreme Court and investigated by the Ministry of Justice. The law re-
 quires employers found guilty of firing an workers because of union activity to rein-
 state them.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 35 of the Constitution pro-
 hibits forced labor, except in cases defined in law. No such laws have been passed
 since the adoption of the new Constitution. Neither the Law on Labor Protection
 nor the Law on Employment, both predating the 1994 Constitution, specifically pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. The Soviet practice of compelling students to pick
 cotton was officially banned in 1989. However, due to the lack of fuel and mechani-
 cal harvesting equipment, in the fall students in the Khatlon and Leninabad regions
 were again sent to the fields to pick cotton, as they were in 1993 and 1994.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to labor laws, the mini-
 mum age for the employment of children is 16, the age at which children may also
 legally leave school. With the concurrence of the local trade union, employment may
 begin at the age of 15. Workers under the age of 18 by law may work no more than
 6 hours a day and 36 hours per week. However, children as young as 7 years of
 age participate in agricultural work, which is classified as family assistance. Trade
 unions are responsible for reporting any violations in the employment of minors.
 Cases not resolved between the union and the employer may be brought before the
 Procurator General, who may investigate and charge the leader of the enterprise
 with violations of the Labor Code.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The President, on the advice of the Ministry
 of Labor and in consultation with trade unions, sets the minimum monthly wage.
 After introduction of the new national currency, the Tajik ruble, the minimum
 monthly wage in December was $.51 (144 Tajik rubles). This wage falls far short
 of providing a decent standard of living for a worker and family. The Government
 recognizes this and has accordingly retained and increased a system of subsidies for
 workers and their families at the minimum wage. With the new national currency,
 the Government started paying current-but not past-due-salaries, often only in
 partial amounts. The Government and the two trade union federations agreed in
 June to submit to the Majlisi Oli draft legislation abolishing limitations on maxi-
 
 
 1060
 
 mum monthly salaries. The Government imposed the limit in January 1994 in re-
 sponse to the continuing economic crisis and shortage of banknotes.
 As factories and enterprises either remained closed or were shut down because
 of the declining economy, workers were laid off or put on compulsory vacation for
 periods up to several months. Some establishments, both governmental and private,
 compensated their employees in kind with food commodities or the output of that
 particular concern for which the employee worked. The employee could then sell or
 barter those products in local private markets. Citizens in rural areas intensified
 cultivation of food crops on their private or rented plots, while even urban residents
 started tending small vegetable gardens and raising livestock.
 The legal workweek for adults (over age 18) is 40 hours, with a weekly 48-hour
 rest period. Overtime payment is mandated by law, with the first 2 hours of over-
 time to be paid at one and one-half times the normal rate and the rest of the over-
 time hours at double time.
 The Government has established occupational health and safety standards, but
 these fall far below accepted international norms, and the Government does not ac-
 tively enforce them in practice. The enforcement of work standards is the respon-
 sIility of the State Technical Supervision Committee under the Council of Min-
 isters. It is virtually certain, given the continuing economic decline, that 1993 statis-
 tics, reporting that over one-fifth of the population worked in substandard condi-
 tions, greatly underreport the number working in substandard conditions. New sta-
 tistics are not available. Workers can leave their jobs with 2 months' notice, but,
 given the bleak employment situation, few choose to do so. Under Article 13 of the
 w on Labor Protection, workers can remove themselves from hazardous conditions
 without risking loss of employment.
