 TAJIKISTAN
 Tajikistan remains in the hands of a largely authoritarian government, although
 it has established some nominally democratic structures. The Governments narrow
 base of support limits its ability to control the entire territory of the country. The
 Government of President Emomali Rahmonov, comprised largely of natives of the
 Kulob region, continued to dominate the State.
 Tajikistan took a significant step toward national reconciliation after its 1992 civil
 war, with the signing of a comprehensive peace accord in June and the inaugura-
 tion of a Commission on National Reconciliation in July in Moscow. An amnesty
 agreement and accord on exchange of prisoners also were signed; the Commission
 on National Reconciliation met in Moscow in July, before moving to Dushanbe in
 September. Despite the agreement, the United Nations Mission of Observers to
 Tajikistan (UNMOT) reported two cease-fire violations in August. Under the peace
 accords, the opposition is allotted 30 percent of government positions but as of year's
 end, the Government still had not given the opposition any positions. The judiciary
 is not independent.
 Internal security is the responsibility of the Ministries of Interior, Security, and
 Defense. The Russian Army's 201st Motorized Rifle Division, part of a Common-
 wealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force established in 1993, re-
 mained in the country. The Russian Border Guas Force (RBF) reports to Moscow,
 has primary responsibility for guarding the border with Afghanistan, and is com-
 prised mostly of Tajiks with some Russians and a limited number of other Central
 Asians, although the officer corps remains principally Russian. Some regions of the
 country remained effectively outside the Government s control, and government con-
 trol in other areas existed only by day, or at the sufferance of local opposition com-
 manders. Opposition forces basednear Kofarnihon, east of Dushanbe, carried out a
 variety of attacks during the year. Some members of the security forces and govern-
 ment-aligned militias committed serious human rights abuses. The armed opposi-
 tion also committed serious human rights abuses, including abductions and mur-
 ders. There have been credible reports of threatening, extortion and abuse of civilian
 populations by both government and United Tajik Opposition units.
 The economy continued to be extremely depressed, and government revenue re-
 mains highly dependent on the government-owned aluminum and government-domi-
 nated cotton industries. Economic reform has been halting. Most Soviet-era factories
 operate at a minimal level, if at all, while privatization has moved ahead only slow-
 ly. As much as one-third of the total population is unemployed or significantly un-
 deremployed according to government estimates. Inflation increased during 1997,
 and the exchange rate declined substantially as the Government failed to maintain
 fiscal and budgetary discipline. Many, but not all, wages and pensions are being
 paid. However, because most yearly salary percentage increases are still meager and
 do not keep up with inflation, the sums remain extremely low and not enough to
 support adequate nutrition without supplemental income. Gross domestic product
 increased marginally, but remained as low as $200-$400 per person, according to
 official statistics. There were serious shortages of natural gas for heating and indus-
 try, largely as a result of continued disputes with Uzbekistan over natural gas pur-
 chases. Wheat acreage and the total harvest continued to increase dramatically as
 privatized farmers responded to their own and market needs for increased produc-
 tion, although state farm harvests continue to be mediocre.
 The Government's human rights record improved slightly, due principally to the
 reduced level of violence and the absence of widespread military conflict; however,
 serious problems remain.
 The Government limits citizens' right to change their government. Some members
 of the security forces were responsible for killings and beatings, and often abused-
 detainees. These forces were also responsible for threats, extortion, looting, and
 abuse of civilians. Certain battalions of nominally government forces operated quasi-
 independently under their various leaders, who generally have government posi-
 tions. These forces committed similar abuses. The government prosecuted few per-
 petrators for these abuses. Prison conditions remain life threatening, and the Gov-
 ernment continued to use arbitrary arrest and detention. Basic problems of rule of
 law persist. There are often long delays before trials, and the judiciary is subject
 to political and paramilitary pressure. The authorities infringe on citizens' right to
 privacy. There has been public criticism of corrupt or criminal actions by Ministry
 of Interior employees, several dozen of whom were removed from their positions dur-
 in the year.
 The Government severely restricts freedom of the press, restricts freedom of
 speech, and dominates the electronic media. No genuine opposition media appeared
 
 
 1320
 during the year, and the Government suspended and harassed independent local tel-
 evision stations. The authorities strictly control freedom of assembly and association
 for political organizations. Freedom of assembly is hindered. Two new political par-
 ties were allowed to register, bringing the total to 11; the 3 opposition parties and
 a branch of the fourth affiliated with the armed opposition remained suspended. The
 Government cooperated to a limited extent with the Organization on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in Dushanbe, but did not establish a human rights
 ombudsman as recommended by the OSCE. The Government also did not establish
 its own ombudsman, despite its statement in 1996 that it would do so. Violence
 against women is a problem.
 Several armed clashes among ostensible government supporters occurred, result-
 ing in civilian deaths, abuse, and property damage. The general weakness of govern-
 ment control and continuing decline in social order led to an increase in crime and
 violence, including politically-inspired violence.
 The armed opposition committed numerous serious abuses. Opposition forces were
 responsible for killings, kidnapings, abuse, threats, and extortion, including against
 civilians.
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the independence of Tajikistan in
 1991, regional, political, and religious tensions led to a brief but violent civil war
 in 1992-93. A low scale guerrilla war continued until late 1996, led by a coalition
 of regionally based, democratic and Islamic groups, with a political base and refugee
 population in northern Afghanistan, against the winners of the civil war, a loose co-
 alition of also regionally based, but more politically traditional, that is Communist,
 elements. By June a series of accords had been signed ending the civil strife and
 pointing to elections in 1998.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Extrajudicial killings numbered in
 the scores but it was difficult to attribute responsibility in many individual cases.
 Some killings were committed by competing government forces for varying motives,
 both political and economic; some by the opposition; and some by independent war-
 lords.
 For example commanders under Presidential Guard chief Ghaffar Mirzoyev have
 reportedly carried out a number of killings in the Tursunzade area since they took
 control of it from mutinous forces in August. In one case, a religious leader with
 ties to the Tajik opposition and his son were killed by a hand grenade thrown into
 their house in early November.
 In April an assassination attempt in Khujand slightly wounded the President and
 killed two members of his entourage. The grenade thrown at the President and de-
 fensive action by security forces also wounded 70 other persons. Government forces
 arrested a large number of civilians and some officials, in some cases using the as-
 sassination attempt to arrest opponents without any evidence of their involvement.
 Many of those arrested are still in jail. While some have been tried and sentenced,
 most are still being investigated. A number of local officials, businessmen, and pro-
 fessional figures were killed during the year for a variety of political, economic, and
 ethnic reasons. Few suspects, if any, have been identified. The Government has in-
 vestigated some of the higher profile cases, but without positive results. The com-
 petence of those efforts as well as their independence are questionable. A number
 of murders have been essentially concealed with official news noting only that some-
 one died.
 At about 3:00 a.m. on October 16, gunmen attacked the headquarters of the Presi-
 dential Guards and killed 14 persons; some guards were shot and killed while they
 slept. Some of the attackers also were killed, but responsibility for the attack re-
 mained unclear at year's end.
 In January an extended series of clashes between two groups seeking to control
 Tursunzade resulted in the death of at least several persons, and perhaps a signifi-
 cantly higher number, some of them unarmed bystanders. These killings do not ap-
 pear to be connected with the government-opposition conflict, but reflect the lack of
 governmental control and the seizure of local authority by regional strngmen. Ap-
 proximately 20 people were killed in clashes between followers of rival government
 officials in August. In the aftermath of this fighting between opposing elements
 within the government forces in southern Tajikistan, especially in the wake of the
 failed mutiny by renegade government Colonel Mahmud Khudoberdiev, there were
 widespread  reports  of killings  of personnel belonging   to  or  supporting
 Khudoberdiev's losing side, and of ethnic Uzbeks, although it is unclear whether the
 
 
 1321
 latter killings were politically motivated or resulted from the absence of law and
 order.
 Several Russian army officers, soldiers, and staff were killed during the year. The
 Russian forces and the Government have generally blamed the opposition in these
 cases, charges that the oposition has denied. On February 18, six ethnic Russians,
 including two off duty US. Embassy security guards were killed. The alleged per-
 petrators, who belonged to the United Tajik Opposition, confessed in the presence
 of United Nations personnel. Opposition leaders denied that they had any respon-
 sibility for the attack. In September an ethnic Russian music teacher and her son
 were killed in her apartment. "Death to Russians' and "Allahu Akbar" were
 scrawled in blood on the wall.
 Poor prison conditions and lack of food and adequate medical treatment resulted
 in a significant number of deaths in custody, although the situation improved over
 1996 (see Section 1.c.).
 There have been no developments in, among other outstanding cases, the 1996
 murders of the mufti of Tajikistan and members of his family; Muhammad Osimi,
 a respected senior academic; and a prominent member of Parliament.
 b. Disappearance.-There were a number of disappearances during the year. The
 bodies of a number of persons who were kidnaped and killed were later found.
 On February 4, 5, and 6, hostages eventually totaling 16 persons, including Min-
 ister of Security Saidamir Zuhurov, four UNMOT representatives, and four journal-
 ists, were seized by independent opposition commander Bahrom Alimardonovich
 Sedirov. The hostages were held from February 4 to February 17. In August two
 sons of former mufti Amonullo Nematzoda, the head of the Islamic Center of
 Tajikistan, were taken hostage and held for ransom. Nematzoda was taken hostage
 and released in October. A number of militia personnel were taken hostage at var-
 ious times; some were killed.
 Two French citizens, Franck Janvier-Dupuy, the director of the European Union's
 technical assistance program, and Karine Mane were kidnaped in mid-November in
 Dushambe and held hostage in proposed exchange for the leader of the February
 kidnaping incident. Mane died during a government-led rescue attempt.
 The Government has not been active in investigating disappearances from pre-
 vious years due to insufficient resources, political pressure, and a lack of profes-
 sionalism. There were no developments in the 1996 disappearance of Zafar
 Rahmonov, the opposition cochairman of the Joint Commission on cease-fire obser-
 vation.
 There have been no reports of disappearances tied to forcible conscription.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits such practices, but in practice the Government violates such pro-
 hibitions. Security officials, particularly those in the Ministry of Interior, regularly
 beat detainees in custody, and use systematic beatings to extort confessions. There
 were credible allegations that security forces illegally detained, mistreated, and beat
 members of opposition parties-or their relatives (see Section 1.d.). There were no re-
 ports of rape or threat of rape of women in prison or detention.
 Prison conditions remain harsh and life threatening. Prisons are generally over-
 crowded, unsanitary, and disease-ridden? producing serious threats to many pris-
 oners' health, although there was slight improvement in food and -medical care re-
 flecting ICRC assistance. This problem reflects in part-the self-funded status of most
 prisons, under which before 1992 prisoners grew much of their own food or made
 goods for sale. The general collapse of governmental programs and of the economy
 also caused the virtual disappearance of these programs. Conditions in most prisons
 improved somewhat in 1997, due primarily to the efforts of international relief
 groups and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Some food pro-
 duction is resuming.
 A major cause of the April uprising in a Khujand prison were reports that the
 Government planned to transfer prisoners to Dushanbe, away from their families
 and food source. Twenty-six prisoners were shot and killed when government forces
 retook the prison.
 Family members are allowed access to prisoners only after a guilty verdict, in ac-
 cordance with the law. The ICRC has succeeded in getting permission for access to
 convicted prisoners but not those in pretrial detention (where most abuses occur)
 despite written assurances from semor government officials (see Section 4). The
 ICRC has been able to establish a program to provide food for both guards and pris-
 oners in many institutions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Code has not been signifi-
 cantly amended since independence, and it therefore retains many of the defects in-
 herited from Soviet times. The Government continued to arbitrarily arrest and de-
 tain citizens. Revision of the Criminal Code is a high priority of the Majlisi Oli (par-
 
 
 1322
 
 liament), however, because of the size and complexity of the code, the small par-
 liamentary staff, and limited time in session for the Majlisi, progress has been slow.
 The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention and provides few checks on the
 power of procurators and police to arrest persons. Public order, which broke down
 during the civil war, has yet to be fully restored, and the virtual immunity from
 prosecution of armed militia groups has further eroded the integrity of the legal sys-
 tem.
 Police legally may detain persons without a warrant for a period of 72 hours, and
 the procurator's offie ma  do so for a period of 10 day  atr which the accused
 must be officially charged. At that point, the Criminal C ode permits pretrial deten-
 tion for up to 15 months. The first 3 months of detention are at the discretion of
 the local procurator, the second 3 months must be approved at the regional level,
 and the Procurator General must sanction the remaining time in detention. The
 Criminal Code maintains that all investigations must be completed 1 month before
 the 15-month maximum in order to allow the defense time to examine government
 evidence. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a preliminary judicial
 hearing on the charge or detention. In criminal cases, detainees may be released
 and restricted to their place of residence pending trial. Once a case is entered for
 trial, the law states that it must be brought before a judge within 28 days. However,
 it is common for cases to languish for many months before the trial begins.
 Politically motivated arrests apparently have increased, especially in the north
 followingthe April 30 assassination attempt on the President, and in the south fol-
 lowing the August military clash between government factions. Arrests numbered
 in the scores. There are credible allegations of illegal government detention for ques-
 tioning of members of opposition political parties or their relatives. In most cases,
 the security officers, principally personnel from the Ministry of Internal Affairs and
 Ministry of Security, do not obtain arrest warrants and do not bring charges. Those
 released sometimes claimed that they were mistreated and beaten during detention.
 Opposition sources maintain that security forces detained dozens of persons un-
 lawfully without charge. Since the law precludes visits to persons in pretrial deten-
 tion, it is not possible to assess these allegations. There could be as many as several
 hundred political detainees, but the absence of ICRC or other access to these per-
 sons makes any estimate uncertain.
 The Constitution states that no one can be exiled without a legal basis; no laws
 have been passed so far setting out any legal basis for exile. There were no reports
 of the use of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public lrial.-The 1994 Constitution states that judges are inde-
 pendent and subordinate only to the Constitution and the law; it prohibits inter-
 lerence in their activities. However, judicial officials at all levels of the court system
 are heavily influenced by both the political leadership and, in many instances,
 armed paramilitary groups. Under the Constitution, the President has the right,
 with confirmation by the Parliament, to both appoint and dismiss judges and pros-
 ecutors. In one case involving Abdulhafiz Abdullajonov, the brother of a political op-
 ponent of the President, who was arrested in early summer, narcotics charges ap-
 pear fabricated. The judge was removed after ruling against the Government's case;
 the Government has since claimed that the judge took a bribe and was removed for
 corruption. Abdullajonov is now charged with direct involvement in the April assas-
 sination attempt against the president and is on trial for that crime. Judges at the
 local, regional and republic level are, for the most part, poorly trained and lack un-
 derstanding of an independent judiciary.
 The court system, largely unmodified from the Soviet period, includes city, dis-
 trict, regional, and national levels, with a parallel military system. Higher courts
 serve as appellate courts for the lower ones. The Constitution establishes additional
 courts, including a Constitutional Court. This court has begun to function, has
 heard some cases, and issued decisions.
 According to the law, trials are public, except in cases involving national security
 or the protection of minors. The court appoints an attorney for those who do not
 have one. Defendants may choose their own attorneys but may not necessarily
 choose among court-appointed defenders. In practice arrested persons are often de-
 nied prompt, and in some cases any, access to an attorney.
 The procurator's office is responsible for conducting all investigations of alleged
 criminal conduct. In theory both defendant and counsel have the right to review all
 government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence and testimony.
 Nogoups are barred from testifying, and all testimony is theoretically given equal
 weight, regardless of the ethnicity or gender of the witness. Ministry of Justice offi-
 cials maintain that defendants benefit from the presumption of innocence, despite
 the unmodified Soviet legal statute, which presumes the guilt of all brought to trial.
 Thus, in practice, bringing charges tends to suggest guilt to most Tajiks.
 
 
 1323
 Pressure continues to be exerted on the judicial system by local strongmen, their
 armed paramilitary groups, and vigilantes who operate outside of government con-
 trol, sometimes leading to the dismissal of charges and dropping of cases. Bribery
 of prosecutors and judges is also considered to be widespread.
 The Government holds political prisoners including opposition party activists, al-
 though estimates of the number of prisoners vary widely. The Government and the
 Tajik opposition exchanged multiple lists of prisoners of war (POW's) and political
 prisoners for exchange as a result of the June inter-Tajik talks in Moscow. The larg-
 est opposition list totaled 700 names of political prisoners believed by the opposition
 to be in government custody, while the largest government list totaled over 400 sol-
 diers believed by the Government to be held by the opposition. Both lists undoubt-
 edly include many names of persons missing, dead, or in the case of POW's held
 by the opposition, having defected. The Government released 48 prisoners in July
 in exchange for 49 prisoners held by the opposition. A second prisoner exchange in
 August was delayed by fighting resulting from Khudoberdiev's mutiny. In Septem-
 ber 25 soldiers held by the opposition were released and in October, the opposition
 released 85 and the Government 78 persons.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides- for the inviolability of the home and prohibits interference
 with correspondence, telephone conversations, and postal and communication rights,
 except "in cases prescribed by law." Police may not enter and search a private home
 without the approval of the procurator. In some cases, police may enter and search
 a home without- permission, but they must then inform the procurator within 24
 hours. Police also are permitted to enter and search homes without permission if
 they have compelling reason to believe a delay in-obtaining a warrant would impair
 national security. There is no judicial review of police searches conducted without
 a warrant.
 There are continuing credible reports of arbitrary illegal search, seizure, and
 looting by government forces, especially in the wake of the August fighting in south-
 ern and western Tajikistan.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The level of violence that was dominant during the peak of the civil war in
 1992-93 has dropped dramatically with the implementation of the cease-fire and the
 signing of the comprehensive peace accords. Those incidents of violence that have
 occurred during the year are largely the acts of terrorists or the consequence of ac-
 tions by a still armed population.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite the Constitution and the 1991 law pro-
 tecting freedom of speech and the press, the Government severely restricts freedom
 of expression in practice. Journalists, broadcasters, and individual citizens who dis-
 agree with government policies cannot speak freely or critically. The Government
 exercises control over the media both overtly through legislation and less obviously
 through such mechanisms as "friendly advice" to reporters on what news should not
 be covered. The Government also controlled the printing presses and the supply of
 newsprint, and broadcasting facilities, and subsidizes virtually all publications and
 productions. Editors fearful of reprisals exercise careful self-censorship.
 There is one national television service with several local offices which cover re-
 gional and local issues from an official point of view. There are also about 10 inde-
 pendent television stations that do not at this time have their own facilities and
 must make use of the official studios for most of their work. There are a variety
 of local -newspapers, but only a handful attempt to cover serious news. Several are
 organs of political parties or blocs. Of three serious newspapers in Dushanbe, two
 were closed briefly in mid-November after one published an interview with a gov-
 ernment opponent.
 Both Ittihod, the weekly of the socialist party, and.Samar, the weekly belonging
 to an entrepreneur and deputy of Parliament from the Vose district, on occasion
 were prevented from publishing articles critical of the Government. The Govern-
 ment nationalized a publishing house belonging to the Communist Party. An inde-
 pendent television station in the northern city of Khujand, linked to a former pro-
 vincial chairman, closed by the regional government in 1996, remained closed. De-
 spite passage of a new media law in December 1996, permitting independent tele-
 vision stations, the Government officially closed some such stations in 1997, and
 was very slow in publishing implementing regulations to permit independent sta-
 tions to register. However, regulations were finally issued in the fall, and by the
 end of December, three stations were licensed and operating legally, and four others
 filed the required documents and need only pay registration fees.
 
 
 1324
 Academic expression is limited principally by the complete reliance of scientific in-
 stitutes upon government funding, and in practical terms by the need to find alter-
 nate employment to generate sufficient income, leaving little time for academic writ-
 ing. In one incident, armed men broke into the house of the rector of the Tajik tech-
 nological university and threatened to kill him if he did not resign within 10 days.
 He left Dushanbe shortly thereafter, but did not resign and returned to his position.
 The assailants have not been identified.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly; in practice, however, the authorities exercise strict
 control over organizations and activities of a political nature. Nonpolitical associa-
 tions, such as trade unions, are allowed to meet. Registered organizations must
 apply for a permit from the local executive committee in order legally to organize
 any public assembly or demonstration. Sometimes the right is granted, but the gov-
 ernment subsequently has been known to take reprisals against the organizers.
 There were demonstrations in Khujand during the spring in connection with a local
 prison uprising, and there were public assemblies in several southern cities during
 the year. These events were held without interference, although there were reprisals
 in the north following the demonstrations.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, however, although this right
 is permitted for nonpolitical associations, including trade unions, freedom of associa-
 tion is circumscribed by the requirement (in the law on nongovernmental associa-
 tions) that all organizations must first register with the Ministry of Justice. This
 process is often slowed by the requirement to submit documents in both Russian
 and Tajik. The Ministry of Justice's verification of the text inevitably delays the
 granting of registration. In practice the authorities exercise strict control over orga-
 nizations and activities of a political nature. Once registered an organization may
 apply for a permit to hold a public assembly or demonstration.
 There are six political parties officially registered with the Government. Three of
 the four political parties suspended in 1993-the Islamic Revival Party, the
 Rastokhez National -Movement, and the Lali Badakhshan Movement for the Auton-
 omy of the Pamirs-remain suspended. In March 1996 a seventh political party,
 Adolatkhol (justice seeker), was registered. In addition a national front organization
 (Public Accord) established by the Government was registered in March 1996.
 In several cases, members of suspended political parties have been unable to find
 employment, apparently at the direction of the security services.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion. Reli-
 gion and State are separate, and neither the law nor the Government places restric-
 tions on religious worship. However, according to the Law on Freedom of Faith, the
 Committee on Religious Affairs under the Council of Ministers registers religious
 communities and monitors the activities of the various religious establishments.
 While the official reason given to justify registration is to ensure that religious
 groups are acting in accordance with the law, the practical purpose is to ensure that
 they do not become overtly political. Recently organized religious communities, such
 as Bahai and Hare Krishna Igoups although unregistered exist with no apparent
 formal restriction and only limited experiences of prejudice. The independent
 Muftiyat was dissolved and a replacement Council of the Islamic Center was subor-
 dinated to the Government Committee on Religious Affairs. Muftiyat may have been
 dissolved to avoid conflict with the opposition over control of the organization. It
 happened quietly with no apparent objection from the observant Muslim commu-
 nit.
 Lnited Tajik Opposition leader, Abdullo Nuri, said in a July interview that the
 appearance of different faiths in Tajikistan was a threat to the survival of the na-
 tion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose their place
 of residence, to emigrate, and to return. In practice the Government generally re-
 spects these rights, with some regulation.
 The Government has stipulated that both citizens and foreigners are prohibited
 from traveling within a 25-kilometer zone along the country's borders with China
 and Afghanistan without permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In prac-
 tice, however, international aid workers and diplomats travel freely in these regions
 without prior government authorization.
 Residents of Dushanbe and those travelers wishing to remain longer than 3 days
 are supposed to register with central authorities, and regulations require registra-
 tion at the local Ministry of Interior office upon arrival and departure from a city.
 However, these regulations are largely ignored in practice. There are no legal re-
 strictions on changing residence or workplace.
 
 
 1325
 The Ministry of Security inhibits freedom of travel by requiring citizens who wish
 to travel abroad to obtain an exit visa. This process sometimes includes lengthy
 interviews. The Ministry of Security sometimes withholds or delays exit visas when
 it believes that other ministries or NGO's are infringing on its jurisdiction and have
 not adhered to its formalities for foreign travel.
 There is no law on emigration. Those wishing to migrate within the former Soviet
 Union notify the Ministry of Interior of their departure. Persons wishing to emigrate
 beyond the borders of the former Soviet Union must receive the approval of the rel-
 evant country's embassy in order to obtain their passport. Persons who settle abroad
 are-required to inform the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests section of the
 nearest Russian embassy or consulate.
 Persons who wish to return to Tajikistan after having emigrated may do so freely
 by submitting their applications to the Tajikistan embassy or Tajikistan interests
 section, of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate. The Government adjudicates
 requests on a case-by-case basis. There is no indication that persons, other than
 those who fled Tajikistan for political reasons after the civil war, are not freely per-
 mitted to return. Some persons currently active with the Tajik opposition, whose
 travel- documents expired, at times have had difficulty obtaining new documents
 permitting them to return.
 Under the 1994 refugee law, a person granted refugee status is provided with the
 right to work and move freely throughout the country. The Central Department of
 Refugee Affairs under the Ministry of Labor has responsibility for the registration
 of refugees.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to
 refugee status. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where
 they. feared persecution. The, Government particularly the Ministry of Labor, worked
 closely with the UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration on behalf
 of refugees and internally displaced persons.
 The Government provides first asylum, and has provided it to 1,060 refugees from
 Afghanistan since July 1995.
 The Central Department of Refugee Affairs (CDR) under the Ministry of Labor
 handles the registration of Afghan refugees, in accordance with the 1951 U.N. Con-
 vention Relating to the Status of Refugees and Tajikistan's 1994 Law on Refugees.
 An unresolved problem stems from the unofficial government policy of denying offi-
 cial status to the Afghan spouses of returning Tajik refugees. Although the UNHCR
 has aided their admission to the country (avoiding their being jailed as illegal immi-
 grants), their legal status remains uncertain.
 Almost all Tajik refugees from northern Afghanistan returned to Tajikistan fol-
 lowing the signing of thepeace accords, while those internally displaced persons in
 Gorno-Badakhshan who desired to do so, returned to their home areas. Although
 problems remain with illegal occupation of returnees' homes by those loyal to the
 victorious popular front militias, progress continues to be made in evicting the occu-
 piers.
 There is no legal basis for forcible repatriation, nor is there any-evidence to sug-
 gest that it was practiced in 1997.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Government limits the right of citizens to-change their government peacefully
 and freely, although the peace accords signed in June foresee parliamentary elec-
 tions in 1998. The Government of President Rahmonov remains dominated by
 Kulobi regional political interests, although the prime ministers have been from the
 northern KhuJand region. Some opposition party activists remained either jailed or
 in self-exile abroad, but since the signing of the peace accords, several members of
 the United Tajik Opposition, including its leader Said Abdullo Nuri, have returned
 to the country.
 The last parliamentary (Majlisi Oli) elections conducted in 1995 were marked by
 numerous irregularities, such as voter intimidation and ballot-box stuffing, and did
 not result in a truly independent parliament. A number of Members of Parliament
 lead parties or groups that oppose the Government vigorously on specific issues.
 There are no formal barriers to women's participation in the electoral process, al-
 though since the removal of Soviet-era quotas the number of female deputies has
 declined. At year's end, there were 16 female deputies in the Parliament, 1 female
 serving as a deputy prime minister, 1 female minister, and several female deputy
 ministers.
 
 
 1326
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government's record on dealing with international and nongovernmental in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights abuses was mixed. Fear of persecution by gov-
 ernment or extragovernmental elements has discouraged efforts by citizens to form
 their own human rights organizations. The Government has not prevented citizens'
 and government officials' participation in international and local seminars spon-
 sored by the OSCE, the ICRC, United Nations agencies, NGO's, and foreign govern-
 ments on such topics as the rule of law, an independent judiciary, and international
 humanitarian law. Discussion at such seminars, including those held in Tajikistan,
 has at times been critical of the Government. The Government initially refused to
 register Human Rights Watch as an international organization, asserting that it
 does nothing to benefit citizens, but has since agreed to its registration.
 The Government, particularly the Ministry of Labor, worked closely with the
 UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) on behalf of refu-
 gees and internally displaced persons and with the United Nations Mission of Ob-
 servers in Tajikistan and the U.N. Secretary General's Special Representative on
 the return of refugees from Afghanistan and internally displaced persons from
 Gorno-Badakshan.
 The OSCE's mission continues to monitor human rights issues with the help of
 three field offices, which receive generally good cooperation from local officials.
 While the Government at first agreed to establish a national human rights institu-
 tion and ombudsman position with OSCE financial support, it later decided, in 1996,
 to establish and fund such functions itself. However, thus far no institution or om-
 budsman position has been established. The Government refused the OSCE permis-
 sion to open an additional offices in Gharm but, by the end of the year, had given
 permission to open an office in Khojand.
 The ICRC intensified its contacts with government entities concerned with pris-
 oners, but still was not given access to prisoners in accordance with its standard
 modalities, despite letters from senior government officials asserting that such ac-
 cess would be provided.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for the rights and freedoms of every person regardless
 of nationality, race, sex, language, religious beliefs, political persuasion, social sta-
 tus, knowledge, and property. It also explicitly states that men and women have the
 same rights. In practice, however, there is discrimination as a result of cultural tra-
 ditions and the lingering hostilities from the 1992 civil war.
 Women.-Wife beating is a common problem. In both urban and rural areas,
 many cases of wife beating are unreported and many of those reported are not in-
 vestigated. There is a widespread reluctance to discuss the issue or provide assist-
 ance to women in abusive situations. In addition abduction of brides is widely re-
 ported, and there are reliable reports of young women prevented from leaving the
 country due to threats against their families should they do so.
 The Criminal Code prohibits rape, although it is widely believed that most rape
 cases are unreported. There are no rape crisis centers or special police units for han-
 dling these cases. The threat of rape is reliably reported as being used to coerce
 women. The situation is exacerbated by a general decline in public order, so that
 in many cities, including Dushanbe, women exercise particular care in their move-
 ment, especially at night.
 Laws exist against keeping brothels, procuring, making or selling pornography,
 infecting another person with a venereal disease, and sexual exploitation of women.
 However, prostitutes openly operate at night in certain areas.
 According to the law, women have equal rights with men. Inheritance laws do not
 discriminate against women. In practice, however, inheritances may pass dispropor-
 tionately to sons.
 The participation of women in the work force and in institutes of higher learning
 is one of the more positive legacies of the Soviet era. There is no formal discrimina-
 tion against women in employment, education, or housing, and in urban areas
 women can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enterprises.
 However, divorce rates in urban areas are comparatively high, and women tend to
 carry the burden of child-rearing and household management whether married or
 divorced. In rural areas, women tend to marry younger, have larger families, and
 receive less education than women in cities. Due to the prevalence of large families,
 women in rural areas are also much less likely to work outside the home. Articles
 in the Criminal Code protect women's rights in marriage and family matters.
 
 
 1327
 
 Children.-The extensive government social security network for child welfare
 continued to deteriorate. Women are provided 3 years of maternity leave and
 monthly subsidies for each child, and health care is free. Education is compulsory
 until age 16, but the law is not enforced. However the Government's lack of fman-
 cial resources left it unable to fulfill many of its obligations for the provision of sub-
 sidies and care for maternal and child health.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Law on Social Protection of Invalids stipu-
 lates the right of the disabled to employment and adequate medical care. In prac-
 tice, however the Government does not require employers to provide physical access
 for the disabied. Financial constraints and the absence of basic technology to assist
 the disabled results, in practice, in high unemployment and widespread discrimina-
 tion. There is no law mandating accessibility for the disabled. There are facilities
 for the mentally disabled, however, funding is limited and the facilities are in poor
 condition. Several international NGO's provided limited assistance.
 Religious Minorities.-There have been reports of physical harassment of non-
 Muslim women by conservative Muslims in rural areas for not wearing proper at-
 tire. Muslim leaders have occasionally expressed concern that minority religious
 groups undermine national unity.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-After the civil war, over 75,000 people of pri-
 marily Gharmi and Pamiri origin fled to Afghanistan to avoid reprisals by
 progovernment forces. Most of these persons returned in 1994, 1995, and 1996, and
 many more returned after the June signing of the peace accords. Almost all refugees
 returned by year's end. In general security for returning refugees was good, and the
 OSCE reported that the large inflow of returnees that began in the summer suffered
 virtually no harassment.
 With the exception of the trilingual (Tajik/Uzbek/Russian) school structure, Uzbek
 has no official status, although Uzbeks comprise nearly one-quarter of the popu-
 lation. The Government permits radio and television broadcasts in Russian and
 Uzbek, in addition to Tajik. In practice Russian is the language of interethnic com-
 munication and widely used in Government. Ethnic Russians and related Russian
 speakers, e.g., Ukrainians make up less than 12 percent of the population. While
 the Government has repeatedly expressed its desire for the ethnic Russian and Slav-
 ic populations to remain, economic conditions provide little incentive for them to do
 so, and some local Russians and other Slavs perceive an increase in negative social
 attitudes toward them. A Slavic university and an exclusively ethnic Russian high
 school operate in Dushanbe, with Russian as the language of instruction. An agree-
 ment ratified by the Russian Duma in December 1996 allows for dual Russian and
 Tajik citizenship.
 Section 6, Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Law on Social Organization and the Law on
 Trade Union Rights and Guarantees provide all citizens with the right of associa-
 tion, which includes the right to form and join unions without prior authorization,
 to organize territorially, and to form and join federations.
 The Federation of Trade Unions, a holdover from the Communist era, remains the
 dominant labor organization, although it has since shed its subordination to the
 Communist Party. The Federation consists of 20 professional trade unions and cur-
 rently claims 1.5 million members, virtually all nonagricultural workers. The sepa-
 rate Trade Union of Non-State Enterprises has registered unions in over 3,000
 small and medium-sized enterprises, totaling about 50,000 employees, although
 many of these enterprises are not functioning due to the general economic depres-
 sion. The same is true for many members of the Federation of Trade Unions. The
 Council of Ministers formally consults both labor federations during the drafting of
 social welfare and worker rights legislation.
 The Law on Tariff Agreements and Social Partnerships mandates that arbitration
 take place before a union may legally call a strike. Depending on the scale of the
 labor disagreement, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or govern-
 mental level. In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strike, but
 both labor unions have publicly disavowed the utility of strikes in a period of deep-
 ening economic crisis and high unemployment and espoused compromise between
 management and workers.
 There were no official, union-sanctioned strikes, and wildcat strikes, which oc-
 curred in 1996, were not known to have occurred this year. ,
 The law provides citizens with the right to affiliate with international organiza-
 tions freely.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 
 
 1328
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Employees, members of the trade union, and management participate in
 collective bargaining at the company level. Negotiations involving an industry sector
 include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the union's steering
 committee for that particular sector. As the economic situation worsens, it is becom-
 ing increasingly difficult for enterprises to engage in effective collective bargaining.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade
 union membership, nor may a worker be fired solely for union activity. Any com-
 plaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union activist are first con-
 sidered by a local labor union committee and, if necessary, raised to the level of the
 Supreme Court and investigated by the Ministry of Justice. The law compels an em-
 ployer found guilty of fring an employee based on union activity to reinstate the
 employee.
 ere are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, except in cases defined in law. No laws have been passed defining such cases
 since the adoption of the Constitution. Neither the Law on Labor Protection nor the
 Law on Employment, both predating the 1994 Constitution, specifically prohibits
 forced or compulsory labor. The Soviet practice of compelling students to pick cotton
 was officially banned in 1989, although there continue to be reports of high school
 students sent to the fields to pick cotton, sometimes with compensation. Residents
 of kolkhozes may still be required to pick cotton, although wages are not often not
 paid and the kolkhoz no Ionger provides the services it once did.
 Although forced or bonded labor by children is not specifically prohibited by law,
 other than traditional family participation in agricultural or home craftsman work,
 there is no pattern of such activity. The legal code specifies the minimum age of
 16 years for employment and extensively regulates working conditions; children can
 perform household-based labor after age 7.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-According
 to labor laws, the minimum age for the employment of children is 16 years, the age
 at which children also may leave school legally. With the concurrence of the local
 trade union, employment may begin at the age of 15. By law workers under the age
 of 18 may work no more than 6 hours a day and 36 hours per week. However, chil-
 dren as young as 7 years of age participate in agricultural work, which is classified
 as family assistance. Many children under 10 years of age work in the bazaars or
 sell newspapers or consumables on the streets. Trade unions are responsible for re-
 porting any violations in the employment of minors. Cases not resolved between the
 union and the employer may be brought before the Procurator General, who may
 investigate and charge the manager of the enterprise with violations of the Labor
 Code.
 Although forced or bonded labor by children is not prohibited by law, there is no
 societal pattern for such activity (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The President, on the advice of the Ministry
 of Labor and in consultation with trade unions, sets the minimum monthly wage.
 The nominal minimum wage of $.35 (322 Tajik rubles) falls far short of providing
 a minimal standard of living for a worker and family. The Government recognizes
 this problem and has retained certain subsidies for workers and their families at
 the minimum wage. Although the Government adopted a wage indexation law in
 1993 and inflation has been high, the law has not been implemented.
 The economy remained extremely weak during the year, with a majority of indus-
 try standing idle by the end of the year. As factories and enterprises either re-
 mained closed or were shut down, workers were laid off or furloughed for extended
 periods. Some establishments, both governmental and private, compensated their
 employees in kind with food commodities or the output of the particular concern for
 which the employee worked. The employee could then sell or barter those products
 in local private markets. Citizens in rural areas intensified cultivation of food crops
 on their private or rented plots, while even urban residents started tending small
 vegetable gardens and raising livestock.
 The legal workweek for adults (over age 18) is 40 hours. Overtime payment is
 mandated by law, with the first 2 hours of overtime to be paid at one and one-half
 times the normal rate and the rest of the overtime hours at double time.
 The Government has established occupational health and safety standards, but
 these fall far below accepted international norms, and the Government does not en-
 force them in practice. The enforcement of work standards is the responsibility of
 the State Technical Supervision Committee under the Council of Ministers. While
 new statistics were not available, it is virtually certain, given the continuing eco-
 nomic decline, that 1993 statistics, which reported that over one-fifth of the popu-
 lation worked in substandard conditions, greatly underreport the number working
 
 
 1329
 in substandard conditions. Workers can leave their jobs with 12 months' notice, but,
 given the bleak employment situation, few choose to do so. The Law on Labor Pro-
 tection provides that workers can remove themselves from hazardous conditions
 without risking loss of employment.
