 TAJKISTAN
 Tajikistan was ruled in 1993 by a coalition of regional and clan groupings which
 won a clear-cut military victory in a civil war racking the country, particularly its
 southern regions, during 1992. The winning coalition was supported by Russian,
 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), and Uzbek forces. The Supreme Soviet
 arliament) elected Imomali Rahmanov, Kulyab regional executive chairman, as its
 hairman and Head of State in November 1992. Much of Rahmonov's support came
 from the victorious People's Front forces which originated in Kulyab and Kurgan-
 Tube, the Uzbek-dominated Hissar region which aided in the battle of Dushanbe
 and members of the traditional northern economic elite of Leninabad. The defeated
 opposition comprised a coalition of self-declared democratic and Islamic groups and
 Islamic fundamentalists, a plurality of whom originate from the Garm-Kartogin re-
 gion of the country, and Pamiris who were traditionally underrepresented in the
 ruling coalitions during Soviet and pre-Soviet rule.
 
 
 1077
 The new Government gradually extended its control over all major towns and
 most roads throughout the country except in the Gorno Badakhshan Autonomous
 Oblast (GBAO) where, by agreement with the regional authorities, its security
 forces did not enter. In return, the regional authorities pledged to control their own
 territory and to preclude operations by o position forces. Although the Government
 by and large respected the agreement tle GBAO officials were unable to prevent
 armed opposition elements and their foreign allies (Afghan mujahedin) from using
 their territory for antigovernment attacks.
 Opposition forces, based in Afghanistan and supported by mostly fundamentalist
 Afghan forces, posed a serious military challenge to the Government and to CIS
 (p~rincipally Russian) units by stgin frequent raids across the border in southern
 Katlon province and western G A . Although these raids and incursions did not
 threaten central gvernment control outside the border areas, they caused casual-
 ties, blocked rads, and interfered with the movement of relief supplies and refu-
 gees.
 The Government worked to reconstitute the principal elements of the former secu-
 rity forces: the Ministry of Interior, the National Security Committee, and the new
 Ministry of Defense. It sought to incorporate elements of the progovernment Peo-
 pe's Front militia into these security organs, with limited success. Many People's
 Front units remained outside of central government control. These units, as well as
 the Ministry of Interior forces, committed numerous human rights abuses. The Na-
 tional Security Committee's forces and those of the Ministry of Defense were also
 responsible for abuses, though less frequently.
 The national economy, centrally planned and highly dependent on cotton exports,
 continued to suffer from the effects of the civil war, the severing of traditional eco-
 nomic ties to other republics of the former Soviet Union, and a series of natural dis-
 asters. The Government was unable to stem its collapse.
 Human rights violations were widespread in 1993. The Rahmonov Government
 was unable to follow a consistent policy to eliminate regional abuses and bring
 about reconciliation and political reform. While some senior government officials
 personally intervened when advised of human rights abuses, others reportedly ac-
 quiesced in or were complicitous in violations. Among the most serious reported
 abuses were government security forces' beating and torturing of detainees; vigi-
 lante torture and killing of civilians of Pamiri or Garm ori ; government actions
 to curb political rights and a free press; and opposition intimidation and killing of
 civilians.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-Complete data on the number of political
 or extrajudicial killings are not available, but international agencies recorded at
 least 80 murders or disappearances in the period between March and October 1993,
 and the number is certainly higher. There is credible evidence that the
 progovernment People's Front militias, which after the civil war were to a limited
 extent incorporated into special battalions of the Ministries of Defense and Interior
 and the National Security Committee, were responsible for many deaths and dis-
 appearances.
 No government or security official has been prosecuted for an extrajudicial killing.
 During the civil war and until the consolidation of the Government's control over
 the capital Dushanbe, in February, hundreds of fighters and civilians on both sides
 of the conflict disappeared or were murdered. The death toll was estimated at over
 20,000. Paramilitary forces loyal to the Government were responsible for a pogrom
 against Pamiri and Garm-origin males in Dushanbe from December 1992 to Feb-
 ruary 1993 which resulted in the death of scores of persons.
 In the south, the locus of the civil war, fully armed special battalion members,
 although technically subordinate to the Ministries of Interior and Defense or Na-
 tional Security Committee, dominated local civilian and security authorities. The
 Government made no real effort to disarm the former militia fighters. In at least
 one instance, regular army troops of the Regar battalion were involved in the mur-
 der in Kabodian of three returnees from Afghanistan. Field workers of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in southern Tajikistan reported
 28 known cases of death or disappearance of returnees since May 1993. The rate
 of deaths and disappearances increased in the latter half of the year.
 Opposition fighters, still active in the mountains to the northeast of Dushanbe,
 along the Tajik-Afghan border, and in the Gorno-Badakhshan region, conducted
 cross-border raids, culminating in the deaths of several score Russian and Tajik bor-
 der guards. On July 13, 200 Tajik opposition and Afghan mujahedin forces brutally
 
 
 1078
 murdered 26 Russian border guards and several Tajik civilians in a raid. in addi-
 tion, several local officials in regions that were former strongholds of the opposition
 were assassinated, presumably for cooperating with the Government.
 b. Disappearance.-The disappearance of Pamiri and Garm-origin men from
 Dushanbe and, in southern Tajilkistan, of returnees from Afghanistan continued
 throughout 1993. Disappearances which occurred before March were referred by the
 international community to the Ministry of Interior's Committee on Disappeared In-
 dividuals. The Committee does not make public the number of missing recorded on
 its list.
 After February, law and order were gradually established in Dushanbe; however,
 Pamiri and Garm-origin men continued to disappear at the rate of one or two a
 month from the capital. There has so far been no successful prosecution for the dis-
 appearance or death of a returnee, though several arrests were made and trials
 were pending at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishmen.-
 Credible reports indicate that Ministry of Interior forces used torture, degrading
 treatment, and excessive force against suspected supporters of the former opposi..
 tion-dominated government, despite repeated statements of senior government offi-
 cials to the contrary. Eyewitnesses and victims reported credibly on beatings admin-
 istered by Ministry of Interior officials on the grounds of the Ministry of Interior
 complex in Dushanbe, specifically in the basement of the old Ministry of Interior
 building. In some instances, collaboration is suspected between Ministry of Interior
 forces and local armed groups, whereby Ministry of Interior forces avoid direct in-
 volvement in the administration of beatings.
 In southern Tajikistan, local police officials conducted nighttime raids to search
 for weapons and ammunition. Typically, police took people into custody and beat
 them until they revealed the location of a hidden weapon.
 Former chairman of the Tajikistan State Committee on Television and Radio
 Mirbobo Mirakhimov (see Section Ld.) accused the Government of mistreatment
 durn   his retrial detention. The Government refused to permit Moscow-based Hel-
 sinki Watch representatives to view Mirakhimov's colleagues without their shirts
 on, raising suspicions that charges of physical mistreatment were well founded.
 Government forces, progovernment militias, and opposition forces used rape as a
 weapon. During the February-March battles between government and opposition
 forces in the lower and upper Garm Valley, including the village of Nowabad, there
 was credible evidence that both sides were guilty of rape. Female refugees who re-
 turned to the southern districts of Kabodian and Shaar Tuz were particularly vul-
 nerable. Progovernment militias kidnaped and raped scores of returnees, and re-
 turnee women remained afraid to leave their collective farms or villages.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Code has not been signifi-
 cantly amended since independence, and abuses endemic to the Soviet legal system
 are still evident. The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention and provides few
 checks on the power of prosecutors and police to arrest individuals. In addition, the
 Government arbitrarily arrested political opponents and frequently held prisoners in
 incommunicado detention. The breakdown of public order during the civil war and
 continued immunity of armed militia groups to prosecution further eroded the integ-
 rity of the legal system.
 Legally, police may detain persons arbitrarily and without arrest warrants for ia
 period of 72 hours, and the prosecutor's office may do so for a period of 10 day,-,
 after which the accused must be officially charged. At that point, the Criminal Code
 permits pretrial detention for up to 18 months. The first 3 months of detention is;
 at the discretion of the local prosecutor, the second 3 months must be approved 14
 the regional level, and the Prosecutor General must sanction the remaining period
 in detention. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a preliminary judi-
 cial hearing on the charge or the detention. In criminal cases, detainees may be re-
 leased and restricted to their place of residence pending trial.
 In southern Tajikistan, international observers reported that police did not adhere
 to the 3-day detention rule; instead, police arbitrarily detained persons, failed to no-
 tify families, and released detainees or brought charges against them only in those
 cases in which international workers or influential friends of the detained inter-
 vened. In theory, detainees have the right to counsel after 24 hours of detention,
 with counsel to be provided free to the indigent. In practice, access to legal counsel
 varies widely.
 Officials of the former opposition-dominated government were arrested on politi-
 cally motivated charges of treason, with indictments for the theft of state property
 added. Tajik and Turkmenistan security forces arrested Mirbobo Mirakhimov,
 Chairman of the State Committee on Television and Radio, in Ashgabat on January
 8, 1993, charging him with treason. Three other television officials-Akhmadsho
 
 
 1079
 Kamilov, Khayradin Kasymov, and Khurshed Nazarov-were seized in Kyrgyzstan
 on January 17 and charged with conspiring in the violent overthrow of the 1991-
 92 Nabiyev government by using the mass media topromote the interests of the
 opposition. All four ontinued tbe held at year's end; no trial date has been set.
 In June a Helsinki Watch delegation attempted unsuccessfully to visit these four.
 It rejected the Government's restrictions on the distance at which the prisoners
 could be viewed and the Government's refusal to permit a visual examination of the
 defendants to check for obvious injuries.
 Another politically motivated arrest was that of well-known poet Bozor Sobir,
 charged with inciting interethnic hatred and provoking the seizure of members of
 Parliament in April 1992. Sobir, the author of a poem denouncing Russian impe-
 rialism, allegedly criticized the Nabiyev government at a series of April rallies. In
 December Sobir was convicted and given a 4-year suspended sentence.
 In September the Government formally denied requests by the International Com-
 mittee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for access to persons in pretrial detention, except
 on a case-by-case basis. The Criminal Code prohibits access to those in pretrial de-
 tention, which the exception of immediate family members, except by special per-
 mission of the presiding judge. In highly politicized cases, judges have denied regu-
 lar access by family members to those in pretial detention.
 The issuance of arrest warrants for moderate members of the oposition remain-
 ing in Tajikistan prompted the flight to Moscow of deputy chairman of the
 Rastokhez Movement Abdukikir Kholiqzoda and deputy chairman of the Democrat
 Party Abdunabi Sattorov. The Procurator General, following international commu-
 nity interventions with Head of State Rahmanov, quashed these two warrants, as
 well as a third issued for the arrest of former Democrat Party stalwart Saghib
 Nazarov. The warrants culminated in the arrest of a fourth colleague, Democrat
 Party executive member Oniho Bobonazarova, who was released from prison and
 p laced under house arrest following the personal intervention of Head of State
 Rahmonov.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system remains unmodified from the
 Soviet period. There are several tiers of courts: the city, district, regional, and re-
 public levels, with a separate but parallel military tribunal. Higher courts serve as
 appellate courts for lower ones. Local, regional, and republic-level judges are, for the
 mostpart, poorly trained and lack an understanding of independent judicial func-
 tion. At all levels of the court system, officials are under the strong influence of local
 political leaderships and armed paramilitary groups.
 According to the law, trials are public, except in certain cases involving national
 security or the prtection of minors. The court appoints an attorney for those who
 do not have one. Defendants are permitted to choose their own attorneys but are
 not necessarily permitted to choose among court-appointed attorneys. Former oppo-
 sitionplitical leaders, including Mirbob Mirakhimov (see Section 1.d.), charge they
 were dnied access to  a ttorney. Officials dispute this, stating that theprisoners
 had rejected the court-appointed attorneys. Mirakhimov has since a'vuiredcounsel,
 although the courts sentenced to death opposition commander Mullah Ajik without
 the benefit of counsel after he refused the court-appointed female attorney.
 The procurator's office remains responsible for conducting all investigations of al-
 legations of criminal conduct. In theory, the defendant and counsel have the right
 to review all government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence
 and testimony. No    ups are barred from testifying, and all testimony is given
 equal weight, regarde  of ethnicity or gender. Ministry of Justice and procuracy
 icials contend that defendants benefit fm the presumption of innocence despite
 the unmodified Soviet legal statute which presumes the guilt of someone who has
 been brought to trial.
 In practice, the judiciary is subject to interference from armed vigilantes and
 members of paramilitary groups whom the Government is not able to control. Offi-
 cials candidly admit that many verdicts are decided at the point of a Kalashnikov."
 In southern Tajikistan, three chiefs of police were murdered, and in the relatively
 stable region of Tursunzade one judge was killed,     u    for their refusal to
 bow to the demands of armedprogovernment militias. In the BAO armed opposi-
 tion elements regularly intimidate local authorities who lack the strength to defend
 themselves. Throughout Tajikistan, the fact and fear of armed intimidation affects
 the outcome of legsl proceedings.
 Opposition members and international human rights monitors, including Helsinki
 Watch, charged the Government with abusing the judicial system. For example,
 while gross abuses by members of the      progovernment militias have gone
 uninvestigated and unpunished, two opposition political party officials in the north-
 ern region of Leninabad were arrested and sentenced to 4 and 7 years, respectively,
 for the possession of bullets. Opposition supporters further charged that police
 
 
 1080
 planted the evidence implicating the arrestees. In January 1994, an appeals court
 overturned the guilty verdict of one defendant.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners range from a high of 200 to a low
 of 15. However, many persons currently in self-imposed exile in the CIS are wanted
 by the Government on charges that are political in nature
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Criminal Code provides for the inviolability of the home and prohibits interference
 with correspondence. Police may enter and search a private home with the approval
 of the procurator. In some cases, police may enter and search without permission,
 but they must inform the procurator within 24 hours. Police are permitted to enter
 and search homes without permission if they have compelling reason to believe a
 delay in obtaining a warrant would impair national security. There is no judicial
 review of police searches conducted with or without a warrant.
 The procurator's office ordered thousands of random nighttime raids on homes in
 Dushanbe, using as justification the continued instability within Tajikistan. The
 raids were ordered without prior evidence of wrongdoing. On many occasions, offi-
 cers conducting the raids reportedly extorted money or goods from innocent people.
 Official sources stated that government monitoring of correspondence also increased.
 At the end of the war, members of the local population with ties to the victorious
 special battalions, special battalion members, and ethnic Kulyabis occupied thou-
 sands of homes belonging to displaced persons and refugees. The Government is
 working slowly to evict occupants and return homes to their rightful owners. Never-
 theless, at the district level, local warlords have thwarted procurators' efforts and
 have even offered armed protection to unlawful inhabitants. International workers
 estimate that hundreds of homes remain illegally occupied in the south and in the
 capital.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-During the final phase of the civil war, both the Government and opposition
 were responsible for extensive violations of human rights, including summary execu-
 tions of captives, disregard for civilian and noncombatant status, hostage-taking
 torture, rape, looting, and forced labor and conscription. The Government entered
 the capital in December 1992, but fighting between government and opposition
 forces continued until March 1993 when government forces ousted the opposition
 from the Garm Valley. In the battle to retake the Garm, government forces indis-
 criminately bombed and shelled city centers and villages, killing and injuring civil-
 ian noncombatants. For its part, the opposition brutally exploited the local civilian
 population. In the Garm village of Nowahad, opposition leader Redzuan and Afghan
 mujahedin forcibly conscripted young males and stripped food and medicines from
 a local mental institution, resulting in the death of 50 of its 300 patients.
 The March truce with GBAO authorities, whereby government forces were to re-
 main outside the autonomous province in exchange for provincial government assur-
 ances that opposition forces would not be permitted to cross from Afghanistan or
 conduct operations in the province, broke down in August. Reacting to the opposi-
 tion's buildup of Tajik opposition and mercenary fighters (including volunteers from
 Afghanistan and other states), the opposition's blockade of humanitarian convoys
 from the capital to the GBAO, and the continued military raids of opposition and
 Afghan mujahedin in the Darwaz valley, the Government launched a 2-week offen-
 sive, with Russian assistance, against opposition forces in the Darwaz. According to
 credible reports, government forces, angered that opposition forces would benefit
 from international assistance, also turned back at least one humanitarian aid con-
 VOI areas under its control, the Government moved quickly to permit international
 aid agencies, including the UNHCR, the ICRC, Doctors Without Borders, the Aga
 Khan Foundation, andthe World Food Program, access to the displaced and refugee
 populations. Opposition forces closed the primary supply road to the GBAO for sev-
 eral months. Once that route had been opened, the Government resumed supply
 convoys into the province. Opposition forces in the province continued to fire on
 these relief convoys.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-In theory, a 1991 law protects freedom of speech
 and press, including the right to establish independent newspapers, magazines, and
 radio and television centers. In practice, freedom of expression is severely restricted.
 Journalists, broadcasters, and individual citizens who disagree with government
 policies cannot speak freely or critically. Government control was exerted over the
 media through: the dismissal of journalists and broadcasters even tangentially asso-
 ciated with banned political parties- the criminal prosecution of independent jour-
 nals; self-censorship by editors fearful of armed elements loyal to the Government;
 
 
 1081
 Oacvernment control of printing presses, the supply of newsprint, and broadcasting
 ciities; and government subsidies for virtually al publications.
 In 1993 the number of daily and weekly publications was dramatically reduced.
 Most of those still being published are government publications. While deteriorating
 economic conditions may have played a role in the closing of publications, the fact
 that most publications no longer circulating favored the opposition indicates that po-
 litical motives were a major factor in the closings.
 Since the formation of the Rahmonov Government in December 1992, at least 30
 journalists and broadcasters have fled Tajikistan due to well-grounded fears of polit-
 ical persecution or physical threats by armed members of militia forces. Since Janu-
 ary at least 7 Journalists disappeared and are presumed dead. None of the deaths
 can be linked directly to government forces, but the journalists' political orientation
 clearly suggests the involvement of government supporters. The Ministry of Interior
 has not successfully investigated any of these deaths. The local procurator's office
 initiated formal investigations but did not bring charges in any of the cases.
 The criminal investigation of the independent journals Charogi Ruz, Adolat,
 Najot Oriyon, Bomdod, Bokhtar, and Oinai Sikandart followed the June decision of
 the Miistry of Press and Information to suspend their publishing permits. In addi-
 tion, the Procurator General's office undertook a review of all newspapers and jour-
 nals to assess culpability in the September 1992 overthrow of the previous govern-
 ment. Due to a well-founded belief that criminal charges would be brought against
 his paper, the certainty of his arrest, and thrats against his life, Charogi Ruz edi-
 tor Dodojon Atuollo decided to publisi his journal from exile in Moscow. Faidmurodi
 Yoriyon, a journalist for the opposition-oriented publication Farhang, was arrested
 in January, and no information has been made available on his legal status. Jour-
 nalists for publications believed to be sympathetic to the opposition who remain in
 Tajikistan have regularly been called in for interrogation at the procurator's office.
 Generally, Soviet-era restrictions on criticism of government figures apply: central
 newspapers may upbraid regional officials; and the mass media may criticize those
 government officials whom the Head of State, the Prime Minister, or their deputies
 criticize. When a major daily, Evening Dushanbe, attempted to print an aiclede-
 tailing the Procurator General's charges of corruption against Prime Minister
 Abdullajanov however, armed senior supporters of the Prime Minister destroyed the
 newspaper's linotype and all copies of the article. Since that incident, armed men
 threatened the family of editor Javohir Kobilov during nighttime visits. The Procu-
 rator General agreed to investigate the case but forbade the newspaper to use the
 charges.
 There are no independent broadcast media in Tajikistan. The State Committee on
 Television and Radio oversees the Republic's television and radio channels and is
 subordinate to the Ministry of Press and Information. The Dushanbe city television
 network is subordinate to the city executive committee, and regional television serv-
 ices fall under the control of regional executive committees. Strict self-censorship is
 practiced, and no news or programs critical of the Government are broadcast.
 Current political divisions and fear of retribution by the Government's armed sup-
 p orters limit academic expression. The Government dismantled the Academy of
 iorcacs Institute of Oriental Studies which was suspected of fomenting Islamic
 "fundamentalism." However, Institute employees were not prevented from finding
 employment with other Academy of Science institutes and departments. In October
 arrest warrants reportedly were issued for four leading opposition political party fig-
 ures who had retained senior positions at Tajik State University desite strong
 pressure from the Attorney General and the university rector to resign.  wo of the
 professors, deputy chairman of the Rastokhez movement Abdukokir Kholiqzoda and
 deputy chairman of the Democrat Party Abdunabi Sattorov, fled to Moscow. A third,
 Oinihol Bobonazarova, was later arrested but then released and placed under house
 arrest instead after the personal intervention of Rahmonov.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly. However, following imposition of a city curfew in Jan-
 uary, only the citycommandant, who was originally the Minister of Interior but is
 now a Ministry officer within the city executive committee, has the power to grant
 permission for public demonstrations. Freedom of association is circumscribed by a
 requirement that all organizations must register with the Ministry of Justice. In
 practice, strict control is exercised over organizations and activities of a political na-
 ture, while free assemblyand association are permitted for nonpolitical associations,
 including trade unions. No permits were issued for antigovernment demonstrations
 in Dushanbe. A spontaneous antigovernment demonstration took place in the city
 of Kulyab following price increases in basic commodities, and similar smaller dem-
 onstrations took place in the mountainous districts of Leninabad. There was no gov-
 ernment response to these demonstrations.
 
 
 1082
 Since the formation of the Government in December 1992, the only political orga-
 nization to operate freely is the Communist Party. On June 21, the Supreme Court
 formally banned the political parties that supported the former regime, including
 the Democrat Party, the Islamic Revival Party (IRP), the Rastokhez National Move-
 ment, and the Lai Badakhshan Movement for the Autonomy of the Pamirs. Mem-
 bers of banned political parties are carefully watched and periodically called in for
 questioning.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Church and state are separate in Tajikistan, and the
 Government places no restrictions on religious worship. A   rdi   to the law on
 freedom of faith, the Committee on Religion under the Council of Ministers registers
 religious communities. Among those active in Tajikistan are the Islamic, Russian
 Orthodox, Jewish, German Roman Catholic, Seventh-Day Adventist, Baptist, and
 Baha'i. Islam is freely, practiced by more than 90 percent of Tajikistan's residents.
 All religious communities are permitted to provide religious education, publish reli-
 gious materials of a nonpolitical nature, and maintain international contacts and
 travel. Conversion is permitted and missionaries are free to operate. Religious faith
 confers no particular advantages in civil, political economic, or military structures.
 However, Muslims identified as adherents of the IRP or more broadly supportive of
 political Islam have been purged from government and military employment.
 There are no official restrictions against any religious group. The Qaziate (the Is-
 lamic Center and seat of the chief Islamic judge-and senior cleric-in Tajikistan)
 was closed from October 1992 to February 1993, at which time it was elevated to
 the rank of Muftiate. The closure of the Qaziate was related to the involvement of
 its former leaders in the overthrow of the Nabiyev government and its overt support
 for the opposition during the civil war. Akbar Turajonzoda, the former "Qazi Kalon"
 (chief judge), was a leader of the opposition. His position was abolished, and he was
 replaced as the senior Islamic figure in Tajikistan by the new mufti.
 The largest religious school (madrasah), reopened in the fall of 1993, and other
 such schools operate around the country. However, several schools accused of open
 support of the IRP in the civil war were closed. Qaziate and IRP newspapers were
 banned, and their editors are in exile. Mullahs openly sympathetic to the IRP either
 fled the country following the civil war, assumed a very low profile, or were arrested
 by the Government. The Government announced the trial and death sentence of
 mullah Ajik for his alleged torture and murder of civilians and combatants during
 the civil war. It permitted one mullah, who openly supported the opposition but did
 not serve as a commander, to return from Afghanistan with his extended family.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government has stipulated two restrictions on travel within
 Thjikistan. Tajiks and foreigners alike are prohibited from travel within a 25-kilo-
 meter zone along the Republic's borders with China and Afghanistan. In practice,
 international aid workers and diplomats have traveled freely in these regions with-
 out the Government's prior authorization.
 On October 1, the Government announced that all residents of Dushanbe and any
 travelers planning to stay longer than 3 days in the capital would have to register
 with central authorities and receive a permit. The move serves to prevent the mi-
 gration of refugees and internally displaced persons to the capital from their homes
 in areas disrupted by civil war. Opposition supporters accused the Government of
 attempting to discriminate selectively in the issuance of Dushanbe residence per-
 mits against suspected opponents of the Government.
 With the exception of residence in Dushanbe, there are no legal restrictions on
 changing residence or workplace. Current regulations require registration at the
 local Ministry of Interior office upon arrival and departure.
 Tajik nationals who wish to travel abroad must obtain an exit visa. There is no
 evidence these are withheld for political reasons.
 Tajikistan has no law on emigration. For the time being, persons who wish to mi-
 rate within the former Soviet Union must simply alert the Ministry of Internal Af-
 fairs to their departure. Persons wishing to migrate beyond the borders of the
 former Soviet Union must receive the approval of the relevant country's embassy
 prior to the issuance of an international passport. Persons settled abroad who do
 not intend to return are required to inform the Tajikistan interests section of the
 nearest Russian embassy or consulate.
 Persons who have emigrated to countries within the former Soviet Union may re-
 turn freely to Tajikistan. Those who wish to return to Tajikistan after residing else-
 where must submit their request to the Tajikistan interests section. The Govern-
 ment adjudicates each request on a case-by-case basis. Reports indicate that per-
 sons, other than those who fled Tajikistan for political reasons at the end of the civil
 war, are freely permitted to return.
 
 
 1083
 Some 80 percent of Tikistan's 15,000-strong Jewish community has emigrated
 to Israel through a travel program  re              the Governments of Israel
 and Tajikistan. Several hundred Jews who were disappointed with living conditions
 and the cultural climate in Israel have returned to Tajikistan, primarily to the
 Leninabad region.
 Tajik citizenship is not known to have been revoked for political reasons.
 Approximately 90,000 Pamiri and Garm-origin nationals fled to Afghanistan dur-
 in the fall and winter of 1992, fearing persecution by victorious progovernment mi-
 litia forces. Repatriation of the refugees commenced in the late spring, following
 government amnesty decrees absolving all but the opposition's political leadership
 from responsibility for acts committed during the war. Approximately 40,000 refu-
 gees remain in Afghanistan. Repatriation proceeded slowly due to continued inci-
 dents of harassment, murder, and discrimination against those returning to the
 southern Khatlon district and to the capital. In addition, armed opposition elements
 in Afghanistan sought to prevent refugees from returning, even threatening death
 to those wishing to return.
 Approximately 30,000 internally displaced Pamiris and Garmis remain in the
 Gorno-Badakshan region. Many of these are fearful of retribution by vigilante
 groups and paramilitary forces. In the southern region of Khatlon, particularly in
 the distri,-ts of Kabodian and Shaar Tuz, confrontations erupted between the local
 population and the displaced people, resulting in widespread harassment, beatings,
 and tens of deaths during the March-April period.
 At. a result of conflict and instability, as many as 9C,000 Russian-speaking citi-
 zens left Tajikistan in 1993, and tens of thousands of ethnic Tajiki moved to the
 northern region of Leninabad. In September the Government permitted the UNHCR
 to issue refugee documents for Afghan nationals residing in Tajikistan.
 The Government does not force refugees to return to countries where they fear
 persecution. However, in March it unexpectedly forced the return of approximately
 50,000 internally displaced persons from Dushanbe to their home regions in the
 south. Progovernnient pav'amilitary groups, including the special battalions, and
 groups of local men who objected to this decision for ethnic or economic reasons re-
 sisted the Government's efforts to return these displaced persons to their home
 areas. In addition to harassment, beatings, and rape, several returnees were ab-
 ducted and later found murdered. The paramilitary groups are believed responsible
 for most of the abductions.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their  overnment peacefully. Opposition
 political parties were banne , and opposition political leaders were arrested and
 *ailed or driven into exile (see Section 1.d.). No parliamentary elections have been
 hIeld since independence, and only progovernment supporters ran in the elections
 held in June 1993 to fill the seats of parliamentarians who had been killed or were
 in exile, although all but one of the seats was contested.
 The Government. installed in December 1992 when the Parliament voted to elimi-
 nate te presidential systm, ic composed principally of Kulyab, Leninabd, and
 Hissar regional political interests but has representation from all regions. Abdul
 Malik Abdullajanov, who became Prime Minister in the Iskandarv regime in the
 fall of 1992, ret.ined his position, as did several officials who served in both the
 Nabiyev ad Iskandarov administrations. Under the Rahmonov Government, the
 Cabinet of Ministers and Presidiizm of the Supreme Soviet quickly polarized into op-
 posing bodies representing Leninabad and Kulyab regional interests, resulting in a
 paralysis of the central Government. In December Prime Minister Abdulljanov was
 forced to resign; however, his replacement by fellow Leninabad native Deputy Prime
 Minister Abdujalil Samadov ensures that the rivalry between the two branches of
 government will continue.
 The Parliament was last elected in February 1990 under Soviet election laws and
 prior to the emergence of opposition political parties. It reflects the Communist-era,
 old guard power structure to a signficant degree. The Parliament met only twice
 after the December 1992 election of the Rahmonov Government, in June and De-
 cember 1993. At the June session, senior government officials criticized the Nabiyev
 and Iskandarov regimes' economic reform efforts and the work of certain ministries.
 Former opposition leader Sohibnazarov, in turn, criticized senior government lead-
 ers and was then denounced by other deputies. Opposition deputies still resident in
 Tajikistan were in attendance at the Parliament session, including former acting
 president Iskandarov, and the Government promised to ensure their security. How-
 ever, deputy S. Shoyev, a resident of Garm, was abducted along with his brother
 
 
 1084
 
 from Dushanbe at the conclusion of the session. Their bodies have not been found,
 but they are presumed dead (see Section 1.b.).
 In June the Supreme Court banned four opposition parties and movements (see
 Section 2.b.) on the grounds that they had formed armed units and conspired to
 overthrow the Nabiyev government. The political parties were not represented by
 lawyers, and onlr one opposition political member was permitted to testify. The ban-
 ning of the parties appears to have been motivated by a desire to supress and har-
 ass political dissent.
 There are no legal barriers to female participation in the electoral process, al-
 though the elimination of Soviet-era quotas has resulted in proportionate declines
 in women's representation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Fear of armed, vigilante elements suppressed nascent human rights organiza-
 tions. Local citizens who served as de facto human rights monitors in the past, in-
 cluding the former director of the Women and Children's Hospital Sofia Hakimova,
 received anonymous threats. The only local organizations that are able to monitor
 human     hts in Tajikistan are ethnic-based groups which focus on freedom of emi-
 gration of minority populations. These organizations enjoyed good working relations
 with the Rshmonov and previous governments.
 The Rahmonov Government discussed human rights and humanitarian issues
 with representatives of international organizations, including the United Nations
 Mission of Observers to Tajikistan (UNMOT) the ICRC, and the UNHCR, all of
 which have offices in Dushanbe. In addition, tie Government held discussions with
 Helsinki Watch and the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. In May
 senior government officials participated in an UNMOT-sponsored human rights
 seminar which attracted more than 100 participants.
 In June a full-pare attack on Amnesty International (AI) by the Ministry of Inte-
 rior was published in the Tajik and Russian-language dailies. The Government was
 harshly critical of Al's report on Tajikistan, charging that the organization was
 guilty of biased reporting for not indicting the record of the opposition government
 exile.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.--One legacy of the Soviet era is the widespread participation of women
 in the work force and in institutes of higher education. There is no formal discrimi-
 nation against women in employment, education, or housing and in urban areas
 women can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enterprises.
 In rural areas, women marry young, rarely receive university education, and are
 less likely-due to the large family size-to work outside the home. Conservative
 Muslim traditions and ignorance in some villages result in an unknown number of
 cases of wife beating going uninvestigated; however, women's groups maintain that
 police officials and government organs responsibly prosecute those complaints that
 are filed. No official information is available on the prevalence of spousal abuse, or
 prosecution of offenders, nor do nongovernmental organizations exist which monitor
 this problem.
 Children.-The Government has an extensive, if crumbling, security net for chil-
 dren. Women are provided with 3 years' maternity leave and monthly subsidies for
 each child. Health care is free. In the aftermath of the civil war, children returning
 from Afghanistan suffered from malnutrition and experienced high mortality rates
 in settlement camps. The Government has facilitated the work of international relief
 organizations in areas affected by the civil war, and public health officials raffirm
 that maternal and children's health remains a top government priority. According
 to official fiures, approximately 28 percent of the budget is devoted to social wel-
 fare expenditures.
 National/Racial/Ethnic  Minorities.-In  southern  Tajikistan, Kulyabi-origin
 Tajiks dominate local administrative and security offices, having displaced local
 Tajiks and ethnic Uzbeks. Pervasive discrimination against refugees returning from
 Afghanistan is perpetrated by some local officials, collective farn directors, and the
 local warlords technically subordinate to the Ministries of Defense and Inerior and
 the Committee on National Security. The overwhelming majority have not been
 given their jobs back, despite assurances from the Government of both employment
 and back pay. Local government officials in the south have informed international
 aid representatives that political tensions preclude the return of the refugees to
 
 
 1085
 white-collar or factory jobs. In practice, most refugees remain without a source of
 income and subsist on international aid deliveries.
 The Government's intervention has been insufficient and inadequate to the task
 of reintegrating the returning refugees. Government pledges to provide reconstruc-
 tion suplies and ensure physical security have not been fuflled. Returnees seeking
 to use the legal system to evict squatters from their homes are shunted from office
 to office andlack the material and fmancial resources to overcome bureaucratic in-
 ertia. Local prosecutors willing to investigate militia members suspected of the har-
 assment or murder of refugees are not provided with qualified staff, resources or
 political support. The murders of seven returnees in the Kabodian and Shaar ku&
 districts during the June-August period were investigated only after international
 attention was brought to bear, and even so no suspects have been arrested.
 The language law promoting Tjik the civil war, and the unresolved border con-
 flict with Afghanistan resulted in the continued outflow of the Russian-speaking
 population which now numbers approimately 250,000,* down from 600,000 at the
 beg     g of 1992. In contrast to the attitude of the prior opposition regime, how-
 ever, government officials have encouraged the Russian-speakng community to re-
 main.The school system has retained its trilingual (Tajik, Russian, Uzbek) struc-
 turn.
 The Rshmonov Government, like governments which preceded it, has discrimi-
 nated against Afghan nationals by not affording even minimal police protection to
 Afghans who are the victims of criminal elements. In August the security guard at
 the Afghan Consulate was murdered while on duty. Despite frequent official pro-
 tests, security organs did not seriously investigate crimes against the Aghan com-
 munity. In one case, police ruled as suicide t  e  of an Afghan founli hanging
 in his apartment, despite the fact his arms were bound together.
 People with Disabilitieo-The Law on Social Protection of Invalids adopted on
 Janus 1, 1992, stipulates the rights of the disabled to employment and adequate
 medicsl care. However, employers are not required to provide physical access to the
 disabled. High unemployment and the absence of even basic technology to assist the
 disabled results, in practice, in widespread discrimination.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-According to the Law on Social Organization and the
 Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees, all citizens are guaranteed the right
 of association. Included in this guarantee is the right to form and join associations
 without prior authorization, to organize territorially, to form and join federations
 and affiliate with international organizations freely, and to participate in inter-
 national travel.
 Although there in no longer any requirement for a single labor union structure,
 the Communist-era Confederation of Trade Unions remains the dominant labor or-
 ganization. It has, however, shed its subordination to the Communist Party. Vir-
 tually all nonagricultural workers are members. The Confederation consists of 20
 professional trade unions and claims 1,689,000 members. The separate Labor Union
 of Private Enterprise Workers has registered 3,000 small and medium enterprises,
 totaling 40,000 members, some of whom have dual membership in the Confed-
 eration. Both labor unions are formally consulted by the Cabinet of Ministers during
 the drafting of social welfare and worker rights legislation.
 The law on tariff agreements and social partnerships mandates that arbitration
 take place before a strike can legally be called. Depending on the scale of the labor
 disagreement, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or governmental
 level. In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the ri ht to strike. Both labor
 unions publicly disavowed the utility of strikes in a period of deepening economic
 crisis and high unemployment and espoused compromise between management and
 workers. According to the Confederation, there were no strikes in 1993.
 b. Ti-: Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Pa       gin collective bargaining at the ompany level are employ-
 ees, members of the trade union, and management. Negotiations involving an indus-
 try sector include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the trade
 union's steering committee for that particular sector.
 Antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade union membership
 is prohibited. Any complaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union
 activist are immediately raised to the level of the Supreme Court and investigated
 by the Ministry of Justice. Any employer found guilty of firing an employee based
 on his union activity is compelled to reinstate the employee.
 There are no export processing zones.
 
 
 1086
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no explicit injunction in
 the Law on Labor Protection or the Law on Employment prohibiting forced or com-
 pulsory labor. However, these laws provide that a person has the right to find work
 of his own choosing. Labor inspectors within the local trade union structure enforce
 this principle. The Soviet practice of compelling students to harvest cotton was out-
 lawed in 1989; in January-March 1993, however, students and other state workers
 were used to pick cotton not harvested during the civil war. The UNHCR received
 credible reports that local officials and collective farm directors were responsible for
 instituting forced labor of returnees and other presumed supporters of the former
 government in the district of Bokhtar.
 d. Minimum Age for Employm.:nt of Children.-According to labor laws, the mini-
 mum age for the employment of children is 16. With the concurrence of the local
 trade union, employment may begin at the age of 15. While official data are lacking
 children from the age of 7 routinely perform agricultural work, which is classified
 as "family assistance." Trade unions report any violation in the hiring of minors for
 work in enterprises.
 e. Acceptable Condlions of Work.-In consultation with trade union representa-
 tives, the Government raised the minimum wage three times in 1993. The minimum
 wage, however, does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family.
 By December 1993, the minimum wage was valued at only $1.25 (8,000 rubles) per
 month at the official exchange rate; on the black market, the dollar value would be
 about $0.82.
 The legal workweek is 40 hours. The Government's established occupational
 health and safety standards fall below international standards and are not actively
 enforced. Work r.tandards are enforced by the state technical supervision committee
 under the Cabinet of Ministers. According to official data, more than a fifth of in-
 dustrial workers worked in substandard conditions.
