Tajikistan
The human rights situation in Tajikistan remains poor. The government persisted
in 2012 with enforcing a repressive law on religion, and introduced new legislation
further restricting religious expression and education. Authorities restricted
media freedoms and targeted journalists for their work. Domestic violence
against women and children and torture remain widespread human rights concerns.
Tajik authorities took positive steps during the year, including accepting a visit
by the United Nations special rapporteur on torture. They also removed slander
and insult from the criminal code, making them misdemeanors subject to fines.
However, the government also restricted space for free expression, further tightening
restrictions on religious practice, and denying the National Movement of
Tajikistan, a new political party that had called for reducing presidential powers
and reducing the presidential term from seven to five years, the right to register.
In July, dozens of deaths and numerous injuries were reported in Khorog, the
provincial capital of Gorno-Badakhshan, after the Tajik government sent troops
to the southeastern region to arrest those responsible for the fatal stabbing of
the local state security chief. By late July, official sources reported that 17 government
soldiers, 30 gunmen, and 20 civilians had died in the violence, but
independent sources reported greater numbers of casualties among the general
population. Human Rights Watch has not been able to verify the casualty
reports.
Criminal Justice and Torture
Torture remains an enduring problem, and is used to extract confessions from
detainees, who are often denied access to family and lawyers in pre-trial custody.
Despite periodic discussions with the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), authorities have not granted ICRC access to places of detention.
While torture is practiced with near impunity, authorities took a few significant
steps in 2012 to hold perpetrators accountable. In early 2012, Tajikistan’s criminal
code was revised to include a definition of torture in line with international law. In March, authorities announced they would implement some of the recommendations
on torture from the UN Human Rights Council’s (HRC) Universal
Periodic Review (UPR), including ensuring access for detainees to legal and
medical assistance when in custody; and amending the criminal procedural
code to ensure that the identity of law enforcement officers involved in arrests is
recorded.
In September, authorities instituted the first-ever criminal prosecution under the
newly amended article on torture. A court in Khatlon province sentenced police
officer Mashraf Aliyev to seven years’ imprisonment on charges of “torture” and
“abuse of powers.” Prosecutors charged Aliyev after Khoushvakht Mahmadsaid,
a minor who was a suspect in a theft investigation, was found hanged at home
in the village of Kulobod following torture and beatings that his family and
lawyers allege Aliyev used to extract a forced confession.
Nongovernmental organizations and local media also reported on the death in
September of Hamza Ikromozoda, 27, at the central detention center in
Dushanbe. Relatives report that his body, which was returned to them on
September 21, bore traces of torture, including burns from a heated iron. The
center’s officials refused to explain the cause of Ikromzoda’s death to reporters,
while a representative of the Penitentiary Control Board said “nobody tortures
anyone in Tajik jails.”
In October, a court in northern Tajikistan granted a Ministry of Justice petition to
shut down one of Tajikistan’s leading human rights organizations on charges
that appeared politically motivated. The group, the Association of Young
Lawyers (Amparo), investigates torture and serves as an advocate for the rights
of army conscripts and other vulnerable groups. The rights group was shut down
on what appear to be minor charges, including allegations that the group was
conducting activities outside the province where they were originally registered
and illegally operating a website.
For several years the group has been an active member of the Coalition against
Torture, which brings together several leading Tajik civil society organizations
that collect and report on torture allegations from across the country, and jointly encourage the government to meet its international commitments to end the
practice.
Beyond investigating cases of torture, Amparo also conducted summer camps
for youth to raise awareness about constitutional protections and international
human rights norms. The Ministry of Justice filed a motion to liquidate Amparo
on June 29, the day after ministry officials visited the group’s Khujand office to
conduct an unannounced, wide-ranging audit. The visit came just weeks after a
representative of Amparo spoke publicly about the need to monitor reports of
torture and severe forms of hazing in Tajikistan’s army at a civil society seminar
organized by the European Union in Dushanbe.
Freedom of Media
In 2012, Tajikistan witnessed further restrictions on media freedoms. Authorities
frequently blocked access to critical websites, and continued to intimidate journalists.
While July’s decriminalization of libel was a step towards freedom of
speech, the new legislation retained criminal sanctions for insulting the president.
Beginning in March, authorities ordered internet providers on several occasions
to block access to independent local and international news and social networking
sites. Following the publication of a critical article, the government blocked
the Russian analysis site zvezda.ru. Three news sites that subsequently published
the article were also blocked, as was Facebook, following user discussions
deemed overly critical of the government.
In July and August, armed clashes in Gorno-Badakhshan prompted authorities
to restrict, and at some points completely shut down, internet and telephone
communications. News sites including the independent news site Asia Plus, as
well as the BBC, RIA-Novosti, Lenta.ru, and Centrasia.ru that reported on the
violence were blocked. Access to YouTube was also blocked after videos of
demonstrations were posted.
Despite the absence of a clear definition of libel under Tajik law, state telecommunications
chief Beg Zukhurov announced in July the formation of a “citizens’ organization” to monitor online publications and websites for insulting or
libelous content.
Journalists continue to suffer threats and violent attacks. On May 8, two
unknown assailants beat unconscious Daler Sharifov, a state television reporter
and host of the anti-corruption NGO, Step by Step. Also in May, two other journalists,
Ravshan Yormakhmadov and Salim Shamsiddinov, were beaten in
attacks that appeared to be connected to their work.
Freedom of Religion
Tajik authorities further tightened restrictions on religious freedoms, and due to
newly adopted legislation, the government now extends far reaching controls
over religious education and worship. According to a statement that the international
religious freedom watchdog Forum 18 issued in August, authorities continue
to try to suppress unregistered Muslim education throughout the country,
brought administrative charges against Muslim teachers, and closed unregistered
mosques.
In May, authorities closed the Muhammadiya mosque, one of Tajikistan’s most
popular, which is run by the family of Haji Akbar Turajonzoda, a theologian and
charismatic leader during the country’s civil war in the mid-1990s.
Authorities added further punishments, through changes to the administrative
code that were enacted in July, for violating Tajikistan’s restrictive religion law
and increased the powers of the State Committee for Religious Affairs to administer
punishments without investigation by police or prosecutors. The new provisions
impose significant fines on those violating the religion law’s tight restrictions
on sending citizens abroad for religious education, teaching religious doctrines,
and establishing ties with religious groups overseas.
The steady tightening of state controls led rights groups, religious groups, and
international bodies in 2012 to continue to criticize the highly controversial
Parental Responsibility law, which President Emomali Rahmon signed in August
2011. The law stipulates that parents must prevent their children from participating
in religious activity, except for state-sanctioned religious education, until
they are 18 years old.
Under the pretext of combating extremist threats, Tajikistan continues to ban
several peaceful minority Muslim groups. Some Christian minority denominations,
such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, are similarly banned. Local media continued
to report on prosecutions of alleged members of Hizb ut-Tahrir and the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan.
Women’s and Children’s Rights
Women and girls in Tajikistan continue to face gender-based discrimination and
violence at home. Despite a draft law that has been under discussion for many
years, the government has yet to adopt a law prohibiting domestic violence.
In July, the country’s Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) mission hosted a meeting where civil society representatives spoke
about the growing number of domestic violence cases, and the difficulties of
holding perpetrators accountable and ensuring that victims can access courts.
One major obstacle, for example, is the legal requirement that victims, rather
than police or prosecutors, collect evidence of the domestic violence they have
suffered before authorities will initiate charges.
Key International Actors
UN Special Rapporteur on Torture Juan Méndez visited Tajikistan in May 2012. In
a statement issued at the end of his mission, Mendez reported that “pressure
on detainees, mostly as a means to extract confessions is practiced … in various
forms, including threats, beatings (with fists and kicking but also with hard
objects) and sometimes by applying electric shock.” The statement added that
Mendez was “persuaded that [torture] happens often enough and in a wide variety
of settings that it will take a very concerted effort to abolish it or to reduce it
sharply.”
In June, the EU organized a civil society seminar in Dushanbe focused on torture,
and submitted the resulting recommendations to the government.
In March, in response to the worsening climate for religious freedom, the United
States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) downgraded Tajikistan from its “watch list” of violators of religious freedom, naming it a
“country of particular concern.” The commission censured Tajik authorities for
“systematic, ongoing, and egregious violations of freedom of religion or belief,”
stating that Dushanbe “suppresses and punishes all religious activity independent
of state control, and imprisons individuals on unproven criminal allegations
linked to religious activity or affiliation.”