Tajikistan
Human rights conditions worsened in Tajikistan following political upheaval
in neighboring Kyrgyzstan in March 2005 and violence in Uzbekistan in
May. Concerned with possible domestic unrest, the government jailed opposition
leaders and journalists on spurious charges. Ongoing state persecution
of independent media led to the closure of key print and broadcast outlets.
Flawed parliamentary elections also marred Tajikistan’s rights record in 2005.
Although it noted improvements over previous elections, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) characterized the February
2005 polls as failing to meet international standards.
February Parliamentary Elections
According to the final report of the OSCE observation mission, the February
27, 2005, election for the lower house of parliament failed to meet international
and domestic standards. In particular, the OSCE report cited the
detention of key political leaders, government domination of the campaign
process, and restrictions on independent media as significant obstacles to a
free and fair election.
The OSCE report also noted improvements over previous elections in
Tajikistan. The polling was peaceful and there was a measure of choice
among candidates. Despite the restrictions on independent media, the OSCE
determined that state media was “reasonably balanced” in the run-up to elections.
However, the report noted that two state-owned newspapers refused to
publish the OSCE’s preliminary report on the election, even as a paid advertisement.
Observers noted serious problems with the polling process itself. OSCE
monitors concluded that the counting process was “poor” or “very poor” at
54 percent of the polling stations they visited. Within five days of the first
round of voting, four opposition parties announced that they would not recognize
the results of the election, but their protest did not have a significant
impact on domestic or international policies.
Political Opposition
As the February elections approached, the government began to pressure
members of the political opposition. In August 2004, police raided the offices
of the Taraqqiyot (Tajikistan Development) party after its members published
an open letter accusing President Emomali Rakhmonov of practicing the
“politics of genocide.” The authorities seized documents they claimed insulted
the president, which is criminalized in Tajikistan, and prosecutors charged
the deputy chairman of the party, Rustam Faziev, the letter’s author, with violating
the lèse majesté law. In June 2005, a court sentenced Faziev to five
years and ten months in prison. At this writing, ailing party Chairman Sulton
Kuvatov was due to face trial on the same charges pending improvement in
his health.
In December 2004, Russian police arrested Mahmudi Iskandarov in Moscow
at the request of Tajik authorities. The government had implicated
Iskandarov—a vociferous critic of President Rakhmonov, presidential hopeful,
and leader of the Tajik Democratic Party—in an attack on two government
offices in Tojikobod in August 2004. Russian authorities released him
on April 3, 2005, but he disappeared just two days later and eventually turned
up in custody in Tajikistan. Iskandarov claimed that he had applied for
refugee status after his initial release from Russian custody, but said that
Russian police had kidnapped him off the street and transferred him to
agents who flew him to Dushanbe. On October 5, 2005, after a trial that lasted
more than two months, Iskandarov was found guilty on six counts, including
terrorism and illegal possession of weapons. He was sentenced to twentythree
years in prison and fined 1.5 million soms (approximately
U.S.$470,000).
Prosecutors also charged a group of individuals, including Iskandarov’s former
driver, in connection with the attack. One of the defendants, Bakhtior
Saidov, claimed at trial that investigators had tortured him and the other
members of the group and forced them to plead guilty to the August 2004
attack. On October 4, 2005, all the men were found guilty and received sentences
ranging from eleven to twenty-two years in prison.
After the uprising in Kyrgyzstan and public demonstrations in Uzbekistan,
the government broadened its repression of dissident political activists. A
court convicted Nizomiddin Begmatov and Nasimjon Shukurov, who ran as
Social Democratic Party (SDP) candidates in the February 2005 parliamentary
elections, on charges of hooliganism and sentenced them to twelve and
eighteen months in prison, respectively. They were contesting the election
on behalf of the party when they allegedly addressed a judge with foul language
during a court hearing. The SDP leadership decried their conviction
as political persecution.
The government also charged Saifiddin Faizov of the Islamic Renaissance
Party with hooliganism for allegedly using foul language in a mosque. IRP
leaders contend that the charges were meant to discredit their image in the
majority-Muslim country and to punish Faizov for his work as an active campaigner
in the February polls. Police briefly detained another IRP member,
Abdulvose Abdujalilov, in July on charges of teaching Islam to minors without
legal authorization.
Nongovernmental Organizations
In the wake of popular upheavals in a number of post-Soviet states, the Tajik
government has become increasingly concerned about foreign sponsorship of
civil society groups. On April 14, 2005, the Tajik foreign ministry announced
that foreign embassies and aid organizations would have to report to the government
their contacts with local political and civic activists. Under the new
regulations, diplomats and international organizations are required to give
Tajik authorities advance notice of any meetings with local activists.
Press Freedom
The Tajik government uses a range of administrative methods to crack down
on freedom of the press. In August 2004, for example, the government shut
down Jionhon printing house, which published Ruzi Nav, another independent
paper. Prosecutors have since charged the paper’s editor, Rajabi Mirzo,
with insulting the president. The paper remains out of print.
Tajikistan’s practice of targeting the printing houses that publish opposition
newspapers continued in 2005 with the January closure of the printing house
that published Nerui Sukhan. Authorities also charged the paper’s editor-inchief,
Mukhtor Bokizoda, with tax evasion, but eventually dropped the
charges. In July, the government allowed the newspaper to reopen, but tax
authorities shut it down again after only one issue.
Tajik regulatory authorities shut down two private broadcasters in April 2005,
leaving the capital with no alternative to state television. The government
ordered closure of TV Somonian because its license had apparently expired.
TV Gul-i-Bodom was taken off the air over accusations that it had violated
regulations on election coverage, but it was allowed to resume operations in
July. Free press advocates regarded both closures as politically motivated.
In May 2005, the Institute for War and Peace Reporting (IWPR) reported
allegations that the license applications of some thirty print and other media
outlets were still pending. Some of these delays were due to the lack of a
statute on broadcasting. A draft statute introduced by authorities in April
2005 was strongly opposed by independent broadcasters who believed the
proposed legislation would open the door to Soviet-style censorship.
The state also engaged in repression of individual journalists. On April 24,
2005, authorities arrested independent reporter Jumaboi Tolibov in Aini on
charges of hooliganism and resisting arrest. Free press advocates suspected he
was detained for his criticism of the district prosecutor. The public outcry at
this arrest was so great that, on June 8, a crowd of more than 120 people
demonstrated in support of him. In July, a court in Shahristan sentenced
Tolibov to two years in prison for drunken behavior and abusing his government
post as head of the legal department of a district administration.
In June 2005, the deputy editor-in-chief of Nerui Sukhan, Vahhob Odinaev,
was accused of violating Tajikistan’s press law in connection with a story that
allegedly contained a libelous statement about a university professor. He was
ultimately convicted, however, under a negligence statute. The court sentenced
him to a year in prison and ordered the confiscation of 30 percent of
his wages.
Key International Actors
On October 16, 2004, Russia and Tajikistan signed a bilateral agreement
revising their security relationship. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia
will maintain an important military base in the country. Most significantly,
Russia agreed to hand over control of the Tajik-Afghan border entirely to
Tajikistan. Russian troops abandoned the last border post on July 12, 2005,
marking a substantial shift in the Russian-Tajik relationship. Russian forces
had remained on the border after Tajik independence in 1991, ostensibly to
stem the flow of drugs from Afghanistan.
The United States continues to weigh in on Tajik policy, expressing concern
about detentions of dissident politicians and the lack of free press in the
country. It is also an important source of foreign aid. In FY 2005, the United
States disbursed an estimated U.S.$43.6 million in assistance to Tajikistan.
The State Department’s Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor
characterized Tajikistan’s human rights situation as “poor” in its 2004 report
on the country, citing unfair elections, the use of torture, and poor prison
conditions. Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice visited Tajikistan in October
and held talks with President Rakhmonov on the U.S. military presence in
the region.
The European Union has been a major donor to Tajikistan since 1992.
Tajikistan has received more aid per capita from the E.U. than any other
Central Asian country during this period. In October 2004, Tajikistan and
the E.U. signed a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), which
formalized closer ties between the two parties. An interim agreement governing
trade was signed at the same time.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) maintains
an office in Dushanbe that serves as a base for its monitoring and development
activities. In addition to monitoring the 2005 parliamentary elections,
the OSCE also has weighed in on governance and rights issues. OSCE
chairman Dimitrij Rupel visited Tajikistan in April 2005, meeting with
President Rakhmonov and urging the government to lift media restrictions
and punish corruption. In September 2005, Miklos Haraszti, the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, expressed concern that nothing
had been done to address the closure of several independent newspapers by
the Tajik government.
In September 2005, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) criticized the Tajik government for breaking a pledge to the
United Nations when it forcibly deported an Afghan woman and four of her
children.