 TAJIK[STAN
 The Government of Supreme Soviet Chairman and Head of State Emomili
 Rahmonov, composed of a coalition dominated by Tajiks from the Kulyab region who
 were victorious in the 1992 civil war, continued in power. Fraud and intimidation
 marred the presidential election on November 6; the Government declared
 Rahmonov the winner with 58 percent of the vote. Also on November 6, a new Con-
 stitution, a sig cant improvement over the Soviet-era document, was overwhelm-
 ingly approved in a popular referendum.
 Tle opposition coalition of nationalists and Islamic groups defeated in the 1992
 civil war boycotted the election and continued to wage a bloody insurgency along
 the Tajikistan-Afghanistan border and in the southeastern district of Tavildara.
 Under United Nations auspices, the Government and the opposition engaged in sev-
 eral rounds of talks which led to a prisoner exchange, a provisional cease-fire, and
 establishment of joint commissions to monitor refugee issues and the cease-fire and
 a United Nations Mission of Observers to Tajikistan (UNMOT). The cease-fire began
 on October 20 and remained in effect through the end of the year, although several
 alleged violations were reported by both sides.
 Internal security is the responsibility of the Ministries of the Interior, Security,
 and Defense. The Russian Arns 201st Motorized Rifle Division part of a Common-
 wealth of Independent States (CIS) peacekeeping force established in 1993, re-
 mained in the country. This unit and the Border Guards, composed of forces from
 Tajikistan and several CIS members but dominated by Russian border forces, were
 responsible for guarding Tgjikistan's border with Afghanistan. Significant regions of
 the country, however, remained effectively outside the Government's control in
 1994. Opposition military units, supported by an increasing number of Afghan and
 Arab Islamic mercenaries, used parts of the Gorno Baahan Autonomous Region
 for training and as a base for launching their September offensive against the
 Tavildara district. The September fighting was the fiercest since the formal end of
 the civil war in 1992 and produced a large number of refugees.
 The economy, which is centrally planned and highly dependent on cotton, vir-
 tually collapsed, with up to 70 percent of industry standing idle by year's end. De-
 spite a series of loans from Russia, the Government fell months behind in paying
 
 
 983
 salaries and pensions. There were critical shortages of fuel for heating, transport,
 and industry. Uzbeklstan periodically suspended natural gas sales to Tajikistan for
 nonpayment of bills. Shortages of wheat and flour led to social unrest in Dushanbe,
 the capital, and other cities in October and November.
 Both Government and government-related forces committed widespread human
 rights abuses, including acores of brutal political assassinations and the torture and
 beating of detainees and prisners. Progovernment farces allegedly killed several
 mullas with ties to the rslanic Revival Party (IRP). There were credible reports
 that progovernment militia forces, notably the loosely controlled "Faisali Brigade,"
 terrorized noncombatants in Tavildara district, beating, raping, and killing civilians
 and looting their homes. The Government prosecuted no one for political or
 extrajudicial killings in 1994, and the Procurator General's office closed all cases in
 which alleged murerer were from the same region as the ruling Kulyabis. Opposi-
 tion forces reportedly murdered several Russian army officers and attacked buses
 cariying dependnts of Russian military personnel. Both sides executed prisoners.
 The Government severely restricts freedom of speech and press freedom and com-
 pletely controls the electronic media. No genuine opposition media appeared during
 the year. Three new political parties were allowed to register in 1994; four opposi-
 tion parties affiliated with the armed opposition remained suspended. The Govern-
 ment allowed Human Rights Watch/Helsinki and the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to open offices in Dushanbe.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Klling.-There were a substantial number of
 extrajudicial killings, but fewer than in 1993. Newspaper reports and international
 agencies put the number at between 80 and 100. The primary culprits are the para-
 military groups which were not disarmed or disbanded after the war. While the
 Government has attempted to incorporate these groups into the recently created
 Ministry of Defense, many groups operated well outside government control as infor-
 mal militias and private armies. According to credible reports, these groups oper-
 ated with the tacit approval of some high-ranking officials within the Government,
 including the Minister of the Interior and officials at the Ministries of Defense and
 Security. No government or security official, the majority of whom are ethnic
 Kulyabis, was prosecuted for an extrajudicial killing. If the alleged perpetrator of
 a crime was of Kulyabi origin, the procurator's office dropped all charges and closed
 the cases.
 The Faisali Brigade, a militia group consolidated within the Ministry of Defense
 after the war, killed civilians in the Tavildara district during the height of fighting
 between government and opposition forces. The death toll eventually reached sev-
 eral score. The Government withdrew the Brigade in September (see Section 1.g.).
 Conflict between political rivals and factions within the ruling coalition is believed
 responsible for numerous killings of prominent businessmen and political figures. In
 February a deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers, M. Nazershoev, a Pamiri,
 was murdered near his home ostensibly for supporting negotiations with the opposi-
 tion. He was to have been a member of the delegation to the first round of talks.
 In April unknown assailants, possibly representing hardline government elements,
 riddled thehe of the Foreign Minister with automatic weapons fire in an unsuc-
 cessful attempt on his life.
 In several instances, paramilitary leaders escaped even the nominal control of the
 Government and became warlords, maintaining private armies and battling over
 territory and economic riches. At the urging of the international community, the
 Government successfully disarmed one warlord in Hissar who had been terrorizing
 local residents, stealing, beating, and killing those who protested. In the two dis-
 tricts of Gorno Baahhan controlled by the opposition, warlords also operated
 independently. One warlord hijacked convoys of humanitarian aid provded by inter-
 national nongovernmental organizations, killing several drivers. Others fought
 among themselves or with Russian border guards in defiance of orders from the op-
 position's external political leadership.
 In late May and early June, a series of assassinations of ethnic Russian military
 officers in Dushanbe left six officers dead. Many within the Government claim that
 opposition forces, using terror tactics, were responsible for at least some deaths. In
 June opposition elements fired a rocket launcher at a bus carrying the wives and
 children of Russian border guards, killing one pedestrian. In October they launched
 a rocket-propelled grenade into a Russian military bus, killing one officer and
 wounding several others. Also in October, Deputy Prime Minister Munavvarsho
 
 
 984
 Nazriyev was killed in his bome district of Garm when his car ran over a land mine,
 probably placed by an opposition group.
 In September according to some credible reports, members of the Faisali Brigade
 tortured and killed Mullah Eshon Said Ashraf Shah Abdullohadov in Kurgan Tyube
 prison. Mullah Ashraf; in prison for allegedly supporting those seeking to overthrow
 the Government, was on the oppositionls t of 5 prisoners whom the Government
 had agreed to release under the September 17 prisoner exchange agreement. The
 Procurator General's office said that the sexagenarian Mullah Ashraf had died in
 prison on September 21 as a result of a heart attack. However, his body was never
 given to the family for burial, nor was an impartial autopsy allowed.
 Another prisoner on the opposition list scheduled for exchange, Mullah A&ik Aliev,
 was executed in prison, allegedly on September 15. There is strong suspicion how-
 ever, that he was killed after the September 17 signing of the cease-fire and pris-
 oner exchange agreement. Aliev, former IRP chairman in the Ehatlon district, had
 been sentenced to death on August 25, 1993, for terrorism, treason, and conspiring
 to overthrow the Government.
 Progovernment forces are credibly believed to be responsible for the murders in
 February of Mullah Imkomuddin and Mullah Abdul Esbim. Both were active in the
 IRP, and   Imkomuddin, who     had returned   to  Dushanbe   after hiding  in
 Komsomolobad, died of wounds sustained during a severe beating.
 b. Disappearance.-The disappearance of Garmi- and Pamir-origin men contin-
 ued, although at a lower rate than in 1993. The number of returned refugees who
 disappeared-greatly decreased. In many cases, those thought to have disappeared
 had in fact been conscripted as part of a government policy actively pursued in Au-
 gust and September in response to increased fighting both on the Tajikistan-Afghan-
 istan border and in the Tavildara district. Young men were rounded up on the
 streets and in night raids on their homes. Several Dushanbe newspapers estimated
 that at least 60 men and women had disappeared, aside from any conscripted, in
 the first half of 1994.
 The Government has been unwilling to investigate claims of disappearances seri-
 ously, asserting that the Procurator General's office does not have sufficient re-
 sources for the purpose.
 In December 1993, unknown assailants abducted Tagobek Shukurov, a sitting
 judge and Supreme Soviet member from Kolkhozobod, who had been a member of
 the People's Front during the war and had supported the return of Tajik refugees
 from Afghanistan. He remained missing throughout the year and is now presumed
 dead.
 The 1993 disappearance of Dr. Ayniddin Sadykov, a noted surgeon and chairman
 of the Dushanbebranch of the Democratic Party, remained unsolved throughout
 1994.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Security officials, particularly those in the Ministry of the Interior, regularly beat
 detainees in custody. Security forces were responsible for the widespread use of sys-
 tematic beatings and, in some instances, the torture of prisoners and detainees.
 Human rights groups reported that, in some cases, mistreatment increased if vic-
 tims made formal allegtions of abuse.
 Female detainees were frequently subject to rape or the threat of rape. For exam-
 ple, one woman, detained for the alleged distribution of antigovernment leaflets, was
 beaten while in custody and eventually forced to confess on threat of being raped
 in front of her young daughter. Credible sources reported that the members of the
 Faisali Brigade raped women in villages under its control during the Tavildara cam-
 paign, in one instance beating, raping, and then burning one woman to death.
 rion conditions in Tajikistan declined markedly, primarily due to a shortage of
 government resources. Food, never plentiful, became even more scarce, leading to
 an increase in malnutrition and disease among prisoners. Visitors to one prison
 found officials well-intentioned but hopelessly ill-equipped to care for the prisoners.
 A followup visit to the same prison found conditions improved, due to an amnesty
 which relieved overcrowding and medicines donated by international relief groups.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile-The Criminal Code has not been signifi-
 cantly amended since independence, and it therefore retains many of the defects in-
 herited from Soviet times. The system allows for lengthy pretrial detention and pro-
 vides few checks on the power of procurators and police to arrest persons. The Gov-
 ernment continued to arrest political opponents arbitrarily and is widely known to
 hold prisoners in incommunicado detention. Public order, which broke down during
 the civil war, has yet to be fully restored, and the virtual immunity from prosecu-
 tion of armed militia groups has further eroded the integrity of the legal system.
 Legally, police may detain persons arbitrarily and without a warrant for a period
 of 72 hours, and the procurator's office may do so for a period of 10 days after which
 
 
 985
 the accused must be officially charged. At that point, the Criminal Code permits
 pretrial detention for up to 15months. The first 3 months of detention is at the dis-
 cretion of the local procurator, the second 3 months must be approved at the re-
 gional level and the-Procurator General must sanction the remaining time in deten-
 tion. The Criminal Code maintains that all investigations must be completed 1
 month before the 15-month maximum in order to allow the defense time to examine
 government evidence. There is no requirement for judicial approval or for a prelimi-
 nary judicial hearing on the charge or detention. In criminal cases, detainees may
 be released and restricted to their place of residence pending trial.
 Allegations abounded of illegal government detention, well beyond the maximum
 allowed by law. In one well-known example security forces arrested four journalists
 in January 1993--Mirbobo Mirakhimov, Khiurshed Nazarov Khayriddin Kasymov,
 and Akhmadsho Komilov-and held them for 18 months before their trial began in
 May 1994. The trial was never completed as the four were among those released
 in the November 12 prisoner exchange; the charges against them were presumably
 dro ped.
 One a case is entered for trial, the law states that it must be brought before a
 judge within 28 days. However, it is common for cases to languish for many months
 before the trial begins. For example, the ongoing case of Qynihol Bobonazarova,
 placed under house arrest in 1993 pending resolution of the continuing investigation
 of alleged antigovernment activities during 1992 has not yet been concluded.
 The Government routinely uses arbitrary Aetention against those expressing
 views contrary to official policy. Security forces routinely rounded up members of
 opposition political parties for questioning. In most cases, they do not obtain arrest
 warrants and do not bring charges. In August security forces, allegedly looking for
 opposition sympathizers, cordoned off streets and conducted house-to-house searches
 in the Yuzhni and Avoui districts of Dushanbe, detaining eight young men (see also
 Section 1.f.). One remains in go.-ernment custody, charged with possession of two
 hand grenades allegedly found during a warrantless search; six were released; and
 the last, Dashtov Ismanbek, died in detntion. Security forces alleged that he died
 while tring to escape by jumping out of a third-story window. Those released
 claimed they were mistreated and beaten during their detention.
 In August security forces detained two journalists, Makhsoud Huseinov and Mu-
 hammad Rahim     Saidar, for allegedly distributing the pro-opposition newspaper
 Charoghi Ruz. Huseinov and Saidar were informed that distribution of Charoghi
 Ruz was illegal, although the Government had never officially banned it. While in
 detention, Huseinov was reportedly beaten. Neither man was ever charged with a
 crime, and both were released after several days (see Section 2.a.).
 Opposition sources maintain that security forces detained hundreds of persons un-
 lawfully without charge. As Tajikistan law precludes visits to persons in pretrial de-
 tention, it is virtually impossible for any independent organization to estimate the
 number of persons detained.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has not been allowed access
 to all prisoners falling within its mandate according to its standard criteria since
 the authorities claimed, on legal grounds, that they could not guarantee access to
 all nonconvicted prisoners. Nevertheless, the ICRC was able, in a specific context,
 to register and hold private talks with 23 detainees held by the Government and
 27 detainees held by the opposition who were about to be liberated simultaneously
 in the framework of an agreement achieved under the auspices of the United Na-
 tions.
 The Government proclaimed two amnesties which generally had a limited scope
 and did not affect those detained for political crimes. Article 19 of the new Constitu-
 tion states that no one can be exiled without a legal basis; no laws have been passed
 so far setting out any legal basis for exile. Forced exile is not known to be used.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system remains unmodified from the
 Soviet period. There are several tiers of courts: city, district, regional, and republic
 levels, with a separate but parallel military tribunal. Higher courts serve as appel-
 late courts for lower ones. Local, regional, and republic-level judges are, for the most
 part, poorly trained and lack an understanding of independent judicial function. Ju-
 dicial officials at all levels of the court system are under constant heavy influence
 from both the political leadership and, in many instances, armed paramilitary
 groups. The new Constitution establishes additional courts, including a Constitu-
 tional Court, and states that judges are independent and subordinate only to the
 Constitution and the law; it prohibits interference in their activities. Provisions of
 the new Constitution concerning the judicial system had not yet been implemented
 at the end of 1994.
 According to the law, trials are public, except in certain cases involving national
 security or the protection of minors. The court will appoint an attorney for those
 
 
 986
 who do not have one. A defendant may choose his or her own attorney but may not
 necessarily choose among court-appointed defenders. Arrested persons are often de-
 nied prompt, and in some cases any, access to an attorney.
 The procurator's office is responsible for conducting all investigations of alleged
 criminal conduct. In theory, both defendant and counsel have the right to review
 all government evidence, to confront witnesses, and to present evidence and testi-
 mony. No groups are barred from testifying, and all testimony is theoretically given
 equal weight, regardless of etbnicity or gnder. Ministry of Justie officials maintain
 that defendants benefit from the presumption ofinocence, despite the unmodified
 Soviet legal statute which presumes the guilt of all bought to trial.
 The pressure exerted on the udicial system by armed paramilitary goups and
 lfe~dto te dismisu o
 vigilantes who operate outside of government control oftn lead ote snssal of
 charges and the dropping of cases. A judge in Kurgan Tyube, Pamiri by origin, was
 forced to flee with h  family for attempting to try the case of an armed band ac-
 cused of beatings, murder, and rery. The Procurator General's order closed the
 case. The Depuiy Procurator General closed another case when it turned out that
 the defendant, a member of a group accused of robbery and the murders of 18 peo-
 ple, had fought for the Government during the civil war. While crimes allegedly
 committed by progovernment groups go uninvestigated or unprosecuted, even minor
 infractions by those whom the Government views as in opposition are vigorously
 prosecuted.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners vary widely. The armed opposition
 submitted a list of 29 political prisoners at the Tehran round of the U.N.-sponsored
 inter-Tajik peace talks in June. It later expanded its list to 52 at a September ses-
 sion of talks in which both sides agreed to an exchange of prisoners for prisoners
 of war (POW's). In accord with a later agreement reached on November 1, the Gov-
 ernment exchanged 27 political prisoners for 27 POW's captured by the armed oppo-
 sition. According to an international human rights organization, scores of political
 prisoners remain in government custody.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Articles
 22 and 23 of the new Constitution and the Criminal Code provide for the inviolabil-
 ity of the home and prohibit interference with correspondence, telephone conversa-
 tions, and postal and communication rights, except "in cases prescribed by law." Po-
 lice may not enter and search a private home without the approval of the procu-
 rator. In some cases, police may enter and search a home without permission, but
 they must then inform the procurator within 24 hours. Police are permitted to enter
 and search homes without permission if they have compelling reason to believe a
 delay in obtaining a warrant would impair national security. There is no judicial
 review of police searches conducted without a warrant. In September the penalties
 for the violation of the privacy of correspondence were increased to several years
 in prison. Also in September, the Supreme Soviet raised the maximum sentence for
 invasion of privacy of the home from between 2 and 5 years to between 5 and 8
 years in prison.
 Numerous examples of arbitrary illegal search and seizure by government forces
 included the August raid by Interior Ministry forces against a predominantly Garmi
 and Pamiri neighborhood in the Yuzhni district of Dushanbe. Security forces pre-
 sented no warrants as they rounded up young men, apparently at random, and took
 them away.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flict.-The lower level of conflict in Tajikistan during 1994 provided a commensu-
 rate lowering of the level of allegations of excessive force. However the August-Sep-
 tember campaign in Tavildara saw many excesses committed by bth sides in the
 abuse of civrian populations and the confiscation of humanitarian aid. Neither gov-
 ernment forces nor the opposition have complete control over all elements ostensibly
 loyal to them. Government forces, most notably the Faisali Brigade, swept the coun-
 tryside in Vanch and upper Garm, according to one witness, lke an army of occu-
 pation," looting, confiscating crops, and beating and killing inhabitants allegedly
 sympathetic to the opposition forces then active n the area. On the other hand, gov-
 ement forces (other than the Faisali Brigade) who operated further to the west
 maintained good discipline, leaving the homes and property of evacuees largely un-
 touched. Casualties among civilians were lower in 1994 as the Government made
 efforts to evacuate civilians in areas of its operations.
 Hostilities in the GarmZavildara districts closed the only road through the area
 several times, blocking convoys of humanitarian aid and the return of refugees and
 internally displaced persons. Foce loyal to the opposition continued indiscriminate
 raids on convoys of humanitarian aid destined for refugees and internally displaced
 persons in Gorno Badakhshan A notorious opposition leader named Jumah raided
 convoys of food and medicine belonging to the Aga Khan Foundation, World Food
 
 
 987
 Program, Medicins sans Frontieres, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) in September and October.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite Article 30 of the new Constitution and
 the 1991 law protecting freedom of speech and press, the Government severely re-
 stricts freedom of expression in practice. Journalists, broadcasters, and individual
 citizens who disagree with government policies cannot speak freely or critically. The
 Government exercises complete control over the media both overtly through legisla-
 tion and less obviously through the dismissal of journalists andbroadcasters for
 their political or ethical convictions and the closing of independent journals. The
 Government also controls the printing presses and the supply of newsprint and
 broadcasting facilities, and subsidizes virtually all publications and productions.
 Editors fearful of reprisals by armed elements loyal to the Government exercise
 careful self-censorship.
 Journalists remained prime targets for violence by both the Government and op-
 position. Provrnment forces are believed to be responsible for the death of
 Haydrsho ]Khushvakt, the strongly progovernment editor at the newspaper
 Jumhuriyat. Although strongly provenent himself, Khushvakt had written, but
 not yet published, a series of artics on he poitical-criminal mafia in Dushanbe
 which upset other progovernment elements. Opposition forces were probably respon-
 sible for the murder in August of Davlatal Rakhmonov, director of programming
 at the State Television and Radio Committee and a strongly partisan Kulyabi. In
 November the editor in chief of the Uzbek-language weekly Haq Suz was murdered
 at the entrance to his apartment building, probably in connection with an internal
 Uzbek community dispute. In yet another instance, a grenade was thrown into the
 home of the editor in chief of the Uzbek-language Communist Party paper, wound-
 ing several members of his family. The Government informed the Committee for the
 Protection of Journalists in September that investigations had been opened into all
 of the deaths of journalists during 1992-94.
 The Ministry of Security detained two journalists, Makhsoud Huseinov of Sadoi
 Mardum and Muhammad Rahim Saidar, accusing them of distributing the pro-oppo-
 sition newspaper Charoghi Ruz in August. It also questioned several other alleged
 distributors in connection with their activities relating to Charoghi Ruz which the
 Government has never officially banned. Huseinov and Saidar, against whom formal
 charges were never brought, claimed that they were beaten while in custody in an
 effort to extract information from them.
 In September the regional executive committee in the northern city of Leninabad
 closed the independent newspaper Ittihod for allegedly printing several articles criti-
 cal of the Government. The Government did not issue a formal ban but simply cut
 off all supplies of newsprint. Many journalists who displeased the Government were
 fired. Lack of pay forced those who could to find work elsewhere. The economic situ-
 ation allowed the Government to hold the newspapers hostage. The Government
 used the press freely as a vehicle to propagandize on its own behalf and discredit
 its opponents. For example, a two-page article lambasting former Prime Minister
 Abdulmalik Abdullajanov for alleged corruption was printed at the behest of anti-
 Leninabad elements within the Government.
 In direct contradiction to the 1991 law, the Supreme Soviet passed a decree in
 February suspending the activity of all independent electronic media until it adopt-
 ed a new law on the media. The ban was ostensibly due to the unregulated amounts
 of violence and pornography being shown on independent television, but the effect
 was to muzzle the independent media during a time of political change in the coun-
 try. All hut 2 of the 10 to 15 independent television stations, most of which are
 sponsored either by large enterprises or local executive committees, adhered to the
 ban and remained off the air for most of 1994. This precluded virtually any inde-
 pendent television coverage of the inter-Tajik negotiations, the military situation, or
 the election campaign.
 Academic expression is limited to a certain extent by fear of violent reprisals, but
 much more so by the complete reliance of scientific institutes upon government
 funding. Three professors from Tajik State University remain either in hiding or
 under arrest, although one, Oynihol Bobonazarova, former dean of the law faculty,
 has been allowed to teach classes.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Article 29 of the new Constitu-
 tion provides for freedom of peaceful assembly. However, the Government sus-
 pended that right by the inposition of a state of emergency in all districts of
 Tajikistan except for Leninabad province. Thus, all public demonstrations and gath-
 erings were banned until the state of emergency lapsed in August 1994.
 
 
 988
 
 Freedom of association is further circumscribed by the requirement, in the law on
 nongovernmental associations, that all organizations must first register with the
 Ministry of Justice. This process is often slowed by the cumbersome necessity to
 submit all documents in both Russian and Tojik. The Ministry of Justice's verifica-
 tion of the text inevitably delays the final granting of registration. In practice the
 authorities exercise strict control over organizations and activities of a political na-
 ture, while free assembly and association are permitted for nonpolitical associations,
 including trade unions.
 Once registered, an organization must apply for a permit from the local executive
 committee in order legally to organize any public assembly or demonstration. No
 permits were issued in 1994. In the spring, two work actions, not sanctioned by ei-
 ther the trade union or the local executive committee occurred to pretest the Gov-
 ernment's failure to pay salaries and poor work conditions. The Government's re-
 sponse to these actions was for the most part conciliatory, and the workers soon re-
 turned to their jobs.
 The four political parties suspended in 1993--the IRP, the Rastokhez National
 Movement, the Lali Badakhshan Movement for the Autonomy of the Pamirs and
 the Democratic Party-remained suspended. Senior government officials stated that
 new po~itical parties, including ones with the same names as those which were sus-
 pended, coulc[ be formed provided their charters do not conflict with the Constitu-
 tion and laws of Tajikistan. Opposition members were not inclined to form new po-
 litical parties, lest this be interpreted as an admission of guilt or wrongdoing by
 their suspended parties. Three new political parties were registered in 1994, one of
 which is associated with defeated presidential candidate Abdullajanov. According to
 the law, a political party must have at least 500 members to register.
 c. Freedom of Reon--Churc     and state are separate in   kista, and neither
 the law nor the Government place restrictions on religious worship. However, ac-
 cording to the law on freedom of faith, the Committee on Religions under the Coun-
 cil of Ministers registers religious communities and monitors the activities of the
 various religious establishments. While the official reason given is to ensure that
 they are acting in accordance with the law, the practical purpose is to ensure that
 they do not become overtly political.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Forein Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government has stipulated that Tjikistan citizens and foreigners
 alike are prhibited from traveling within a 25-kilometer zone along the Republic's
 borders with both China and Afghanistan without permission from the Ministry of
 Foreign Affairs. In practice, however, international aid workers and diplomats trav-
 el freely in these regions without prior government authorization._
 Residents of Duslanbe and those travelers wishing to remain longer than 3 days
 no longer need to reeive a permit, although they must still register with central
 authorities. Due to the state of emergency which was in _place until August, all citi-
 zens were obliged to carry their identification cards at all times. There are no legal
 restrictions on changing residence or workplace. Current regulations require reg-
 istration at the local Interior Ministry office upon arrival and departure. Tajildstan
 nationals who wish to travel abroad must obtain an exit visa. There is no evidence
 that these are withheld for political reasons.
 Tajikistan does not yet have a law on emigration. Currently, those wishing to mi-
 grate within the former Soviet Union notify the Ministry of the Interior of their de-
 parture. Persons wishing to emigrate beyond the borders of the former Soviet Union
 must receive the approval of the relevant country's embassy in order to obtain their
 international passport. Persons who settle abroad are required to inform the
 Tajikistan interests section of the nearest Russian embassy or consulate.
 Persons who wish to return to Tajikistan after having emigrated may do so freely
 by submitting their applications to the Tajikistan interests section of the nearest
 Russian embassy or consulate. The Government adjudicates requests on a case-by-
 case basis. There is no indication that persons, other than those who fled Tajikistan
 for political reasons after the civil war, are not freely permitted to return.
 A refugee law passed in June guarantees a person granted refugee status the
 right to work and move freely throughout the country. Following implementation of
 the law, the Government created a central department for refugees, under the Min-
 istry of Labor, which worked actively with the UNHCR. One unresolved issue per-
 tains to the right of returnees who married in Afghanistan to bring their spouses
 with them to Tajikistan. Credible reports claimed that the Government maintained
 an unofficial policy of denying residence permits to Afghan spouses' of returnees,
 thereby allowing the Government to deny any official status to these persons or
 their children.
 Due to better cooperation with the Government and an increased level of security,
 the UNHCR increased the rate of return among Tajik refugees in Afghanistan in
 
 
 989
 1994, leaving only approximately 22,000 refugees there and another estimated
 16,000 internally displaced persons in Gorno Badakhshan. Representatives of the
 armed opposition in Afghanistan continued their efforts to dissuade Tgjiks from re-
 turning, using threats and disinformation in the refugee camps.
 One of the significant impediments to refugee repatriation remained the occupa-
 tion of returnees' homes by those loyal to the victorious special battalions, special
 battalion members, and ethnic Kulyabis. The Government is working slowly to evict
 occupiers. Several factors limited progress on this issue, including lack of will
 among local officials, fear of revenge by those who protest, and lack of power among
 officials to act against often armed or well-connected occupiers.
 There is no legal basis for forcible repatriation, nor is there any evidence to sug-
 gest that it was practiced in 1994.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Government severely limits the right of citizens to change their government
 peacefully and freely. The Government is dominated by a coalition composed of
 Kulyabi regional political interests. The four main opposition parties remained sus-
 pended, and the majority of their leaders and party activists remained either jailed
 or in exile abroad, although a few Democratic Party leaders have returned to
 Tajikistan.
 Two candidates were nominated in the presidential election scheduled for Septem-
 ber. parliamentary Chairman Emomili Rahmonov and former Prime Minister
 Abdulmalik Abdullajanov. Both waged strong campaigns throughout Tajikistan.
 Most observers viewed the speed with which the Government called for elections in
 July as a transparent ploy to exclude the opposition from nominating candidates.
 Under a combination of Russian and Uzbek pressure, widely supported by the inter-
 national community, the Government postponed the election from September 25 to
 November 6 ostensibly to allow greater time both for the Government to organize
 fairer procedures and for the opposition to nominate candidates. The opposition,
 however, refused to take part in any elections, claiming that free and fair elections
 were impossible under the Rahmonov Government.
 Although the Government invited international observers to monitor the polls and
 lifted the state of emergency, people remained fearful of free expression. -The ban
 on the independent electronic media remained in force prior to and during the elec-
 tion. The Government controlled all aspects of the planning for the election and
 openly favored the incumbent. Voter registration lists did not fully take into account
 the massive dislocation caused by the civil war. Refugees outside Tajikistan were
 unable or afraid to register thereby effectively excluding a large number of persons
 who might have opposed tie government candidate at the polls. The election was
 marked by open intimidation by government security forces who, in some locations,
 threatened to kill anyone voting for Abdullajanov. The stuffing of ballot boxes and
 the substitution of entire boxes was reported at a number of polling stations. Vote-
 count rigging was also strongly suspected.
 No parliamentary elections have been held since independence. The Government
 has scheduled elections for February 1995 when the term of the present Parliament
 expires. The Supreme Soviet adopted a new parliamentary election law in Decem-
 ber, incorporating some suggestions by the CSCE. While the new law was somewhat
 better than the presidential election law, many outside observers believe the law
 still allows undue government influence in the electoral process.
 There are no barriers to female participation in the electoral process, although
 since the removal of Soviet-era quotas the number of female deputies has declined.
 At year's end, there were eight female deputies in the Supreme Soviet, a female
 deputy prime minister, and seven women serving in positions with the rank of min-
 ister or deputy minister.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government's record on dealing with international and nongovernmental in-
 vestigation of alleged human rights abuses ranged from poor to mixed. Fear of per-
 secution by government or extragovernmental elements has all but precluded efforts
 by Tajikistan citizens to form their own human rights organizations. Nonetheless,
 one indigenous group has begun to work its way through the labyrinthine process
 of government registration.      o    rganization, formed at the end of 1993 by
 the head of the Writer's Union, works with the Government's blessing and serves
 primarily as a rubber stamp for government actions
 The Government worked closely with the UNIIOR on behalf of refugees and inter-
 nally displaced persons and with the UNMOT and the U.N. Secretary General's spe-
 
 
 990
 
 cial representative in the course of the inter-Tajik talks. The UNHCR reported that,
 while there had been no convictions of individuals accused of crimes against refu-
 gees the Government's responsiveness was greater than in 1993. Those cases which
 the UNHCR brought to the attention of local authorities were investigated, albeit
 with varying degrees of enthusiasm (see Section 5).
 In February the CSCE opened an office in Dushanbe, and in April a permanent
 representative of Human Rights Watch/Helsinki arrived. These organizations and
 the ICRC reported a mixed level of cooperation from the Government. The ICRC has
 not yet obtained access to all prisoners but has found the military responsive to its
 program of education on the tenets of the Geneva Convention. The CSCE believed
 that the Government ignored many of its suggestions for the new Constitution and
 the electoral law. Although it obtained access to the Justice and Interior Ministries
 and the procurator's office, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki reported that access did
 not always lead to government responsiveness.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Relgion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Woen.-The participation of women in the work force and in institutes of higher
 learning is one of the more positive legacies of the Soviet era. There is no formal
 discrimination against women in employment, education, or housing, and in urban
 areas women can be found throughout government, academic institutes, and enter-
 prises. However, in rural areas, women tend to marry young, have large families,
 and only rarely receive university education. Due to the prevalence of large families,
 women in rural areas are also much less likely to work outside the home.
 Conservative Muslim traditions, especially in rural areas, resulted in an unknown
 number of cases of wife beating going uninvestigated. There is no evidence that po-
 lie officials and government organs do not responsibly prosecute those complaints
 that are fied. No official data are available on the prevalence of spousal abuse, nor
 are there nongovernmental organizations that monitor this problem.
 The threat of rape is widespread, and rape or the threat of rape is sometimes used
 as a means of coercion of women detainees. Women rarely go out alone and almost
 never at night. In the countryside, particularly in Khatlon, women seldom leave the
 security of their cooperative farm to venture out unaccompanied.
 Children.-The extensive government social security network for child welfare
 continued to deteriorate. Women are provided 3 years of maternity leave and
 monthly subsidies for each child. All health care is free. However, the Government's
 lack of financial resources left it unable to fulfill many of its obligations for the pro-
 vision of subsidies and care for mother and child health.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-After the civil war, over 90,000 people of pri-
 marily Garmi and Pamiri origin fled to Afghanistan to avoid reprisals by
 progovernment forces. The repatriation of Tajiks continued during 1994, and the
 Government encouraged their return. While making a god faith effort to assist with
 the repatriation of refugees particularly those from Afghanistan, the Government
 did not fulfill many of its pledges, including the payment of reconstruction fees for
 returning refugee families.-However, in general security for returnees was adequate,
 and the UNHOR, with which the Government cooperated, accelerated the rate of re-
 patriation.
 In southern Tajikistan and in Dushanbe, Kulyabi-origin Tajiks continued to dis-
 place other ethnic groups in local government positions and, most notably, in the
 security forces. Local procurators who attempt to investigate militia members sus-
 pected of the harassment or murder of refugees do not have sufficient qualified staff,
 resources, or political support. In many cases, fear of reprisals and threats result
 in the withdrawal of information and allegations. The UNHCR reported, however,
 that local officials actively investigated a number of cases which the UNHCR
 brought to their attention and made several arrests.
 With the exception of the trilingual (Tajik/Uzbek/Russian) school structure, nei-
 ther the Uzbek nor the Russian language is afforded any official status in
 Tajikistan, despite the large numbers these ethnic minorities represent. In practice,
 Russian is still widely used in government, although it is not an official language.
 Uzbek speakers represent approximately 26 percent of the population, and Russian
 speakers an estimated 2 percent. The nonofficial status of the Russian language con-
 tributed to the steady exodus of Russian speakers from Tajikistan. Those remaining
 see little future for themselves. While the Government has repeatedly expressed its
 desire for the Russian-speaking population to remain, economic conditions provide
 little incentive for them to do so. Russian-language schools claimed that they were
 routinely shortchanged in the apportionment of government funds.
 During May, June, and July, the Government initiated a campaign to disarm the
 local militias operating outside its control in southern Tajikistan. Kulyabi security
 
 
 991
 forces, who were conducting the camp aiga, engaged in numerous beatings and ille-
 gal searches aimed mainly at the Uzbek minority. Human rights groups protested,
 charging that the security forces were employing inhumane tactics in searching for
 weapons and that in reality Kulyabi forces were using the campaign to disarm their
 ethnic rivals, the Uzbeks. Another disarmament campaign was launched in Decem-
 ber after the presidential election, but it did not target Uzbeks in particular and
 relied on voluntary surrenderingof weapons.
 The Ramonov Government, like governments before it, discriminated against Af-
 ghan nationals by not giving Afghans who are the victims of criminal elements even
 minimal police protection.  though te Government signed the 1951 Convention on
 Refugees and passed a national law on refugees in 1994, international groups, in
 ..icula  the UNHCR, charged with the protection of Afghan refugees in
 lodged   eent protests with the Government over its treatment of Af-
 ghan refugees. The UNHCR regstered some 600 Afghans as refugees in Tajikistan
 during 1994. An unresolved problem stems from the unofficial government policy of
 deny*ng official status to the Afghan spouses of returning Tajik refugees (see Section
 People With Disabilities.-The Law on Social Protection of Invalids adopted in
 1992 stipulates the right of the disabled to employment and adequate medical care.
 In practice, however, the Government does not require employers to provide phys-
 ical access for the disabled. The absence of basic technology or the financial means
 to implement the technology available to assist the disabled results, in practice, in
 high unemployment and widespread discrimination. There is no law on accessibility
 for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Law on Social Organization and the Law on
 Trade Union Rights and Guarantees provide all citizens with the right of associa-
 tion. This includes the right to form and join associations without prior authoriza-
 tion, to organize territorially, to form and join federations and affiliate with inter-
 national organizations freely, and to participate in international travel.
 The Confederation of Trade Unions, a holdover from the Communist era, remains
 the dominant labor organization, although it has since shed its subordination to the
 Communist Party. The Confederation consists of 20 professional trade unions and
 currently claims 1,500,000 members-virtually all nonagricultural workers. The sep-
 arate Trade Union of Private Enterprise Workers has registered 3,241 small and
 medium-sized enterprises, totaling 60,000 members, some of whom have dual mem-
 bership in the Confederation. The Council of Ministers formally consults both labor
 unions during the drafting of social welfare and worker rights legislation.
 The Law on Tariff Agreements and Social Partnerships mandates that arbitration
 take place before a union may legally call a strike. Depending on the scale of the
 labor disagreement, arbitration can take place at the company, sector, or govern-
 mental level. In the event that arbitration fails, unions have the right to strie, but
 both labor unions have publicly disavowed the utility of strikes in a period of deep-
 ening economic crisis and high unemployment and espoused compromise between
 management and workers.
 The state of emergency, in place in all regions of Tajikistan except Leninabad
 until August, restricted the right of workers to strike. While there were no official,
 union-sanctioned strikes, several wildcat strikes occurred. A combination of govern-
 ment capitulation and intimidation quickly settled two walkouts in April. News-
 paper workers and journalists and, separately, the teachers in one secondary school
 refused to enter their workplaces to protest the lack of materials and salary pay-
 ments. The Government met quickly with the newspaper workers, reaching a com-
 promise in which the workers were back at their jobs the next day. Several teachers
 reported that Interior Ministry officials had ordered them back to work under threat
 of reprisal, although the Ministry also made conciliatory efforts with the teachers,
 who soon returned to work.
 Since the expiration of the state of emergency, teachers again walked off the job
 in September, this time in much larger numbers. Teachers in the Frunze district
 of Dushanbe refused to continue classes in protest over salaries that had not been
 paid in more than 6 months. The teachers formed a strike committee independent
 of the union, and the Government negotiated with it about a return to work. Also
 in September, some local residents in the southern town of Nizhni Pyauj refused
 to pick cotton until the local bakery provided them with bread.
 None of the strikes have had the sanction of the labor unions and were, hence,
 illegal. Despite the unsanctioned nature of the September strike, the union inter-
 vened with the Government on behalf of the teachers to prevent any from being
 
 
 992
 
 fired. The Ministry of Labor recognized that nonpayment of salaries to workers was
 a violation of International Labor Organization regulations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is codified in the Law on Trade Union Rights and Guarantees,
 the Law on Social Partnerships and Collective Contracts, and the Law on Labor
 Protection. Participa  in collective bargaining at the company level are employ-
 ees, members of the trade union, and management. Negotiations involving an indus-
 try sector include officials from the relevant ministry and members of the unions
 steering committee for that particular sector. As the economic situation worsens, it
 is becoming increasingly difficult for enterprises to engage in effective collective bar-
 gaining.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination or the use of sanctions to dissuade
 union memrshp, nor may a worker be fired solely for his or her union activity.
 Any complaints of discrimination against a labor union or labor union activist are
 first considered by a local labor union committee and, if necessary, raised to the
 level of the Supreme Court and investigated by the Ministry of Justice. The law
 compels an employer found guilty of firing an employee based on union activity to
 reinstate the employee.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Neither the Law on Labor Protec-
 tion nor the Law on Employment specifically prohibits forced or compulsory labor.
 The Soviet practice of compelling students to pick cotton was officially banned in
 1989. However, due to the lack of fuel and mechanical harvesting equipment, in the
 fall students were again sent to the fields to pick cotton, as they were in 1993. In
 parts of Khatlon province, press gangs randomly dragooned people on the streets
 and sent them to the cotton fields. There were also credible reports that young men
 of families who had returned to Khatlon were forced to work on the private farm
 plots of ethnic Kulyabis.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to labor laws, the mini-
 mum age for the employment of children is 16, the age at which children may also
 legally leave school. With the concurrence of the local trade union, employment may
 begin at the age of 15. Workers under the age of 18 by law work no more than 6
 hours a day and 36 hours per week. However, children as young as 7 years of ago
 participate in agricultural work, which is classified as "family assistance." Trade
 unions are reaponsible for reporting any violations in the employment of minors.
 Cases not resoved between the union and the employer may be brought before the
 Procurator General, who may investigate and charge the leader of the enterprise
 with violations of the Labor Code.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The President, on the advice of the Ministry
 of Labor and in consultation with trade unions, sets the minimum monthy wage,
 which in 1994 was approximately $3.20 (8,000 rubles) at the rate of exchange in
 late 1994. This wage falls far sh~ort of providing a decent standard of living or a
 worker and family. In January, in response to the continuing economic crisis and
 the shortage of banknotes, the Government introducd a maximum montly salary
 of $25.60 which could be paid in cash. The remainder of all workers' slaries are
 paid on account, meaning a credit that the worker could then theoretically use to
 purchase goods at any state-ron shon.
 Tajikstan's economy virtually collapsed in 1994, with 60 to 70 percent of its in-
 dstry standing idle by the end of the year. As factories and enterprises shut down,
 workers were laid off orput on compulsory vacation for weeks and months on end.
 Some establishments, be  governmental and private, compensated their employees
 in kind with food commodities or the output of that particular concern for which
 the employee worked. The employee could then sell those products in local private
 markets.
 The legal workweek for adults (over age 18) is 40 hours, with a weekly 48-hour
 rest period. Overtime payment is mandated by law, with the first 2 hours of over-
 time to be paid at one and one-half times the normal rate and the rest of the over-
 time hours at double time.
 The Government has established occupational health and safety standords, but
 these fall far below accepted international norms, and the Government does not ac-
 tively enforce them in practice. The enforcement of work standards is the respon-
 sibility of the State Technical Supervision Committee under the Council of Min-
 isters. While new taistatic were not available, it is virtually certain, given the con-
 tinuing economic decline, that 1993 statistics, which reported that overent ofith of
 the population worked in substandard conditions, greatly underreport the number
 woring in substandard conditions in 1994. Workers can leave their jobs with 2
 months notice but, given the bleak employment situation, few choose to d so.
 
 
