Tajikistan
Tajikistan’s human rights situation continues to be characterized by lack of access
to justice, due process violations, incommunicado detention, and ill-treatment in
custody. The government interferes with opposition political parties. Government
harassment of non-traditional religious groups and Muslim groups that are independent
of state-controlled religious bodies has intensified.
The government announced an amnesty in June to mark the 10th anniversary of
the end of the civil war, but it remains unclear how many people were released
from prison. The amnesty excluded persons convicted of “extremism,” which is
the most common charge in religious and politically-motivated cases.
Nongovernmental Organizations
On May 12 the Tajik parliament adopted a new law “on public associations.” The
law grants the government excessive powers to monitor the activities of public
associations, including nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Only groups that
have representative offices or branches in all provinces are registered as national
associations and allowed to carry out activities countrywide; local associations
are restricted to activities in the district where they are registered. The law also
requires all NGOs in Tajikistan to re-register no later than January 1, 2008. All prior
registrations will be automatically nullified.
On April 30, 2007, President Emomali Rahmon (he publicly dropped the Russified
name by which he was previously known—Emomali Rahmonov—in March)
announced an initiative to establish an Ombudsman’s institution. Seventeen
local human rights organizations in November issued an open letter calling for
NGO participation in drafting the law on the Ombudsman and for more transparency
in the process.
Freedom of Expression
The government continues to tighten control over independent media activities.
Critical journalists are routinely threatened with prosecution or are called before
state bodies to “explain” their publications. The pressure sometimes results in self-censorship. Under the new law on public associations, media outlets will
also be required to re-register by January 1, 2008.
On July 30, 2007, President Rahmon signed into law widely criticized amendments
to articles 144, 307, and 396 of the criminal code (publishing false information,
slander, and libel in the mass media) and an additional provision for information
published on the internet. These offenses are punishable by up to two
years’ imprisonment, and by up to five years for criminal defamation of the president.
Two judges filed a lawsuit against Firuza Vohidova for insult to their “honor, dignity
and business reputation” after she named them in a letter to the president
about what she considered to be the judges’ unfair decision. On October 1 the
Dushanbe City Court fined Vohidova 4,000 somoni (approximately US$1,500) in a
flawed proceeding. She is appealing against the ruling. Human rights organizations
and journalists are concerned that Vohidova’s case may prevent others from
complaining about unfair treatment or procedural violations.
An ongoing licensing dispute means that the BBC has been unable to restart FM
radio broadcasts in Tajikistan, which were initially suspended by Tajik government
order in early 2006.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Human rights organizations and lawyers continue to receive reports of arbitrary
arrests, violations of detention procedures and fair trial standards, and credible,
serious allegations of ill-treatment and torture in detention. Defense lawyers
themselves are subject to threats and harassment if they insist on effective assistance
of counsel.
Tajikistan has not amended its law on torture to comply fully with the UN
Committee Against Torture’s recommendations to the country in December 2006.
Law enforcement officials can be charged with “abuse of professional competency”
(criminal code article 314), but not with torture. National legislation does not
prohibit torture evidence from being admitted at trial.
Impunity for ill-treatment in detention continues to be widespread. There were,
however, at least two cases in 2007 in which law enforcement officers were prosecuted
for ill-treatment. In April police lieutenant Nurullo Abdulloev was sentenced
to seven years’ imprisonment by a court in Kulyab for the unlawful detention and
ill-treatment of two detainees. In another case in April, two police officers were
each sentenced to two years’ imprisonment for beating and torturing with electrical
shock a 15-year-old boy in the capital, Dushanbe. All three men were convicted
under article 314.
Tajikistan continues to return individuals to Uzbekistan in violation of its nonrefoulement
obligations. In January the Prosecutor General’s Office announced that
two “Andijan suspects” (see Uzbekistan chapter) had been returned.
Actions in the Name of Countering Terrorism and Extremism
In 2007 law enforcement bodies continued to arrest individuals simply because
they were accused of possessing leaflets of Hizb ut-Tahrir, a banned Islamic
organization, and at least three alleged Hizb ut-Tahrir members were sentenced to
more than 10 years’ imprisonment each for “incitement of ethnic and religious
hatred” and “membership in extremist organizations.” In the first case of a child
being imprisoned for membership in Hizb ut-Tahrir, Muminbek Mamedov, a 17-
year-old boy, was sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment.
In January the Supreme Court banned another 10 organizations, including the
Islamic Movement of Turkestan, as “extremist.” In August a small Islamist group,
Mavlavi, was banned on the grounds that it holds “unsanctioned gatherings.”
Uzbek and Tajik citizens continue to be arrested for alleged membership in the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. In these highly political cases involving terrorism
charges, the suspects are frequently denied procedural protection and the
right to a fair trial, and routinely suffer from inhumane treatment in detention.
Freedom of Religion
In early 2007 the Prosecutor General’s Office and officials of the Committee on
Religious Affairs conducted an investigation into the membership and finances of all religious groups in Tajikistan. Religious leaders were asked to present lists of
all members who regularly attend their services, and to provide tax and land-use
documentation. A draft religion law is currently under consideration. If adopted, it
would require all religious groups to re-register, subject to conditions that are draconian,
such as requiring that each of the group’s followers has had legal residence
in the country for at least 10 years, with documentary proof to that effect.
At least three unregistered mosques were demolished in Dushanbe in 2007, and
more were reportedly forced to close.
In October Jehovah’s Witnesses were banned from conducting any religious activities
in Tajikistan. According to Forum 18, an independent, international religious
freedom group, the ban was because of the sect’s position of conscientious
objection to military service, and because Jehovah’s Witnesses “propagate faith
in public places.”
Housing Rights and Forced Evictions
Violations of housing rights, including deprivation of property and mass eviction,
gained momentum in Dushanbe in late 2006 and 2007, when the government
began forcibly resettling residents of some areas of central Dushanbe to the city
outskirts without just compensation and sometimes to unsafe buildings. The government
justified the evictions as part of a longstanding reconstruction plan and
claimed public and governmental need for the sites, but local human rights
organizations allege that the land has not always been used for public purposes
but sold for commercial use. The project was ultimately postponed until 2009
after it triggered protests.
Political Parties
In April the Ministry of Justice tried to suspend the opposition Social Democratic
Party (SDP) for six months for allegedly failing to report on its activities and funding
sources. The SDP rejected the charges as groundless. The ministry later withdrew
its lawsuit, stating that the SDP had “rectified the violations.”
Mahmadruzi Iskandarov, the leader of the opposition Democratic Party of
Tajikistan (DPT), did not benefit from the June amnesty and at this writing remains in prison on terror-related charges. The DPT accused the government of interfering
with the party’s efforts to identify new leadership. The Ministry of Justice officially
recognized one faction, led by Masud Sobirov, after the party split into three
groups.
Key International Actors
Visiting Tajikistan in April, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Louise Arbour called on the government to ensure better access to justice and to
allow local and international monitors, including the International Committee of
the Red Cross, to visit detention places. Asma Jahangir, the UN special rapporteur
on freedom of religion or belief, visited Tajikistan in February, concluding that religious
communities and individuals faced “challenges,” and underscoring the
importance of the government’s ensuring that “especially vulnerable individuals”
be protected “from harassment by non-State actors in the name of religion.”
In March the UN Human Rights Committee issued two decisions on applications
alleging abuses by Tajik authorities. It found that in both Ashurov v. Tajikistan,
and Karimov and Nursatov v. Tajikistan the victims had been subjected to torture
and unfair trial. The decisions urge Tajik authorities to ensure effective remedy to
the applicants, including compensation, and in the Ashurov case to immediately
release the victim. At this writing the government has not implemented the decisions.
The European Union’s first-ever Central Asia Strategy adopted in June acknowledged
human rights as one of its priorities but fell short of formulating countryspecific
benchmarks. The focus on vaguely worded “human rights dialogues”
raises doubts about their effectiveness.
Russia remains a key partner for Tajikistan, although relations are tense. The
plight of approximately 50,000 Tajik citizens who were deported from Russia in
recent years because of irregularities in their migration documents is a particularly
sensitive issue between the two countries.
The United States’ relationship with Tajikistan focused primarily on border control,
security, and law enforcement. The 2007 US Department of State’s Country
Reports on Human Rights expressed concern about a number of issues in Tajikistan, including torture, restrictions on freedom of speech and press, harassment
of international NGOs, and access to prisons.