Turkmenistan
Following February 2012 presidential elections, President Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov retained unchallenged power, and Turkmenistan remains
one of the world’s most repressive countries.
The country is virtually closed to independent scrutiny, media and religious freedoms
are subject to draconian restrictions, and human rights defenders and
other activists face the constant threat of government reprisal. The government
continues to use imprisonment as a tool for political retaliation.
Turkmenistan continued to expand relations with foreign governments and international
organizations in 2012, but without meaningful outcomes for human
rights.
Cult of Personality and Presidential Elections
President Berdymukhamedov, his relatives, and associates enjoy unlimited
power and total control over all aspects of public life in Turkmenistan. In official
publications Berdymukhamedov, who has been power since 2007, is known as
arkadag (patron), and his cult of personality continued to grow during the year.
In April 2012, for example, he won a carefully choreographed car race.
Berdymukhamedov was reelected president on February 12, 2012. According to
the Central Election Committee (CEC), he received 97 percent of the vote with a
nearly 97 percent turnout. Conditions for a competitive vote were so lacking that
the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, part of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), declined to send
an election observation mission.
A law on political parties adopted in January 2012 envisaged for the first time
the registration of parties other than the ruling party. In August, a close associate
of Berdymukhamedov founded the Party of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs,
but there is no indication that it will present meaningful political alternatives.
Civil Society
Turkmenistan’s repressive atmosphere makes it extremely difficult for independent
nongovernmental organizations to operate. Human rights and civil society
activists and journalists, including those living in exile, face a constant threat of
government reprisal.
In August, state security services warned at least four activists not to attend a
meeting convened by the OSCE to welcome its new ambassador. In July, a state
security official warned one activist not to try to meet OSCE Representative on
Freedom of the Media Dunja Mijatović when she visited Ashgabat, the capital.
In February, Natalia Shabunts—one of the few openly active human rights
defenders—found a bloody sheep’s head on her doorstep in Ashgabat, one day
after speaking about the presidential election with Radio Free Europe’s Turkmen
Service.
For more than four years, the authorities have refused to reinstate the confiscated
passport of Gurbandurdy Durdykuliev, a dissident, who cannot receive his
pension or disability allowance, and cannot move freely inside the country without
it.
Freedom of Media and Information
The state controls all print and electronic media and it is very difficult for foreign
media to cover Turkmenistan because they often cannot access the country.
Internet access remains limited and heavily state-controlled. The country’s only
internet service provider is state-operated, and political opposition websites are
blocked. Internet cafes require visitors to present their passports. The government
is known to monitor electronic and telephone communications.
In the lead-up to the presidential election, the website for the Turkmen Initiative
for Human Rights (TIHR)—a Vienna-based exiled human rights group—was disabled
for nine days due to hacking, and the website of the exiled Turkmen political
opposition endured several days of denial-of-service attacks.
Holders of Gmail accounts in Turkmenistan could not access their e-mails
between February 16 and 26, and for two weeks in June, internet users could not
access Ertir.com, a web platform popular among young adults for social contact
and political discussion.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmenistan’s government continues to restrict the right to travel freely internationally
by means of an informal and arbitrary system of travel bans commonly
imposed on civil society activists and relatives of exiled dissidents.
After twice barring Bisengul Begdesenov, a former political prisoner, from traveling
abroad, migration authorities finally allowed him to travel in May 2012.
Several incidents in 2012 indicated that Turkmen authorities still bar people
from traveling abroad with valid Kyrgyz visas in their passports, continuing a
practice begun in late 2009. In August 2012, the migration office of the
Ashgabat airport without explanation barred a dozen students from travelling to
Bulgaria and Russia to commence their studies. In October, Turkmen authorities
barred a number of Turkmen citizens from traveling to seek medical treatment in
neighboring Iran.
The Turkmen government continues to create travel obstacles for Turkmen citizens
who also hold Russian passports. In December 2011, Turkmenistan Airlines
warned travelers that from July 2013 tickets for destinations abroad will only be
sold to holders of the new Turkmen international passport. The authorities use
various pretexts to deny issuing new international passports to persons who
continue to hold Russian passports, and require that they sign documents
renouncing Russian citizenship.
Freedom of Religion
The right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion is heavily restricted in
Turkmenistan, where no congregations of unregistered religious groups or communities
are allowed. Religious communities have been unable to register for
years.
In February 2012, Ilmurad Nurliev, a Pentecostal pastor sentenced in 2010 to
four years in prison on bogus swindling charges, was freed under a general
amnesty.
According to Forum 18, an independent international religious freedom group,
as of August 2012 at least four Jehovah’s Witnesses who are conscientious
objectors were imprisoned, and five received suspended prison sentences for
evading military service.
Forum 18 also reported that local officials harassed and threatened several
Protestants for printing religious materials without state approval. Among them
was a 77-year-old Baptist who had tried to print a book of his own Christian
poetry. Police questioned him and threatened to press criminal charges but did
not do so.
In three separate trials held in August 2012, courts fined at least five
Protestants in Lebap province, northeast Turkmenistan, for engaging in religious
activity without state approval.
Political Prisoners and Enforced Disappearances
Unknown numbers of individuals continue to languish in Turkmen prisons on
what appear to be politically motivated charges. The justice system lacks transparency,
trials are closed in political cases, and the overall level of repression
precludes independent human rights monitoring.
In April 2012, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) made one
visit to one prison. The government has persistently denied access to the country
for independent human rights monitors, including international NGOs and 10
United Nations special procedures whose requests for visits remain unanswered.
In March, the Turkmen foreign minister announced that Ovezgeldy Ataev and his
wife had been released from prison. Ataev was the constitutionally designated
successor of dictator Saparmurad Niyazov. He and his wife were arrested one
month after Niyazov’s death in 2007.
However, the government ignored calls by several UN bodies to release wellknown
political prisoners Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy Khajiev,
who had worked with human rights organizations prior to their imprisonment in
2006. Political dissident Gulgeldy Annaniazov, arrested in 2008, also remains
imprisoned. He is serving an 11-year sentence.
In October 2012, the authorities arrested Geldymyrat Nurmuhammedov, a former
government minister who had openly criticized the government, and sent
him to a detention center to allegedly undergo six months of forced treatment
for drug addiction, even though he had no history of drug use.
Two popular singers, Murad Ovezov and Maksat Kakabaev, whom courts sentenced
on bogus charges in 2011 to five and seven years’ imprisonment respectively,
remain behind bars. The sentences were retribution for their music and
their involvement in a talk show that aired on a Turkish satellite channel in 2011.
Kakabaev’s father, brother, and brother-in-law—also sentenced in 2011 to twoyear
prison terms for the broadcast—remain in custody.
Several dozen persons convicted in relation to the November 2002 alleged
assassination attempt on Saparmurat Niyazov—including former Foreign
Minister Boris Shikhmuradov and Turkmenistan’s former ambassador to the
OSCE, Batyr Berdiev—remain victims of enforced disappearances. Their fate is
unknown. Human Rights Watch is aware of unconfirmed reports that several
defendants in the 2002 plot case have died in detention.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Homosexual conduct between men is criminalized with a maximum prison sentence
of two years. The penal code does not mention same-sex relations
between women. According to one local NGO, police sometimes blackmail and
extort homosexual men due to their sexual orientation.
Illegal House Evictions in Ashgabat
In 2012, authorities in Ashgabat and the surrounding area failed to provide adequate
compensation or redress to residents forcibly evicted and expropriated in previous years and whose homes were demolished without a court ruling. The
demolitions made way for construction as part of massive urban renewal projects
initiated in the late 1990s. Further demolitions are scheduled to continue
through 2020 in some areas of Ashgabat.
Key International Actors
Several international actors continue to seek to leverage Turkmenistan’s energy
wealth, sidelining concerns about the government’s human rights record. The
European Union continued to press forward with a Partnership and Cooperation
Agreement (PCA) with Turkmenistan, frozen since 1998 over human rights concerns,
without requiring any human rights reforms in exchange. Throughout
2012, the European Parliament continued to hold up its necessary approval of
the PCA over human rights concerns. At this writing, the European Parliament’s
vote on the PCA remained pending.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee reviewed Turkmenistan in March
2012, and issued a highly critical assessment highlighting the government’s
clampdown on freedom of expression and repression of civil society activism,
torture, and ill-treatment in places of detention, and the lack of an independent
judiciary. It directed the Turkmen government to report back within one year on
measures taken to address them.
In October, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW) issued its observations about the state of women’s human
rights in Turkmenistan, expressing deep concern in particular about women’s
disadvantaged and unequal status in many areas, including education, public
life and decision-making, and the absence of specific legislation on violence
against women, including domestic and sexual violence.
While in Turkmenistan for a July conference on media, the OSCE representative
on freedom of the media called upon Central Asian states to guarantee freedom
of media and expression online.
After having had no active projects on Turkmenistan since 1997, the World Bank
is working to reengage in the country. It was unclear at this writing whether the
bank will require improvements in governance as part of reengagement.