 TURKMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan, a one-party state dominated by its President and his closest advis-
 ers; made little progress in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian style of govern-
 ment to a democratic system. Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Turkmen Com-
 munist Party since 1985 and President of Turkmenistan since its independence in
 October 1990, may legally remain in office until 2002. The Democratic Party, the
 renamed Communist Party, retained a monopoly on power, the Government reg-
 istered no parties in 1997 and continued to repress all opposition political activities.
 Emphasizing stability and gradual reform, official nation-building efforts focused on
 fostering Turkmen nationalism and glorification of President Niyazov. In practice
 the President controls the judicial system, and the 50-member unicameral Par-
 liament (Mejlis) has no genuinely independent authority.
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) has the responsibilities formerly held
 by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), namely, to ensure that the re-
 gime remains in power through tight control of society and discouragement of dis-
 sent. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal police, which works close-
 ly with the KNB on matters of national security. Both operate with relative impu-
 nity and have been responsible for abusing the rights of individuals as well as en-
 forcing the Government s policy of repressing political opposition.
 Turkmenistan is largely desert with cattle and sheep raising, intensive agri-
 culture in irrigated oases, and huge oil and gas reserves. Its economy remains de-
 pendent on central planning mechanisms and state control, although the Govern-
 ment has taken a number of potentially significant steps to make the transition to
 a market economy. Agriculture, particularly cotton cultivation, accounts for nearly
 half of total employment. Gas, oil and gas derivatives, and cotton account for almost
 all of the country s export revenues. Seeking increased outlets for its gas exports
 (and, thereby, greater economic independence), the Government is considering con-
 struction of new gas export pipelines to or through a number of countries, including
 neighboring Iran and Afghanistan.
 The Government continued to commit human rights abuses, and the authorities
 in particular severely restricted political and civil liberties. Citizens do not have the
 ability to change their government peacefully. Dissident Durdymurad Khodzha-
 Mukhammed remains in a psychiatric hospital in Geok-Depe, and dissident Ata
 Aymamedov is still imprisoned for calling for the President's removal from office.
 
 
 1354
 Senior government officials failed to respond to inquiries regarding these two cases.
 Security forces continued to beat and otherwise mistreat suspects and prisoners,
 and prison conditions remained poor and unsafe. Arbitrary arrest, detention, unfair
 trials, and interference with citizens privacy remained problems. The Government
 completely controls the media, censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting inde-
 pendent criticism of government policy or officials. The Government generally gave
 favored treatment to ethnic Turkmen over minorities and to men over women.
 Women experience societal discrimination, and domestic violence against women is
 a problem.
 The recently amended law on religion reaffirmed a number of important religious
 freedoms but also tightens government control of religious groups. The requirement
 that religious organizations have at least 500 members to be legally registered has
 prevented some minority religions from legally establishing themselves.
 The Institute for Democratization and Human Rights, given a mandate to conduct
 research in support of the democratization of the Turkmen government and society
 and to monitor the protection of human rights, completed its first year of operation
 in October. During the year, it continued to develop its research and monitoring ac-
 tivities. Early in 1997, it conducted inspections of prisons, and several reforms re-
 sulted from these inspections.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1992 Constitution makes torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment illegal. Nevertheless, there were credible and widespread reports that security
 officials frequently beat criminal suspects and prisoners and often used force to ob-
 tain confessions. Security forces also used denial of medical treatment and food,
 verbal intimidation, and placement in unsanitary conditions.
 International human rights organizations reported that dissident Durdymurad
 Khodzha-Mukhammed (arrested by authorities in 1995) remains in a psychiatric
 hospital in Geok-Depe for nonmedical reasons. Others who have protested govern-
 ment policies or economic conditions also reportedly are held in psychiatric hos-
 pitals.
 Prison conditions are poor, and prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe.
 Food is poor, and infectious diseases are rampant. Facilities for prisoner rehabilita-
 tion and recreation are extremely limited. In the past, some prisoners have died due
 to overcrowding, untreated illness, and lack of adequate protection from the severe
 summer heat.
 Although in the past year diplomats have been permitted to visit selected prisons
 and detention centers, the Government does not permit unrestricted independent
 monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution states that citizens
 "have the right to freedom of belief and the free expression thereof and also to ob-
 tain information unless it is a state, official, or commercial secret." In practice those
 expressing views critical of or different from those of the Government have been ar-
 rested on false charges of committing common crimes, such as Ata Aymamedov (see
 Section i.e.).
 The precise number of political detainees held at year's end was unknown. Pre-
 trial detainees are held 6 to 8 months on the average. Several thousand people,
 many of them arrested for narcotics-related crimes, were released from prison under
 a presidential amnesty act partly intended as an effort to release untried detainees.
 Forced exile was not known to have occurred in 1997. However, almost all promi-
 nent political opponents of the present Government have chosen to move to either
 Moscow, Stockholm, or Prague for reasons of personal safety; none returned this
 year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for judicial independ-
 ence. However, in practice, the judiciary is not independent; the President's power
 to select and dismiss judges subordinates the judiciary to the Presidency. The Presi-
 dent appoints all judges for a term of 15 years. The appointments are without legis-
 lative review, except for the Chairman (Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court, and
 the President has the sole authority to remove them from the bench before the com-
 pletion of their terms.
 The court system has not been reformed since the Soviet era. It consists of a Su-
 preme Court, 6 provincial courts (including 1 for the city of Asbgabat only), and,
 
 
 1355
 at the lowest level, 61 district and city courts. A Supreme Economic Court hears
 cases involving disputes between state-owned enterprises and ministries, and, in-
 creasingly, commercial disputes. The Government abolished all military courts in
 May. Criminal offenses committed by members of the armed forces are now tried
 in civilian courts under the authority of the office of the Prosecutor General.
 The law provides for the rights of due process for defendants, including a public
 trial, the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right
 to call witnesses to testify on behalf of the accused. In practice these rights are often
 denied by authorities, and there are no independent lawyers, with the exception of
 a few retired legal officials, available to represent defendants. When a person cannot
 afford the services of a lawyer, the court appoints one. A person may represent him-
 self in court.
 Lower courts' decisions may be appealed, and in the case of the death penalty the
 defendant may petition the President for clemency. The President granted clemency
 to several hundred people in 1997 in connection with the general amnesty, which
 released several thousand inmates from prison (see Section 1.d.). In practice adher-
 ence to due process is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts in rural areas.
 Even when due process rights are observed, the authority of the prosecutor vis-a-
 vis the defense attorney is so great that it is very difficult for the defendant to re-
 ceive a fair trial.
 In September the Government held at least 10 political prisoners, including 1 dis-
 sident committed to a psychiatric hospital for nonmedical reasons. According to
 Human Rights Watch, at least two other dissidents were also held in psychiatric
 hospitals. Of the current convicted political prisoners, eight were involved in the
 July 1995 demonstration. Two others were convicted in secret before the Supreme
 Court in 1995 for an alleged conspiracy to assassinate the President. Dissident Ata
 Aymamedov was sentenced in February 1996 to 42 years' imprisonment for
 "hooliganism" after he criticized the-President in a private conversation. He report-
 edly claimed that the- only way to- improve the country's situation would be to re-
 move the President from office. The authorities tried and imprisoned him on the day
 of his arrest.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right of protection from arbitrary interference by the
 State in a citizen's personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate the
 conduct of surveillance by the state security apparatus, which regularly monitors
 the activities of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use phys-
 ical surveillance, telephone tapping, electronic eavesdropping, and the recruitment
 of informers. Critics of the Government, and many other people, report credibly that
 their mail is intercepted before delivery.
 The Government restricts citizens'. ability to obtain foreign newspapers (see Sec-
 tion 2.a.).
 In the past, the authorities have dismissed children from school and removed
 adults from their jobs because of the political activities of relatives. Since his trial,
 the Government has reportedly persecuted Ata Aymamedov's entire family in this
 way. The authorities al so threaten supporters of opposition political movements
 with loss of employment and homes (see Section 2.b.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom ofSpeech and Press.-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions .and to express them freely. In practice, however, the Govern-
 ment severely restricts freedom of speech and does not .permit freedom of the press.
 Continued criticism of the Government can lead to personal hardship, including loss
 of-opportunities for advancement and employment.
 The Government. completely controls radio and television. Its budget funds almost
 all print media. The Government censors:newspapers; the Committee for the Protec-
 tion of State Secrets must approve prepublication galleys. The two nominally inde-
 endent newspaprs established under presidential decree, Adalat (Justice) and
 alkynysh (Revival) continue to operate. Although both newspapers profess to be
 independent, their content is censored. Russian language newspapers from abroad
 are generally available only to organizations by subscription; individuals are rarely
 able to subscribe. Individual issues -are available in at least one Ashgabat hotel, but
 are sometimes confiscated from passengers arriving at international airports.
 The-Government prohibits the media from reporting the views of opposition politi-
 cal leaders and critics, and it rarely allows even the mildest form of criticism in
 print. The Government has subjected those responsible for critical foreign press
 items to threats and harassment. After publishing a series of articles critical of the
 Government in the Russian newspaper Pravda in 1996, journalist Marat Durdyev
 was fired from three state jobs: at the state-owned newspaper, an archeological site;
 
 
 1356
 and a state school; he also was harassed by the KNB and other government organs.
 The Government revoked the- accreditation of the Radio Liberty correspondent in
 1996 because of broadcasts by an opposition politician in exile, but it did not prevent
 him from continuing to file reports for broadcast in 1997.
 Following his arrest on October 30, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty correspond-
 ent Yowshan Annakurbanov was released from a KNB prison on November 12.
 Annakurbanov reportedly was not physically harmed but remained under investiga-
 tion at year's end for allegedly attempting to smuggle "military secrets" out of the
 country. Reportedly, he also was forbidden to leave is apartment, meet with jour-
 nalists and foreign officials, or discuss his case. An article containing inaccurate
 statements about RFE/RL and a negative depiction of Annakurbanov's case ap-
 peared in the officially sanctioned daily newspaper Neutral Turkmenistan on No-
 vember 14.
 Intellectuals have reported that the security organs have instructed them to
 praise the President in their art and have warned them not to participate in recep-
 tions hosted by foreign diplomatic missions.
 The Government also restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of
 government policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research
 into areas it considers politically sensitive. The government-controlled Union of
 Writers has in the past expelled members who have criticized government policy;
 libraries have removed their works.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution allows for
 peaceful assembly and association, but the Government restricts these rights. It
 does not permit peaceful demonstrations organized by alleged critics and in 1995
 dispersed the first peaceful protest rally in years, onvicting over 20 persons for
 their participation. According to Amnesty International, 8 of the original 20 con-
 vited demonstrators remain in jail. Permits are required for public meetings and
 demonstrations. There were reports of spontaneous demonstrations over bread
 prices in 1996, but none in 1997.
 A few unregistered organizations without political agendas are permitted to func-
 tion publicly. nregistered organizations with a politicai agenda are not allowed to
 hold demonstrations or meetings outside, but can hold small private meetings. No
 political groups critical of government policy have been able to meet the require-
 ments for registration. The Government uses laws on the registration of political
 parties to prevent the emergence of potential opposition groups. At present the only
 registered political party is the Democratic Party of Turkmenistan.
 Social and cultural organizations without political aims are allowed to function,
 but often have difficulty registering. Theoretically, citizens have the freedom to asso-
 ciate with whomever they please. However, the authorities have fired or threatened
 to fire supporters of opposition movements from their jobs, removed them from pro-
 fessional societies, and even threatened them with the loss of their homes. In addi-
 tion some citizens with links to foreigners are subject to official intimidation.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and
 does not establish a State religion. The State generally respects religious freedom.
 Citizens are overwhelmingly Muslim, but Islam does not play a dominant role in
 society, in part due to the 70 years of Soviet rule. "
 A modest revival of Islam has occurred since independence. The Government has
 incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition into its efforts to define a Turkmen
 identity, and it gives some financial and other support to the Council on Religious
 Affairs, which plays an intermediary role between the government bureaucracy and
 religious organizations.
 Religious congregations are required to register with the Government. While re-
 affirming a number of important religious freedoms, the Law on the Freedom of
 Conscience and Religious Organizations, amended in 1995 and again in 1996, also
 provides for significant government control of religion. For example, the requirement
 that religious organizations have at least 500 adherents to be legally registered has
 prevented all but Sunni Muslims and Russian Orthodox Christians from setting up
 legal religious organizations. This restriction has caused problems for a number of
 minority religions, especially the Baha'i, who have been prevented from conducting
 services. A member of a Ashgabat religious grup reported that on several occasions
 law enforcement officials raided the Baptist church where the group conducted
 meetings, confiscated religious material, and warned church authorities against per-
 mitting unregistered religious groups from meeting in its facilities. Diplomats re-
 ceived similar reports of raids and seizures of religious materials at Protestant
 churches in other areas of the country.
 While protected by law, pmselytization by "foreign" (i.e., non-Sunni Muslim) reli-
 gions can incur official displeasure. Missionaries arriving at Ashgabat International
 An-port with large quantities of religious material have had the material con-
 
 
 1357
 fiscated. Government officials acknowledge this practice, stating that the quantities
 are clearly for proselytizing and not for personal use. Hare Krishnas arriving from
 .Uzbekistan have had their religious material confiscated. Government permission is
 required for any mass-meetings or demonstrations for religious purposes. However,
 the Government does not restrict the travel of clergy or members of religious groups
 to Turkmenistan. Islamic religious literature is distributed through the mosques.
 Orthodox churches offer a variety of Christian religious literature.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not generally restrict movement within the coun-
 try, although travel to southern border zones is tightly controlled. Citizens still
 carry internal passports. These documents are. used-primarily as a form of identi-
 fication, rather than as a means of controlling movement. Residence permits are not
 required, although place of residence is registered and noted in passports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports and exit visas as a general
 means of restricting international travel. Most nonofficial travelers find the process
 of obtaining passports and exit visas to be difficult. Many allege that officials solicit
 bribes in exchange for permission to travel abroad. This year the Government intro-
 duced new passports which-will eventually serve as combined foreign and internal
 travel documents.
 Most citizens are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction. In 1996 some
 government opponents were denied the opportunity to emigrate; however, there
 were no reports of similar government action in 1997. In 1997 ethnic Russians and
 other non-Turkmen residents, including Jewish residents, have been permitted to
 emigrate.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad-who wish to return to Turkmenistan and apply for citizenship. The
 Government, however, discourages immigration by ethnic Turkmen living in Iran,
 Iraq, Turkey, and other countries. Immigration of non-Turkmen from other areas of
 the former Soviet Union is discouraged by the unofficial policy of favoring employ-
 ment of ethnic Turkmen.
 On June 12, the Government adopted the 1951 United Nations Convention and
 its 1967 Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, but its accession to the Conven-
 tion has not yet been approved by the U.N. The law on refugees was also adopted
 on June 12. It establishes the procedure and conditions for recognizing refugee sta-
 tus, and sets the legal, economic, and social-rights of refugees.
 The country does not provide first asylum, and the issue of its provision has never
 arisen. The Government has.,never granted refugee or asylee status to individuals,
 but some ethnic Turkmen from Afghanistan have been resettled.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNRCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees.
 There were no confirmed reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim
 to refugee status. There have been unconfirmed reports of small numbers of refu-
 gees being forcibly returned by individual border guards. According to the UNHCR,
 however, there is no clear pattern of abuse or forced expulsion of refugees, with the
 exception of such low-level harassment.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no real ability to effect peaceful change in the Government and
 have little influence on government policy or decisionmaking. The 1992 Constitution
 declares Turkmenistan to be-a secular democracy in the form of a presidential re-
 public. It calls for the separation of powers between the various branches of govern-
 ment, but vests a disproportionate share of power in the Presidency. In practice
 President Niyazov's power is absolute, and the country remains a one-party state.
 Despite the appearance of decisionmaking by consensus, most decisions are made
 at the presidential level.
 In the 1992 presidential election, the sole candidate was Saparmurad Niyazov, the
 incumbent and nominee of the Democratic Party of Turkmenistan. The Government
 announced the election barely a -month before voting day, giving opposition groups
 insufficient time to organize and qualify to submit a candidate. A 1994 national ref-
 erendum extended the President's term to 2002, obviating the need for the sched-
 uled presidential election in 1997. According to the official results, 99.9 percent of
 those voting cast their ballots to extend his term. The policy of the Democratic
 Party, according to its leadership, is to implement the policy of the President.
 In the 1994 elections for a reconstituted Mejlis (Parliament), no opposition partici-
 pation was permitted. The G-overnment claimed that 99.8 percent of all eligible vot-
 ers participated. The Mejlis routinely supports presidential decrees, and, as yet, has
 
 
 1358
 no genuine independence, although it has taken several measures to become a more
 professional body and does debate and amend draft legislation, including key bills
 such as civil and criminal codes. The next parliamentary elections are scheduled for
 1999,
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in the
 political process. Women hold the positions of Minister of Textile Industry, Prosecu-
 tor General, Deputy Chairperson of Parliament, and the Ambassador to the U.N.
 There are no women serving as provincial governors. Minorities are represented in
 the Government although preference is given to ethnic Turkmen.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups, and government restrictions
 on freedom of speech, press, and association would preclude any effort to investigate
 and criticize publicly the Government's human rights policies. Several independent
 journalists based in Russia report on these issues in the Russian press and have
 contact with international human rights organizations. On numerous occasions in
 the past, the Government has warned its critics against speaking with visiting jour-
 nalists or other foreigners wishing to discuss human rights issues.
 The National Institute for Democracy and Human Rights under the President
 completed its first year of operation in October. Its mandate is to support the de-
 mocratization of the government and society and monitor the protection of human
 rights. Beginning in December 1996, Institute personnel led an investigative tour
 of prisons and of regional and local government offices, reporting to the President
 on substandard prison conditions and abuses by regional and local authorities. The
 investigation led to the general amnesty and Criminal Code changes. The Institute
 maintains two full time staff members and also played an active role in receiving
 and resolving citizen complaints of arbitrary government action. Approximately
 1400 complaints have been filed with the Institute and, reportedly, over 50 percent
 concern the judicial process and judges but there are no specific statistics on the
 number of complaints against law enforcement and security organizations. In gen-
 eral the Institute conducts a study and returns its findings to the individual and
 the organizations involved. The Institute, however, is not an independent body, and
 the full scope of its prospective activities remained unclear at years end.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and freedoms for all, independent of
 one's nationality, origin, language, and religion. It further specifies equal rights be-
 fore the law for both men and women. There is no legal basis for discrimination
 against women or religious or ethnic minorities. Cultural traditions and the Govern-
 ment's policy of promoting Turkmen nationalism, however, limit the employment
 and educational opportunities of women and nonethnic Turkmen.
 Women.-Anecdotal reports indicate that domestic violence against women is com-
 mon, but no statistics are available. The subject is not discussed in society. There
 are no court cases available and no references to domestic violence in the media.
 One unofficial group to support battered women operates in Ashgabat.
 Women are underrepresented in the upper levels of state-owned economic enter-
 prises and are concentrated in the health care and education professions and in
 service industries. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous and envi-
 ronmentally unsafe jobs. Under the law, women enjoy the same inheritance and
 marriage rights as men. In traditional Turkmen society, however, the woman's pri-
 mary role is as homemaker ar d mother, and family pressures often limit opportuni-
 ties for women to enter outside careers and advance their education. Religious au-
 thorities, when proffering advice to practicing Muslims on matters concerning inher-
 itance and property rights, often favor men over women.
 There is only one officially registered women's group, headed by the Deputy
 Chairperson of the Mejlis and dedicated in honor of the President's mother. The
 Government has no program specifically aimed at rectifying the disadvantaged posi-
 tion of women in society, as it does not acknowledge that women suffer discrimina-
 tion.
 Children.-Turkmenistans social umbrella covers the welfare needs of children.
 The Government provides 9 to 10 years of education for the nation's children. Gen-
 erally, there is little difference in the education provided to girls and boys. The Gov-
 ernment has not taken effective steps to address the environmental and health
 problems that have resulted in a high rate of infant and maternal mortality.
 
 
 1359
 
 During the annual cotton harvest, some schools in agricultural areas are closed
 and children as young as 10 years of age work in the cotton fields (see Section 6.d.).
 Other than this activity, there is no societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-Government subsidies and pensions are provided for
 those with disabilities, although the pensions are inadequate to maintain a decent
 standard of living. Those capable of working are generally provided with jobs under
 still-valid preindependence policies that virtually guarantee employment to all. Ac-
 cording to existing legislation, facilities for the access of the disabled must be in-
 cluded in new construction projects. Compliance is spotty, however, and most older
 buildings are not so equipped. Care for the mentally retarded and mentally ill is
 handled on the local level. Mentally retarded and mentally ill children are placed
 in boarding schools with educational and future employment opportunities if their
 condition is mild. Adults with disabilities requiring institutionalization are kept pri-
 marily in "psycho-narcological" hospitals in Geok-Depe, Bekrova, and Kava, an din
 theory provided with food, clothing, and medical care.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides for equal rights
 and freedoms for all citizens. Turkmen comprise approximately 77 percent of the
 population of about 4.5 million; Russians, 7 percent; and Uzbeks, 9 percent. There
 are smaller numbers of Kazakhs, Armenians, Azerbaijanis, and many other ethnic
 groups. Since independence, Turkmenistan has not experienced ethnic turmoil.
 As part of its nation-building efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen the official language, and it is a mandatory subject in school, al-
 though not necessarily the language of instruction.
 The Constitution also provides for the rights of speakers of other languages to use
 them. Russian remains in common usage in government and commerce. The Gov-
 ernment insists that discrimination against Russian speakers will not be tolerated.
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups, not solely ethnic Russians.
 Non-Turkmen fear that the designation of Turkmen as the official language will put
 their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They complain that
 some avenues for promotion and job advancement are no longer open to them. Only
 a handful of non-Turkmen occupy high-echelon jobs in the ministries, and govern-
 ment employees from minority ethnic groups are sometimes assigned lesser posi-
 tions than their experience and qualifications would merit.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government-associated trade unions. There are no legal guarantees entitling work-
 ers to form or join unions. The Colleagues Union is the only legal central trade
 union federation permitted, and it claims a membership of 1.6 million; its unions
 are divided along both sectoral and regional lines. Unions may not form or join
 other federations.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union during the year.
 The law neither prohibits nor permits strikes and does not address the issue of
 retaliation against strikers. Strikes are extremely rare and no strikes were known
 to have occurred in 1997.
 There is no information on union      affiliation with international unions.
 Turkmenistan joined the International Labor Organization in 1993.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not protect the
 right to collective bargaining. In practice, in the state-dominated economy, the close
 association of both the trade union and the state-owned enterprise with the Govern-
 ment seriously limits workers' ability to bargain, and workers often go months with-
 out pay or receive their paychecks late.
 The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares general guidelines for wages and
 sets wages in health care, culture, and some other areas. In other sectors, it allows
 for some leeway at the enterprise level, taking into account local factors. The Gov-
 ernment determines specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enter-
 prise.
 The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers against union
 members and organizers, and there are no mechanisms for resolving such com-
 plaints.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. No incidents of compulsory labor were reported.
 
 
 1360
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and generally en-
 forces this prohibition effectively, with the exception of cotton harvesting in rural
 areas.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment of children is 16 years; in a few heavy industries it is 18
 years. The law prohibits children 16 through 18 years of age from working more
 than 6 hours per day (the normal workday is 8 hours).
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and generally en-
 forces this prohibition effectively, with the exception of cotton harvesting in rural
 areas (see Section 6.c.). A 15-year-old child may work 4 to 6 hours per day, but only
 with the permission of the trade union and parents. This permission rarely is grant-
 ed. Violations of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the cotton harvesting
 season, when teenagers work in the fields and children less than 10 years of age
 sometimes help with the harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. As of August 1,
 the average wage in the state sector was approximately $31 (160,000 manats) per
 month. While the Government subsidizes the prices of many necessities and pro-
 vides others free of charge, this wage falls short of the amount required to meet the
 needs of an average family. Most households are multigenerational, with several
 members receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions. Even so, many people lack the
 resourceA to maintain an adequate diet, and meat is a luxury for most citizens.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours with 2 days off. Individuals who work
 fewer hours during the week or are in certain high-level positions may also work
 on Saturdays.
 Turkmenistan inherited from the Soviet era an economic system with substandard
 working conditions-one in which production took precedence over the health and
 safety of workers. Industrial workers often labor in an unsafe environment and are
 not provided proper protective equipment. Some agricultural workers are subjected
 to environmental health hazards. The Government recognizes that these problems
 exist and has taken some steps to deal with them, but it has not set comprehensive
 standards for occupational health and safety. Workers do not always have the right
 to remove themselves from work situations that endanger health or safety without
 jeopardy to their continued employment.
