Turkmenistan
The Turkmen government tightened repression in this already extremely repressive
and authoritarian country. While retaining excessive restrictions on freedom
of expression, association, and religion, it embarked on a new assault on freedom
of movement and the right to education by preventing dozens of students
studying in private universities abroad from leaving the country.
The authorities released two political prisoners, one of whom had served his full
prison term, but they arrested and convicted a well-known environmental activist
on trumped-up charges, later releasing him on condition that he renounce his
Turkmen citizenship and immediately leave the country. Untold numbers of people
continue to languish in Turkmen prisons following unfair trials on what would
appear to be politically motivated charges.
The government presents international interest in its hydrocarbon wealth as an
expression of international support for President Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov’s policies. A conflict that started in April 2009 between the
Turkmen authorities and the Russian gas company Gazprom (over an explosion in
a pipeline) served to intensify Western diplomacy aimed at convincing
Turkmenistan to commit to supplying its gas via pipelines bypassing Russia.
Elections
The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR) did not send a full election
observation mission to the December 2008 parliamentary elections in
Turkmenistan, stating that “the current political context does not allow for a
meaningful competition.” About 90 percent of the candidates were members of
the Democratic Party, which is led by Berdymukhamedov and is the only political
party registered in Turkmenistan. Non-party candidates were nominated by statecontrolled
groups. Nongovernmental groups in exile reported pressure on individuals
not affiliated with the state who attempted to register as independent candidates.
Freedom of Expression and Civil Society Activism
Independent NGOs and media cannot operate openly, if at all, in Turkmenistan.
No independent organization has been permitted to carry out research on human
rights abuses inside the country, and no international agency—governmental or
nongovernmental—has had access to detention facilities.
Independent activists and journalists continue to be subjected to threats and
harassment by security services. For example, in spring 2009 customs officials
searched two civil society activists for nearly two hours at Ashgabad airport
before allowing them to board a flight abroad. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, a
US government-funded media outlet, reported that its correspondents’ telephone
lines were disconnected during the December 2008 parliamentary elections, and
one of its correspondents was interrogated and threatened by state security officers
the same month.
Andrey Zatoka, an environmental activist who for two years had been banned
from traveling abroad, was arrested on October 20 in Dashoguz. Zatoka was
attacked by a man without warning while shopping for food at a local market.
When Zatoka turned to police officers nearby to report the incident, the policemen
proceeded to arrest him. On October 29 Zatoka was convicted and sentenced
to five years’ imprisonment on false charges of “causing injuries of medium
severity.” Security services pressured Zatoka to renounce his Turkmen citizenship
and leave the country as an unofficial condition for his release. On
November 6 the appeals court commuted Zatoka’s sentence to a fine equivalent
of US$350, and Zatoka and his wife were forced to leave for Russia the next day.
Political Prisoners, Enforced Disappearances, and Deaths in
Custody
The harsh repression that prevents civic activism impedes determining the number
of political prisoners. Only two individuals believed to be imprisoned for
political reasons have been released in the past 12 months—activist Valery Pal in
December 2008, and longest-serving political prisoner Mukhametkuli Aymuradov,
arrested in 1994 and having served his full prison term, in May 2009. Well-known
political prisoners from the era of Berdymukhamedov’s predecessor Saparmurad Niazov, including activists Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy Khajiev,
remain behind bars. Also still imprisoned is the dissident Gulgeldy Annaniazov,
who was arrested in June 2008 upon his return from exile and sentenced to 11
years’ imprisonment on unknown charges.
There is no information about the fate of Ovezgeldy Ataev (Niazov’s constitutionally
designated successor) and his wife, who were imprisoned in 2007 just after
Berdymukhamedov became president. The fate of about 50 prisoners implicated
in the alleged November 2002 attack on Niazov’s life likewise remains unknown,
including that of former foreign minister Boris Shikhmuradov, his brother
Konstantin Shikhmuradov, and the former ambassador to the OSCE, Batyr
Berdiev. At least two persons serving prison terms after being purged from government
service by Niazov died in prison in 2009 under unknown circumstances:
Rejep Saparov, the former head of the presidential administration, and
Khabibulla Durdyev, a former provincial governor.
Forum 18, an independent, international religious freedom group, reported that
four Jehovah’s Witnesses were imprisoned in 2009 for refusing compulsory military
service on grounds of religious conscience: Shadurdi Ushotov, sentenced on
July 13 to two years; Akmurat Egendurdiev, sentenced on July 29 to one-and-a-half
years; and brothers Sakhetmurad and Mukhammedmurad Annamamedov, who
were given two-year suspended sentences in November 2008 but transferred to
prison in May 2009 following a further court ruling.
Criminal Justice System
Turkmenistan adopted a new criminal procedure code in May. The code has limited
progressive clauses related to juvenile justice, appeals, and admissibility of
evidence. While declaring that human rights should be respected, the code does
not provide any viable mechanisms for their protection: it does not contain
habeas corpus guarantees; does not provide for judicial oversight of investigative
actions or detention; provides only limited alternatives to pretrial detention; and
lacks guarantees for presumption of innocence.
Freedom of Movement
In late July and August Turkmen authorities prevented hundreds of students from
boarding planes and crossing land borders to depart for study abroad. Authorities
told the students that they did not have appropriate documents to leave the
country: The required documents included an invitation from the university, a
copy of its license, verification of its state-affiliation status, and a copy of the contract
between the student and the university. After weeks of uncertainty, the
Turkmen government started to grant permission to leave, but generally to those
studying at state-run foreign universities. Dozens of students studying in private
universities abroad were not allowed to travel. According to the Vienna-based
Turkmen Initiative for Human Rights, at least five students of a private university
who tried to leave Turkmenistan in October where informed at the border that
they are banned from foreign travel.
Other arbitrary restrictions on foreign travel remain in place and activists and relatives
of dissidents are often targeted. Unlike in previous years when some individuals
were allowed to travel, there were no reversals of travel bans in 2009. Still
banned from foreign travel are Rashid Ruzimatov and Irina Kakabaeva, relatives
of an exiled former government official; the daughter of Gulgeldy Annaniazov and
her family; Shageldy Atakov, an active Baptist, and his family; Ilmyrat Nurliev, a
Turkmen Evangelical Church pastor; and Svetlana Orazova, sister of exiled opposition
leader Khudaiberdy Orazov. Her husband Ovez Annaev, who since June 15,
2008, was barred from traveling abroad for medical treatment, died in November
2009.
Key International Actors
Turkmenistan’s vast energy wealth and proximity to Afghanistan continue to
prompt Turkmenistan’s international partners to actively engage with the Turkmen
government and to refrain from making human rights improvements an integral
part of this engagement.
The European Union in July 2009 formally approved an Interim Trade Agreement
(ITA) that gives preferential treatment and promises broader upgraded relations
with Turkmenistan. The agreement had been stalled by the European Parliament for more than two years due to human rights concerns. The EU foreign ministerial
decision announcing the ITA made no reference to human rights concerns,
despite the fact that the European Parliament’s April resolution green-lighting the
agreement as “a potential lever to strengthen the reform process in
Turkmenistan” had highlighted a number of specific steps the Turkmen government
should take. These included the need for unconditional release of all political
prisoners; removal of all obstacles to free travel; free access for independent
monitors; improvements in civil liberties, including for NGOs; and the ability of
civil society to develop free from undue government interference; freedom of religion;
and open and democratic elections.
In June the EU held its annual human rights dialogue with Turkmenistan, but
failed to use it to publicly highlight concern about Turkmenistan’s poor human
rights record or to urge concrete human rights reforms.
United States officials have generally stated that human rights are an important
part of the US government’s engagement with Turkmenistan. The US administration
issued a statement of concern regarding the arrest of Andrei Zatoka, and
raised concern at a high level about students in US-sponsored programs being
unable to travel. But there is no evidence that human rights issues were pursued
in a manner that fully reflected the serious human rights concerns raised in the
State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices.
In December 2008 Turkmenistan was reviewed under the United Nations Human
Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) mechanism. The Turkmen government
accepted a number of the recommendations, including acting against
any form of harassment and intimidation of journalists, ensuring effective freedom
of worship for all religious communities, and taking effective measures to
allow NGOs to register and work freely. But it merely undertook to consider several
important recommendations such as access to the country for UN special procedures,
protecting human rights defenders from persecution, ending the practice
of government appointment of editors to all media outlets and removing
restrictions on critical media reporting of government policy, and ending torture
in places of detention. It also chose to outright reject a number of key recommendations,
such as the release of political prisoners, a transparent review of the
political cases of past years, holding an independent inquiry into the 2006 death in custody of journalist Ogulsapar Muradova, and the lifting of travel bans on
human rights defenders. To date there are no known steps taken by the Turkmen
government to implement the UPR recommendations it accepted.