 TURKMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan, a one-party state dominated by its President and his closest advis-
 ers, made little progress in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian style of govern-
 ment to a democratic system. Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Turkmen Com-
 munist Party since 1985 and President of Turkmenistan since its independence in
 October 1990, may legally remain in office until 2002. The Democratic Party, the
 renamed Communist Party, retained a monopoly on power, the Government reg-
 istered no parties in 1996 and continued to repress all opposition political activities.
 Emphasizing stability and gradual reform, official nation-building efforts focused on
 fostering Turkmen nation  im and glorification of President Niyazov. In practice,
 the President controls the judicial system, and the 50-member unicameral Par-
 liament (Majlis) has no genuinely independent authority. The Government opened
 the Institute for Democratization and Human Rights in October, giving it a mandate
 to conduct research in support of the democratization of Turkmen government and
 society and to monitor the protection of human rights.
 
 
 1174
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) has the responsibilities formerly held
 by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), namely, to ensure that the re-
 gime remains in power through tight control of society and discouragement of dis-
 sent. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal police, which works close-
 ly with the KNB on matters of national security. Both operate with relative impu-
 nity and have been responsible for abusing the rights of individuals as well as en-
 forcing the Government s policy of repressing political opposition.
 Turkmenistan is largely desert with cattle and sheep raising, intensive agri-
 culture in irrigated oases, and huge oil and gas reserves. Its economy remains de-
 pendent on central planning mechanisms and State control, although the Govern-
 ment has taken a number of potentially significant steps to make the transition to
 a market economy. Agriculture, particularly cotton cultivation, accounts for nearly
 half of total employment. Gas, oil, gas derivatives, and cotton account for almost all
 of the country's export revenues. Seeking increased outlets for its gas exports (and,
 thereby, greater economic independence), the Government is considering construc-
 tion of new gas export pipelines to or through a number of countries, including
 neighboring I     and Afghanistan.
 The Government continued to commit human rights abuses, notably by severely
 restricting political and civil liberties. Citizens do not have the ability to change
 their government peacefully. The Government placed dissident Durdymurad
 Khodzha-Mukhammed in a psychiatric hospital in Geok-Depe and imprisoned dis-
 sident Ata Aymamedov afterhe called for the President's removal from office. Senior
 government officials failed to respond to inquiries regarding these two cases. Secu-
 rity forces continued to beat suspects and prisoners, and prison conditions remained
 poor and unsafe. Arbitrary arrest, detention, unfair trials, and interference with citi-
 zens privacy remained problems. The Government completely controls the media,
 censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting independent criticism of government
 policy or officials. The Government generally gave favored treatment to ethnic
 Turkmen over minorities and to men over women. Women experience societal dis-
 crimination, and domestic violence against women is a problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial KIlling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1992 Constitution makes torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment illegal Nevertheless, there were credible and widespread reports that security
 officials frequently beat criminal suspects and prisoners and often used force to ob-
 tain confessions.
 International human rights organizations reported that on February 22, the au-
 thorities placed dissident Durdymurad Khodzlha-Mukhammed in a psychiatric hos-
 pital in Geok-Depe where he remains against his will. Others who have protested
 government policies or economic conditions also are held in psychiatric hospitals.
 Prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe. Food is poor, and facilities for
 prisoner rehabilitation and recreation are extremely limited. In the past, some pris-
 oners have died due to overcrowding and lack of adequate protection from the severe
 summer heat. The Government does not permit independent monitoring of prison
 conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution states that citizens
 "have the right to freedom of belief and the free expression thereof and also to ob-
 tain information unless it is a State, official, or commercial secret." In practice,
 those expressing views critical of or different from those of the Government have
 been arrested on false charges of committing common crimes, such as Ata
 Aymamedov (see Section i.e.), or the two journalists, Mukhammed Muradliev and
 Yowshan Anagurhan, for "hooliganism" in connection with a 1995 peaceful dem-
 onstration.
 The precise number of political detainees held at year's end was unknown. Pre-
 trial detainees are held 6 to 8 months on the average. One recent detainee was held
 for 61 days and released on October 1 after the presidential amnesty announced in
 conjunction with the fifth anniversary of independence.
 Forced exile was not known to have occurred in 1996. However, almost all promi-
 nent political opponents of the present Government have chosen to move to either
 Moscow, Stockholm, or Prague for reasons of personal safety.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for judicial independ-
 ence. However, in practice, the judiciary is not independent; the President's power
 
 
 1175
 
 to select and dismiss judges subordinates the judiciary to the Presidency. The court
 system has not been reformed since Soviet days. It consists of a Supreme Court, 6
 provincial courts (including 1 for the city of Ashgabat only), and, at the lowest level,
 61 district and city courts. A Supreme Economic Court hears cases involving civil
 disputes between state-owned enterprises and ministries. There are also military
 courts, which handle crimes involving military discipline, criminal cases concerning
 military personnel, and crimes by civilians against military personnel.
 The President appoints all judges for a term of 6 years without legislative review,
 except for the Chairman (Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court, and-he has the sole
 authority to remove them from the bench before the completion of their terms.
 The law provides for the rights of due process for defendants, including a public
 trial, the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right
 to call witnesses to testify on behalf of the accused. In practice, these rights are
 often denied by authorities, and there are no independent lawyers, with the excep-
 tion of a few retired legal officials, available to represent defendants. When a person
 cannot afford the services of a lawyer, the court appoints one. A person may rep-
 resent himself in court.
 Decisions of the lower courts may be appealed to higher courts, and in the case
 of the death penalty the defendant may petition the President for clemency. In prac-
 tice, adherence to due process is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts in
 rural areas. Even when due process rights are observed, the authority of the pros-
 ecutor vis-a-vis the defense attorney is so great that it is very difficult for the de-
 fendant to receive a fair trial.
 In January the Government convicted 27 persons for involvement in a peaceful
 demonstration in July 1995; 20 were immediately amnestied. In February authori-
 ties arrested one more person, Charymurat Amandurdyev, on charges relating to
 the demonstration.
 At the end of the year, the Government held at least 12 political prisoners, includ-
 ing I dissident committed to a psychiatric hospital for nonmedical reasons. Accord-
 ing to Human Rights Watch, at least two other dissidents were also held in psy-
 chiatric hospitals. Of the 11 convicted prisoners, 8 were involved in the July 1995
 demonstration. Two others were convicted in secret before the Supreme Court in
 1995 for an alleged conspiracy to assassinate the President. Dissident Ata
 Aymamedov     was   sentenced  in  February    to  4Y2 years' imprisonment     for
 "hooliganism" after he criticized the President in a private conversation. He report-
 edly claimed that the only way to improve the country's situation would be to re-
 move the President from office. The authorities tried and imprisoned him on the day
 of his arrest.
 f. Arbitrary Intereence With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right of protection from arbitrary interference by the
 State in a citizen's personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate the
 conduct of surveillance by the state security apparatus, which regularly monitors
 the activities of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use phys-
 ical surveillance, telephone tapping, electronic eavesdropping, and the recruitment
 of informers. Critics of the Government, and many other people, report credibly that
 their mail is intercepted before delivery.
 In the past, the authorities have dismissed children from school and removed
 adults from their jobs because of the political activities of relatives. Since his trial,
 the Government has reportedly persecuted Ata Aymamedov's entire family in this
 way.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however, the Govern-
 ment severely restricts freedom of speech and does not permit freedom of the press.
 Continued criticism of the Government can lead to personal hardship, including loss
 of opportunities for advancement and employment.
 The Government completely controls radio and television. Its budget funds almost
 all print media. The Government censors newspapers; the Committee for the Protec-
 tion of State Secrets must approve prepublication galleys. There is at least one
 monthly newspaper that purports to be independent, but it is still censored. Russian
 language newspapers from abroad are generally available only to organizations by
 subscription; individuals are rarely able to subscribe. Individual issues are available
 in at least one Ashgabat hotel, but are sometimes confiscated from passengers arriv-
 ing at international airports.
 After publishing a series of articles critical of the Government in the Russian
 newspaper Pravda, Turkmen journalist Marat Durdyev was fired from three state
 
 
 1176
 obs: at the state-owned newspaper, an archeological site, and a state school; and
 e was harassed by the KNB and other government organs.
 The Government prohibits the media from reporting the views of opposition politi-
 cal leaders and critics, and it rarely allows even the mildest form of criticism in
 print. The Government press has condemned the foreign media, including Radio
 Liberty, for broadcasting or publishing opposing views, and the Government has
 subjected those quoted in critical foreign press items to threats and harassment. It
 revoked the accreditation of the Radio Liberty correspondent because of broadcasts
 by an opposition politician in exile, although it has not prevented him from continu-
 ing to file reports for broadcast.
 The Government also restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of
 government policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research
 into areas it considers politically sensitive. The government-controlled Union of
 Writers has in the past expelled members who have criticized government policy;,
 libraries have removed their works. Intellectuals have reported that the security or-
 gans have instructed them to praise the President in their art and have warned
 them not to participate in receptions hosted by foreign diplomatic missions.
 b. Freedom of Peacefd Assembly and Association.-The Constitution allows for
 p eaceful assembly and association, but the Government restricts these rights. It
 dos not permit peaceful demonstrations organized by alleged critics and in 1995
 dispersed the first peaceful protest rally in year, convicting over 20 persons for
 their participation. Permits are required for public meetings and demonstrations,
 but there were reports of spontaneous demonstrations over bread prices during the
 year.
 � A few unre$istered organizations without political agendas are permitted. Unreg-
 istered organizations    a   itical agenda are not allowed to hold demonstrations
 or meetings outside, but can old small private meetings. No political groups critical
 of government policy have been able to meet the requirements for registration. The
 Government uses laws on the registration of political parties to prevent the emer-
 gence of potential opposition groups. At present the only registered party is the
 Democratic Party of Turkmenistan.
 Social and cultural organizations without political aims are allowed to function,
 but often have difficulty registering. Theoretically, citizens have the freedom to asso-
 ciate with whomever they please. However, the authorities have fired or threatened
 to fire supporters of opposition movements from their jobs for political activities, re-
 moved them from professional societies, and even threatened them with the loss of
 their homes. In addition, some Turkmen with links to foreigners are subject to offi-
 cial intimidation.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and
 does not establish a State religion. The State generally respects religious freedom.
 Citizens are overwhelmingly Muslim, but Islam does not play a dominant role in
 society, in part due to the 70 years of Soviet rule.
 A modest revival of Islam has occurred since independence. The Government has
 incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition into its efforts to define a Turkmen
 identity, and it gives some financial and other support to the Council on Religious
 Affairs, which plays an intermediary role between the government bureaucracy and
 religious organizations.
 Religious congregations are required to register with the Government, but there
 were no reports that the Government has denied registration to any religious
 groups.
 _There is no law specifically addressing religious proselytizing. The Government,
 however, must grant permission for any mass meetings or demonstrations for this
 purpose. The Government does not restrict the travel of clergy or members of reli-
 gious groups to Turkmenistan. Islamic religious literature is distributed through the
 mosques. Orthodox churches offer a variety of Christian religious literature.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Trael, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not generally restrict movement within the coun-
 try, although travel to southern border zones is tightly controlled. Citizens still
 carry internal passports. These are used primarily as a form of identification rather
 than as a means of controlling movement. Residence permits are not required, al-
 though place of residence is registered and noted in passports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports and exit visas as a general
 means of retricting international travel. Most nonofficial travelers find the process
 of obtaining passports and exit visas to be difficult. Many allege that officials solicit
 bribes in exchange for permission to travel abroad.
 While most citizens are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction, some
 government opponents have been denied the opportunity to emigrate. In 1996 ethnic
 
 
 1177
 Russians and other non-Turkmen residents, including Jewish residents, have been
 permitted to emigate.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to Turkmenistan and apply for citizenship. The
 Government, however, discourages immigration by ethnic Turkmen living in Iran,
 Iraq, Turkey, and other countries. Immigration of non-Turkmen from other areas of
 the former Soviet Union is discouraged by the unofficial policy of favoring employ-
 ment of ethnic Turkmen.
 The Government has not formulated a policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first
 asylum. The country does not provide first asylum, anf the issue of its provision
 has never arisen. The Government has never granted refugee or asylee status to
 persons or accepted them for resettlement.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There are no provisions for granting asylum or refugee status in accordance
 with the 1951 United Nations Convention and its 1967 Protocol Relating to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees. Although the Government is not a signatory to the Convention,
 President Niyazov has publicly stated that Turkmenistan will accede to all inter-
 national conventions, including those governing human rights and refugees. There
 are no domestic structures in place for government adherence to the Convention.
 The UNHCR is assisting the Government in creating such structures as a first step
 towards signing the Convention. UNHCR officials estimate that the country is at
 least 2 years away from signing the Convention.
 There were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee
 status. There has not been a pattern of abuse of refugees with the exception of low-
 level harassment.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no real ability to effect peaceful change in the Government and
 have little influence on government policy or decisionmaking. The 1992 Constitution
 declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracy in the form of a presidential re-
 public. It calls for the separation of powers between the various branches but vests
 a disproportionate share of power in the Presidency, particularly at the expense of
 the judiciary. In practice, President Niyazov's power is absolute, and the country re-
 mains a one-party state. Despite the appearance of decisionmaking by consensus,
 most decisions are made at the President's level.
 In the 1992 presidential election, the sole candidate was Saparmurad Niyazov, the
 incumbent and nominee of the Democratic Party of Turkmenistan (formerly the
 Communist Party). The Government announced the election barely a month before
 voting day, giving oppition groups insufficient time to organize and qualify to sub-
 mit a candidate. A 1994 national referendum extended the-President's term to 2002,
 obviating the need for the scheduled presidential election in 1997. According to the
 official results, 99.9 percent of those voting cast their ballots to extend his term. The
 policy of the Democratic Party, according to its leadership, is to implement the pol-
 icy of the President.
 In the 1994 elections for a reconstituted Mejlis (Parliament) no opposition partici-
 pation was permitted. The Government claimed that 99.8 percent of all eligible vot-
 ers participated. The Mejlis routinely supports presidential decrees and, as yet, has
 no genuinely independent authority, although it has taken several measures to be-
 come a more professional body. The next parliamentary elections are scheduled for
 1999.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in the
 political process. Minorities are represented in the Government although preference
 is given to ethnic Turkmen. However, women are underrepresented in the upper
 levels of government. Women currently serve as the Deputy Chairman of the Par-
 liament and as the Permanent Representative to the United Nations. However
 there are no women serving in the influential positions of ministers or provincial
 governors.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups, and government restrictions
 on freedom of speech, press, and association would preclude any effort to investigate
 and criticize publicly the Government's human rights policies. Several independent
 journalists report on these issues in the Russian press in Russia and have contact
 with international human rights organizations. On numerous occasions in the past,
 
 
 1178
 the Government has warned its critics against speaking with visiting journalists or
 other foreigners wishing to discuss human rights issues.
 The National Institute for Democracy and Human Rights under the President
 opened in October. Its mandate is to support the democratization of the government
 and society and monitor the protection of human rights. Be g  in December, In-
 stitute personnel led an investigative tour of prisons and of regional and local gov-
 ernment offices, reporting to the President on substandard prison conditions and
 abuses by_regional and local authorities. The degree of the Institute's independence
 and the full scope of its prospective activities, remained unclear at year's end.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Article 17 of the Constitution provides for equal rights and freedoms for all, re-
 gardless of one's nationality, origin, language, and religion. Article 18 specifies equal
 rights before the law for both men and women. There is no legal basis for discrimi-
 nation against women or religious or ethnic minorities. Cultural traditions and the
 Government's policy of promoting Turkmen nationalism however, limit the employ-
 ment and educational opportunities of women and nonethnic Turkmen.
 Women.-Anecdotal reports indicate that domestic violence against women is com-
 mon, but no statistics are available. The subject is not discussed in Turkmen soci-
 ety. There are no court cases available and no media references to domestic violence
 in the media.
 Despite constitutional provisions, women are underrepresented in the upper levels
 of state-owned economic enterprises and are concentrated in health care, education,
 and service industries. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous an%
 environmentally unsafe jobs. Under the law, women enjoy the same inheritance and
 marriage rights as men. In traditional Turkmen society, however, the woman's pri-
 mazy role is as homemaker and mother, and family pressures often limit opportuni-
 ties for women to enter outside careers and advance their education. Religious au-
 thorities, when proffering advice to practicing Muslims on matters concerning inher-
 itance and property rights, often favor men over women.
 There is o y one officially registered women's group, headed by the Deputy
 Chairperson of the Mejlis and dedicated in honor of the President's mother. At least
 one other group to support battered women operates in Ashgabat. The Women's
 Council of Turkmenistan, a carryover from the Soviet system, was disbanded follow-
 ing the election of Parliament in December 1994, and the only professional business-
 women's organization is no longer active. The Government has no program specifi-
 cally aimed at rectifying the disadvantaged position of women in society, as it does
 not believe that women suffer discrimination.
 Children.-Turkmenistans social umbrella covers the welfare needs of children.
 The Government provides 9 to 10 years of education for the nation's children. Gen-
 erally, there is little difference in the education provided to girls and boys. The Go;-
 ernment has not taken effective steps to address the environmental and health
 problems that have resulted in a high rate of infant and maternal mortality.
 During the annual cotton harvest, some schools in agricultural areas are closed
 and children as young as 10 work in the cotton fields. Other than this, there is no
 societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.--Government subsidies and pensions are provided for
 those with disabilities, although the pensions are inadequate to maintain a decent
 standard of living. Those capable of working are generally provided with jobs under
 still-valid preindependence policies that virtually guarantee employment to all. Ac-
 cording to existing legislation, facilities for the access of the disabled must be in-
 cluded-in new construction projects. Compliance is spotty, however, and most older
 buildings are not so equipped.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides for equal rights
 and freedoms for all citizens. Turkmen comprise approximately 77 percent of the
 population of about 4.5 million; Russians, 7 percent; and Uzbeks, 9 percent. There
 are smaller numbers of Kazaks Armenians, Azerbaijanis, and many other ethnic
 groups. Since independence, Turimenistan has not experienced ethnic turmoil.
 As part of its nation-building efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen the official language, and it is a mandatory subject in school, al-
 o    not necessarily the I  age of instruction.
 The Constitution also      s for the rights of speakers of other languages to use
 them. Russian remains m common usage in government and commerce. The Gov-
 ernment insists that discrimination against Russian speakers will not be tolerated.
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups, not solely ethnic Russians.
 
 
 1179
 Non-Turkmen fear that the designation of Turkmen as the official language will put
 their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They complain tat
 some avenues for promotion and job advancement are no longer open to them. Only
 a handful of non-Turkmen occupy high-echelon jobs in the ministries, and govern-
 ment employees from minority ethnic groups are sometimes assigned lesser posi-
 tions than their experience and qualifications would merit.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government-associated trade unions. There are no legal guarantees entitling work-
 ers to form or join unions. The Colleagues Union is the only legal central trade
 union permitted, and it claims a membership of some 1.6 million; its unions are di-
 vided along both sectoral and regional lines.-Unions may not form or join other fed-
 erations.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union in 1996. The State controls key social benefits such as sick leave, health care,
 maternal and childcare benefits, and funeral expenses. Deductions from payrolls to
 cover these benefits are transferred directly to the Government.
 The law neither prohibits nor permits strikes and does not address the issue of
 retaliation against strikers. Strikes are extremely rare and no strikes were known
 to have occurred in 1996.
 There is no information on union affiliation with international unions.
 Turkmenistan joined the International Labor Organization in late 1993.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not protect the
 right to collective bargaining. In practice, in the state-dominated economy, the close
 association of both the trade union and the state-owned enterprise with the Govern-
 ment seriously limits workers' ability to bargain, and workers often go months with-
 out pay or receive their paychecks late.
 The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares general guidelines for wages and
 sets wages in health care, culture, and some other areas. In other sectors, it allows
 for some leeway at the enterprise level, taking into account local factors. The Gov-
 ernment determines specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enter-
 prise.
 The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers against union
 members and organizers, and there are no mechanisms for resolving such com-
 plaints.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. No incidents of compulsory labor were reported.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 16 years; in a few heavy industries it is 18 years. The law prohibits
 children 16 through 18 years of age from working more than 6 hours per day (the
 normal workday is 8 hours).
 A 15-year-old child may work 4 to 6 hours per day, but only with the permission
 of the trade union and parents. This permission rarely is granted. Violations of child
 labor laws occur in rural areas during the cotton harvesting season, when teenagers
 work in the fields and children less than 10 years of age sometimes help with the
 harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage in Turkmenistan.
 As of October 1, the average monthly wage in the state sector was approximately
 $16 (80,000 manats) per month. While the Government subsidizes the prices of
 many necessities and provides others free of charge, this wage falls short of the
 amount required to meet the needs of an average family. Most households are
 multigenerational, with several members receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions.
 Even so, many people lack the resources to maintain an adequate diet, and meat
 is a luxury for most of them.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours with 2 days off. Citizens are commonly
 expected to work on Saturday in violation of the 40-hour workweek law. Individuals
 who work fewer hours during the week or are in certain high-level positions may
 also work on Saturdays.
 Turkmenistan inherited from the Soviet era an economic system with substandard
 working conditions--one in which production took precedence over the health and
 safety of workers.
 Industrial workers often labor in an unsafe environment and are not provided
 proper protective equipment. Some agricultural workers are subjected to environ-
 mental health hazards. The Government recognizes that these problems exist and
 has taken some steps to deal with them but has not set comprehensive standards
 
 
 1180
 for occupational health and safety. Workers do not always have the right to remove
 themselves from work situations that endanger health or safety without jeopardy
 to their continued employment.
