 TURMVMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan, a one-party state dominated by its President and his closest advi-
 sors, made little progress in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian style of govern-
 ment to a democratic system. Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Communist Party
 since 1985 and President since October 1990 when the post was created, remained
 in office. The Democratic Party, the old Communist Party under a new name, re-
 tained a monopoly on power, the Government registered no opposition parties in
 1995 and continued to repress all opposition political activities. Emphasizing stabil-
 ity over reform, the President's nation-building efforts centered on developing
 Turkmen nationalism and glorification of the President. In practice, the President
 controls the judicial system.
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) has the responsibilities formerly held
 by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), with membership and operations
 essentially unchanged. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal police,
 which works closely with the KNB on matters of national security. These agencies
 have been responsible for human rights abuses in enforcing the Government's policy
 of repressing political opposition.
 Turkmenistan continued to have a centrally planned economy, although the Gov-
 ernment continued to take small steps toward a transition to a market economy.
 The country has .he world's fourth largest reserves of natural gas and is heavily
 dependent on revenue from gas exports. Seeking fuller economic independence, it is
 considering construction of new gas pipelines to or through a number of countries,
 including neighboring Iran and Afghanistan. Agriculture, particularly cotton cultiva-
 tion, accounts for nearly half of total employment. According to statistics of the
 International Monetary Fund, Turkmenistan has a gross domestic product of $516
 per capita.
 The Government continued to commit human rights abuses. Turkmen authorities
 severely  restricted  political and  civil liberties. Dissidents Mukhammetkuli
 Aimuradov and Khoshaly Garayev were sentenced to 15 and 12 years' imprisonment
 for participating in the work of an antistate organization and for plotting to kill the
 President. Other political dissidents were jailed and beaten. Security forces contin-
 ued to beat suspects and prisoners, and prison conditions remained poor and unsafe.
 The Government completely controlled the media, censoring all newspapers and
 rarely permitting criticism of government policy or officials. The Government gen-
 erally gave favored treatment to ethnic Turkmen over minorities and to men over
 women. Women experience societal discrimination, and domestic violence against
 women appears common.
 
 
 1080
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Xilling.-In June a man arrested in Ashgabat
 on suspicion of passing counterfeit money reportedly died from injuries sustained
 while in police custody. Others are also believed to have died as a result of beatings
 inflicted by the police during interrogations (see Section 1.c.). The Government de-
 nies that any extrajudicial killings have occurred, and no investigations or prosecu-
 tions have taken place.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1992 Constitution makes illegal torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment. While systematic torture was not known to have occurred, the beating
 of criminal suspects and prisoners was widespread. In February while in detention
 at the Ministry of Internal Affairs political dissident Mukhammed Aimuradov was
 severely beaten and required hospitalization with two broken arms. Forced confes-
 sions are common.
 Prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe. Food is poor, and facilities for
 prisoner rehabilitation and recreation are extremely limited. Government represent-
 atives have admitted that some prisoners have died due to overcrowding and lack
 of adequate protection from the severe summer heat.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Those expressing views critical of or dif-
 ferent from those of the Government have been arrested on false charges of commit-
 ting common crimes. On July 12, at least 80 persons were arrested after participat-
 ing in apeaceful protest march. The Government claimed that all those who dem-
 onstrated were under the influence of narcotics or alcohol. On July 19, the security
 forces arrested poet and journalist Mukhammed Muradliev, reportedly on suspicion
 of organizing the July 12 demonstrations. Five days later, his colleague and fellow
 journalist, Yowshan Anagurgan was arrested, reportedly for the same reason.
 On December 27, the trialof Muradliev, Anagurban and 25 others connected with
 the demonstration began in secret. The two journalists were convicted of
 hooliganism. The other defendants were all convicted, too, on as yet unknown
 charges. Twenty of the 27 tried and convicted, including the two journalists, were
 subsequently granted amnesty and released.
 The Government occasionally uses forced exile. In January 1994, the authorities
 temporarily exiled political activist Durdymurad Khojamukhamed to Baku, Azer-
 bajan, without either his consent or due process. Almost all prominent political 0p-
 ponents of the present Government have chosen to move to either Moscow, Stock-
 holm, or Prague for reasons of personal safety. Forced exile was not known to have
 occurred in 1995.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution theoretically established judicial
 independence; however, the President's power to select and dismiss judges subordi-
 nates the judiciary to the Presidency. The court system has not been reformed since
 Soviet days. It consists of a Supreme Court, 6 provincial courts (including 1 for the
 city of Ashgabat only), and at the lowest level, 61 district and city courts. A Su-
 preme Economic Court hears cases involving disputes between state economic con-
 cerns and ministries. There are also military courts, which handle crimes involving
 military discipline, criminal cases concerning military personnel, and crimes by ci-
 vilians against military personnel.
 The President appoints all judges for a term of 5 years without legislative review,
 except for the Chairman (Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court, and he has the sole
 authority to remove them from the bench before the completion of their terms.
 The law provides for the rights of due process for defendants, including a public
 trial, the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right
 to call witnesses to testify on behalf of the accused. In practice, these rights are
 often denied by authorities. The accused has the right to select counsel, but there
 are no independent lawyers, with the exception of a few retired legal officials. When
 a person cannot afford the services of a lawyer, the court appoints one. A person
 may represent himself in court.
 Decisions of the lower courts may be appealed to higher courts, and in the case
 of the death penalty the defendant may petition the President for clemency. In prac-
 tice, adherence to due process rights is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts
 in rural areas. Even when due process rights are observed the authority of the pros-
 ecutor vis-a-vis the defense attorney is so great that it is very difficult for the de-
 fendant to receive a fair trial.
 In June opposition members Mukhammet Aimuradov and Khoshali Garaev were
 tried in a closed session of the Supreme Court for conspiracy to assassinate the
 President. Both were arrested in Uzbekistan in October 1994 and subsequently ex-
 
 
 1081
 tradited to Ashgabat under a treaty that the Government of Turkmenistan had yet
 to sign. Neither the public nor international observers were allowed to observe the
 trial. Both defendants were found guilty and were sentenced to 15 and 12 years re-
 spectively in a maximum security prison. The Government has yet to make public
 any credible evidence of the guilt of either Aimuradov or Garaev. The charges
 against the pair are widely believed to be fabricated.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right of protection from arbitrary interference by the
 State in a citizen's personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate the
 conduct of surveillance by the state security apparatus, which regularly monitors
 the activities of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use phys-
 ical surveillance, telephone tapping, electronic eavesdropping, and the recruitment
 of informers. Critics of the Goverment, and many other people as well, report
 credibly that their mail is intercepted before delivery.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however, freedom of
 speech is severely restricted, and there is no freedom of the press. The Government
 completely controls radio and television. Its budget funds all print media. The Gov-
 ernment censors all newspapers; the Committee for the Protection of State Secrets
 must approve all prepublication galleys. Russian language newspapers from abroad
 are routinely confiscated at international airports.
 The Government prohibits the media from reporting the views of opposition politi-
 cal leaders and critics, and it rarely allows the mildest form of criticism in print.
 The government press has condemned the foreign media, including Radio Li erty,
 for broadcasting or publishing opposing views, and the Government has subjected
 those mentioned in critical foreign press items to threats and harassment.
 The Government also restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of
 government policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research
 into areas it considers politically sensitive. The government-controlled Union of
 Writers has in the past expelled members who have criticized government policy;
 libraries have removed their works. Intellectuals have reported that the security or-
 gans have instructed them to praise the President in their art and have warned
 them not to participate in receptions hosted by foreign diplomatic missions.
 Critics of the Government in all fields were frequently reminded that continued
 criticism could lead to many repercussions including the loss of employment and op-
 portunities for advancement. In the past, children have been dismssed from school
 and adults have been removed from their jobs because of the political activities of
 relatives.
 On occasion, the authorities resorted to stronger methods to silence their critics.
 On August 10, dissident Khudaiberdy Khalliev was abducted by assailants believed
 linked to the security organs. After being driven to the desert,  alliev was severely
 beaten and abandoned. In July two journalists were arrested, reportedly on sus-
 picion of organizing protest demonstrations (see Section 1.d.).
 Almost all prominent political opponents of the present Government have chosen
 to leave the country for reasons of personal safety (see Section 1.d.).
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts
 these rights. Unregistered organizations, including those with a political agenda, are
 not allowed to hold demonstrations or meetings. No political groups critical of gov-
 ernment policy have been able to meet the requirements for registration (see Section
 3). Social and cultural organizations without political aims may normally register
 and hold meetings without difficulty. Those with an ethnic or religious orientation
 may, however, be refused registration under constitutional provisions that prohibit
 political parties based on nationality or religion.
 Theoretically, citizens have the freedom to associate with whomever they please.
 However, supporters of opposition movements have been fired from their jobs for po-
 litical activities, remove d from profssional societies or threatened with dismissal,
 or with the loss of their homes or work space.
 On July 12, the authorities dispersed a peaceful demonstration arresting over 80
 participants. Over 20 people were tried in secret on December 27 (see Section 1.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religon.-Citizens of Turkmenistan are overwhelmingly Muslim,
 but Islam does not play a dominant role in society, in part due to the 70 years of
 repression under Soviet rule. The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and
 does not establish a state religion. Official harassment of religious groups has
 ended, and the State generally respects religious freedom.
 A modest revival of Islam has occurred since independence. The Government has
 incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition into its efforts to define a Turkmen
 
 
 1082
 identity, and it gives some financial and other support to its Council on Religious
 Affairs, which plays an intermediary role between the government bureaucracy and
 religious organizations.
 Religious congregations are technically required to register with the Government
 but there were no reports that the Government enforced this requirement or denied
 registration to any religious groups.
 There is no law specifically addressing religious proselytizing. The Government,
 however, would have to grant permission for any mass meetings or demonstrations
 for this purpose. The Government does not restrict the travel of clergy or members
 of religious groups to Turkmenistan. Islamic religious literature is distributed
 through the mosques. Orthodox churches offer a variety of Christian religious lit-
 erature.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not generally restrict movement within the coun-
 try, although travel to the border zones is tihtly controlled. Citizens still carry in-
 ternal passports which are used more as a form of identification than a means of
 controlling movement. Residence permits are not required, although place of resi-
 dence is registered and noted in passports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports as a means of restricting inter-
 national travel for its critics. Exit visas are required for international travel and
 most ordinary travelers find the process of obtaining passports and exit visas to be
 difficult. Many allege that officials solicit bribes in exchange for permission to travel
 abroad.
 While most citizens are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction, some
 government opponents have often been denied the opportunity to emigrate. For ex-
 ample, although journalist Mamedniyaz Sakhatov anud five members of his family
 were granted refugee status by the United States, the Government refused to issue
 the documents the family needed to emigrate. Some ethnic Russians and other non-
 Turkmen residents, including some Jews, left for other former Soviet Republics,
 Germany, and Israel during 1995.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to Turkmenistan and apply for citizenship. The
 Government, however, has not permitted many ethnic Turkmen from Iran, Afghani-
 stan, and other countries to resettle in Turkmenistan. Authorities also tend to dis-
 courage the influx of non-Turkmen workers from other areas of the former Soviet
 Union.
 Turkmenistan is not a signatory to the 1951 U.N. Convention and its 1967 Proto-
 col relating to the Status of Refugees and has yet to develop a written policy on peo-
 ple seeking refugee status. In July however, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees (UNHCR) established an office in Turkmenistan and the Government has co-
 operated with it and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There
 were no reports of forced expulsion of thoselhaving a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The 1992 Constitution declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracy in the
 form of a presidential republic. In practice, however, it remains a one-party state
 dominated by the President and his closest advisers within the Cabinet of Ministers.
 Citizens have no real ability peacefully to change the Government and have little
 influence on government policy or decisionmaking. In the 1992 presidential election,
 the sole candidate was Saparmurad Niyazov, the incumbent and nominee of the
 Democratic Party of Turkmenistan (successor to the Communist Party). The Gov-
 ernment announced the election barely a month before voting day, giving opposition
 groups insufficient time to organize and qualify to submit a candidate.
 A 1994 national referendum extended the President's term to 2002, obviating the
 need for the scheduled presidential election in 1997. According to the official results,
 99.9 percent of those voting cast their ballots to extend his term. In the 1994 elec-
 tions for a reconstituted Mejlis (Parliament) no opposition participation was per-
 mitted. The Government claimed that 99.8 percent of all eligible voters participated.
 The Constitution calls for the separation of powers between the various branches,
 with concomitant checks and balances. However, it vests a disproportionate share
 of power in the Presidency, particularly at the expense of the judiciary. In practice,
 President Niyazov's power is absolute. Despite appearance of consensus, all deci-
 sions are made at the President's level. The Mejlis routinely supports presidential
 decrees and has no genuinely independent authority, although it as taken several
 measures to become a more professional body.
 In addition to its near total control over the flow of information, the Government
 also uses laws on the registration of political parties to prevent the emergence of
 
 
 1083
 would-be opposition groups. At present the only registered party is the Democratic
 Party of Turkmnienistan. The policyof the Democratic Party, according to its leader-
 ship, is to implement the policy of the President.
 Women are underrepresented in the upper levels of government. Women currently
 serve as the Deputy Chairman of the Parliament and as the Permanent Representa-
 tive to the United Nations. There are no women, however, in the positions of great-
 est authority such as the Cabinet of Ministers or provincial governors.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups, and government restrictions
 on freedom of s ech, ress, and association would preclude any effort to investigate
 and criticize publicly txe Government's human rights policies. Several independent
 journalists report on these issues in the Russian press in Russia and have contact
 with internatonal human rights organizations. On numerous occasions in the past
 the Government has warned its critics against speaking with visiting journalists or
 other foreigners wishing to discuss human rights issues.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Article 17 of the Constitution provides for equal rights and freedoms for all, inde-
 pendent of one's nationality, origin, language, and religion. Article 18 specifies equal
 rights before the law for both men and women. There is no legal basis for discrimi-
 nation against women or religious or ethnic minorities. Cultural traditions and the
 Governments's policy of promoting Turkmen nationalism, however, limit the em-
 plo yent and educational opportunities of women and nonethnic Turkmen.
 Women.-Domestic violence against women appears to be common, but, no statis-
 tics are available.
 Despite constitutional provisions, women are underrepresented in the upper levels
 of state economic enterprises and are concentrated in health care, education, and
 service industries. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous and envi-
 ronmentally unsafe jobs. Under the law, women are protected from discrimination
 in inheritance and marriage rights. In traditional Turkmen society, however, the
 woman's primary role is as homemaker and mother, and family pressures often
 limit opportunities for women to enter outside careers and advance their education.
 Religious authorities, when proffering advice to practicing Muslims on matters con-
 cerning inheritance and property rights, often favor men over women.
 There are no women's goups in Turkmenistan. The Women's Council of
 Turkmenistan, a carryover from the Soviet system, was disbanded following the
 election of the new Parliament in December 1994. The professional businesswomen's
 organization now is no longer active. The Government has no program specifically
 aimed at rectifying the disadvantaged position of women in Turkmen society, as it
 does not believe that women suffer discrimination.
 Children.-Turkmenistan's social umbrella covers the welfare needs of children.
 The Government has not, however, taken effective steps to address the environ-
 mental and health problems that have resulted in a high rate of infant and mater-
 nal mortality. During the annual cotton harv.st, children as young as 10 are some-
 times taken from schools to work in the cotton fields. Other than this, there is no
 pattern of societal abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-Government subsidies and pensions are provided for
 those with disabilities, and those capable of working are generally provided with
 jobs under still-valid preindependence policies which virtually guarantee employ-
 ment to all. According to existing legislation, facilities for the access of the disabled
 must be included in new construction projects. Compliance is not complete, however,
 and most older buildings are not so equipped.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minoritie,.-The Constitution provides for equal rights
 and freedoms for all citizens. Turkmen comprise 72 percent of the population of
 about 4 million, Russians 9.5 percent, and Uzbeks 9 percent. There are smaller
 numbers of Kazaks, Armenians, Azerbaijanis, and many other ethnic groups. Since
 independence, Turkmenistan has been spared the ethnic turmoil that afflicted many
 other parts of the former Soviet Union.
 As part of its nation-building efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen the oflicial language, and it is a mandatory subject in school, al-
 though not necessarily the language of instruction.
 The Constitution also provides for the right of speakers of other languages to use
 them. Russi.n remains in cormmon usage in government and commerce. The Gov-
 ernment insists that discrimination agmnst Russian speakers will not be tolerated.
 
 
 1084
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups, not solely ethnic Russians.
 Non-Turkmen fear that the designation of Turkmen as the official language will put
 their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They complain tat
 some avenues for promotion and job advancement are no longer open to them. Only
 a handful of non-Turkmen occupy high-echelon jobs in the ministries, and govern-
 ment employees from minority ethnic groups are sometimes assigned lesser posi-
 tions than their experience and qualifications would warrant.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system rf
 government-associated trade unions. The Federation of Trade Unions claims a mem-
 bership of some 1.6 million and is divided along both sectoral and regional lines.
 Turkmenistan joined the International Labor Organization in late 1993.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union in 1995. The state-sponsored unions control key social benefits such as sick
 leave, health care, maternal, and childcare benefits, and funeral expenses. Deduc-
 tions from payrolls to cover these benefits are transferred directly to the Federation.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, but strikes are extremely uncommon. In July
 workers at a state carpet factory went on strike to protest the fact that they had
 not been paid for several months. The strike ended the same day after the authori-
 ties threatened the strikers with dismissal. No other strikes are known to have oc-
 curred.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not protect the
 right to celective bargaining. The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares gen-
 eral guidelines for wages and sets wages in health care, culture, and some other
 areas. In other sectors, it allows for some leeway at the enterprise level, taking into
 account local factors. Annual negotiations involving the trade union and manage-
 ment determine specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enterprise.
 In practice, in the predominantly state-controlled economy, the close association of
 both the trade union and the enterprise with the Government seriously limits the
 workers' ability to bargain, and workers often go months without receiving their sal-
 aries.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. Although the Government apparently had abandoned its policy of requiring
 students to pick cotton at minimal rates of pay during the annual harvest, schools
 ordered hundreds of students to work in the cotton fields. In certain areas those
 who refused to work were not allowed to graduate or in some instances were held
 back. No other incidents of compulsory labor were reported.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 16 years; in a few heavy industries it is 18 years. The law prohibits
 children age 16 through 18 years from working more than 6 hours per day (the nor-
 mal workday is 8 hours).
 Fifteen-year-old children may work 4 to 6 hours per day but only with the permis-
 sion of the trade union and parents. This permission rarely is granted. Violations
 of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the cotton harvesting season, when
 teenagers work in the fields and children less than 10 years of age sometimes help
 with the harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets the national minimum
 wage quarterly, based on a market basket of commodities reviewed by the Ministry
 of Economics and Finance. On January 1, the Government increased the minimum
 wage, but subsequent devaluations reduced the value of the wage to $.50 (1,000
 manats) per month. This figure falls far short of the amount required to meet the
 needs of an average family. Most households are multigenerational, with several
 members receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions. Even so, many people lack the
 resources to purchase an adequate diet, and meat is a luxury for most of them. The
 standard legal workweek is 40 hours.
 Turkmenistan inherited an economic system with substandard working conditions
 from the Soviet era, when productivity took precedence over the health and safety
 of workers. Industrial workers often labor in an unsafe environment and are not
 provided proper protective equipment. Some agricultural workers are subjected to
 environmental health hazards. The Government recognizes that these problems
 exist and has taken some steps to deal with them but has not set comprehensive
 standards for occupational health and safety.
 
 
 1085
 
