 TURIMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan, a one-party state dominated by its president and his closest advis-
 ers, made little progress in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian style of govern-
 ment to a democratic system. Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Turkmen Com-
 munist Party since 1985 (renamed the Democratic Party in 1992) and President of
 Turkmenistan since its independence in 1991, legally may remain in office until
 2002. The Democratic Party, the renamed Communist Party, retained a monopoly
 on power; the Government registered no parties during the year and continued to
 repress all opposition political activities. Emphasizing stability and gradual reform,
 official nation-building efforts focused on fostering Turkmen nationalism and the
 glorification of President Niyazov. The 50-member unicameral Parliament (Mejlis)
 
 
 1569
 
 has no genuinely independent authority, and in practice the President controls the
 judicial system.
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) has the responsibilities formerly held
 by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), namely, to ensure that the re-
 gime remains in power through tight control of society and discouragement of dis-
 sent. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal police, which work closely
 with the KNB on matters of national security. Both operate with relative impunity
 and have been responsible for abusing the rights of individuals as well as enforcing
 the Government's policy of repressing political opposition.
 Turkmenistan is largely a desert with cattle and sheep raising, intensive agri-
 culture in irrigated areas, and huge oil and gas reserves. Its economy remains de-
 pendent on central planning mechanisms and state control, although the Govern-
 ment has taken a number of small steps to make the transition to a market econ-
 omy. Agriculture, particularly cotton cultivation, accounts for nearly half of total
 employment. Gas, oil and gas derivatives, and cotton account for almost all of the
 country's export revenues. The Government is proceeding with negotiations on con-
 struction of a new gas export pipeline across the Caspian Sea, through Azerbaijan
 and Georgia to Turkey, and also is considering lines through Iran and Afghanistan.
 The Government continued to commit human rights abuses, and the authorities
 in particular severely restricted political and civil liberties. Citizens do not have the
 ability to change their government peacefully. Following a commitment by President
 Niyazov in May, dissident Gulgeldi Annaniyazov was released on January 9, 1999.
 Security forces continued to beat and otherwise mistreat suspects and prisoners,
 and prison conditions remained poor and unsafe. Arbitrary arrest, detention, unfair
 trials, and interference with citizens' privacy remained problems. The Government
 completely controls the media, censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting inde-
 pendent criticism of government policy or officials. The Government imposes restric-
 tions on some religious groups. The Government generally gave favored treatment
 to ethnic Turkmen over minorities and to men over women. Women experience soci-
 etal discrimination, and domestic violence against women is a problem.
 The law on religion, amended most recently in 1996, reaffirmed a number of im-
 portant reigious freedoms but also tightened government control of religious groups.
 The requirement that reigious organizations have at least 500 Turkmen citizens as
 members to be registered legally has prevented all but Sunni Muslims and Russian
 Orthodox Christians from legally establishing themselves.
 The Institute for Democracy and Human Rights, given a mandate to conduct re-
 search in support of the democratization of the government and society and to mon-
 itor the protection of human rights, completed its second year of operation in Octo-
 ber. In December the Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with
 the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concerning the
 opening of an OSCE office in Ashgabat in 1999.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1992 Constitution makes torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment illegal. Nevertheless, there were credible and widespread reports that security
 officials frequently beat criminal suspects and prisoners and often used force to ob-
 tain confessions. Security forces also used denial of medical treatment and food,
 verbal intimidation, and placement in unsanitary conditions to coerce confessions.
 Dissident Durdymurad Khodzha-Mukhammed (arrested by authorities in 1995)
 was released from a psychiatric hospital in Geok-Depe in April.
 Prison conditions are poor, and prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe.
 Food is poor, and infectious diseases are rampant. Facilities for prisoner rehabilita-
 tion and recreation are extremely limited. Some prisoners died due to overcrowding,
 untreated illnesses, and lack of adequate protection from the severe summer heat.
 Although in the past year diplomats have been permitted to visit selected prisons
 and detention centers, the Government does not permit unrestricted independent
 monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution states that citizens
 "have the right to freedom of belief and the free expression thereof and also to ob-
 tain information unless it is a state, official, or commercial secret." In practice those
 expressing views critical of or different from those of the Government have been ar-
 rested on false charges of committing common crimes (see Section i.e.).
 
 
 1570
 The precise number of political detainees held at year's end was unknown. Pre-
 trial detainees are held 6 to 8 months on the average. According to government
 sources, more than 8,000 persons were released from prison under presidential am-
 nesties in February and October. Foreign diplomats received reports that prison offi-
 cials requested bribes to implement releases under these amnesties.
 Forced exile was not known- to have occurred during the year. However, almost
 all prominent political opponents of the present Government have chosen to move
 to either Moscow, Stockholm, or Prague for reasons of personal safety; none re-
 turned this year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for judicial independ-
 ence. However, in practice, the judiciary is not independent; the President's power
 to select and dismiss judges subordinates the judiciary to the Presidency. The Presi-
 dent appoints all judges for a term of 5 years. The appointments are without legisla-
 tive review, except for the Chairman (Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court, and the
 President has the sole authority to remove them from the bench before the comple-
 tion of their terms.
 The court system has not been reformed since the Soviet era. It consists of a Su-
 preme Court, 6 provincial courts (including 1 for the city of Ashgabat only), and,
 at the lowest level, 61 district and city courts. A Supreme Economic Court hears
 cases involving disputes between state-owned enterprises and ministries, and, in-
 creasingly, commercial disputes. The Government abolished all military courts in
 1997. Criminal offenses committed by members of the armed forces are now tried
 in civilian courts under the authority of the Office of the Prosecutor General.
 The law provides for the rights of due process for defendants, including a public
 trial, the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right
 to call witnesses to testify on behalf of the accused. In practice these rights are often
 denied by authorities, and there are no independent lawyers, with the exception of
 a few retired legal officials, available to represent defendants. When a person cannot
 afford the services of a lawyer, the court appoints one. A person may represent him-
 self in court.
 Lower courts' decisions may be appealed, and, in the case of the death penalty,
 the defendant may petition the President for clemency. The President granted clem-
 ency to over 1,000 persons in connection with the general amnesties in February
 and October which released over 8,000 inmates from prison (see Section 1.d.). In
 practice adherence to due process is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts
 in rural areas. Even when due process rights are observed, the authority of the
 prosecutor vis-a-vis the defense attorney is so great that it is very difficult for the
 defendant to receive a fair trial.
 At year's end, the Government held at least four political prisoners. In April the
 Government released four political prisoners held in connection with a July 12, 1995
 demonstration over living conditions in which several thousand persons partici-
 pated. Two of the nine persons convicted and sentenced for their role in this peace-
 ful protest remained in prison at year's end; however, the first, Gulgeldi
 Annaniyazov, who was in grave physical condition in May, was released on January
 9, 1999, following an earlier commitment by President Niyazov for his release. The
 second remaining prisoner from the July 1995 demonstration, Gurbanmurad
 Mammetnazarov, was sentenced to an additional 1 year in May for possession of
 narcotics found in his prison cell; he was released as part of a presidential amnesty
 in January 1999: Two other persons convicted in secret before the Supreme Court
 in 1995 for antigovernment activities and planning terrorist actions against govern-
 ment officials were sentenced to additional concurrent terms of 18 years each for
 allegedly attempting to escape from the maximum security prison in Turkmenbashi.
 Dissident Ata Aymamedov, sentenced in February 1996 for "hooliganism" after he
 criticized the President in a private conversation, was released later that same year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right of protection from arbitrary interference by the
 State in a citizen's personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate the
 conduct of surveillance by the state security apparatus, which regularly monitors
 the activities of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use phys-
 ical surveillance, telephone tapping, electronic eavesdropping, and the recruitment
 of informers. Critics of the Government, and many other people, report credibly that
 their mail is intercepted before delivery.
 Unlike previous years, the Government no longer restricted citizens' ability to ob-
 tain foreign newspapers. A wide variety of Russian and western newspapers are
 available.
 In the past, the authorities have dismissed children from school and removed
 adults from their jobs because of the political activities of relatives. Since his trial,
 the Government has reportedly persecuted Ata Aymamedov's entire family in this
 
 
 1571
 way (see Section I.e.). The authorities also threaten supporters of opposition politi-
 cal movements with loss of employment and homes (see Section 2.b.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however, the Govern-
 ment severely restricts freedom of speech and does not permit freedom of the press.
 Continued criticism of the Government can lead to personal hardship, including loss
 of opportunities for advancement and employment.
 The Government completely controls radio and television; it funds almost all print
 media. The Government censors newspapers and uses Turkmen language news-
 papers to attack its critics abroad; the Committee for the Protection of State Secrets
 must approve prepublication galleys. Russian language newspapers from abroad
 now are available by subscription and some Russian and other foreign newspapers
 are also available in several Ashgabat hotels. However, the two nominally independ-
 ent newspapers established under presidential decree, Adalat (Justice) and
 Galkynysh (Revival), are no longer even nominally independent.
 In order to regulate printing and copying activities, the Government ordered in
 February that all publishing houses and printing and copying establishments obtain
 a license and register their equipment.
 The Government prohibits the media from reporting the views of opposition politi-
 cal leaders and critics, and it never allows even the" mildest form of criticism of the
 President in print. Criticism sanctioned by the President of government officials is
 commonplace. The Government has subjected those responsible for critical foreign
 press items to threats and harassment. The KNB arrested a former presidential
 spokesman one day after he criticized the Government on Radio Liberty in August.
 The former press secretary was released 10 days after the arrest after he said that
 he was coerced into making antigovernment statements by the radio service. The
 Government revoked the accreditation of the Ashgabat-based Turkmen language
 Radio Liberty correspondent in 1996 because of broadcasts by an opposition politi-
 cian in exile, but it has not prevented him from continuing to file reports.
 Following his release from a psychiatric hospital in Geok-Depe in April, dissident
 Durdymurad Khodzha-Mukhammed was warned by a member of the state's internal
 security apparatus to refrain from political activity, including meeting with foreign
 diplomats. In August after meeting with the British ambassador in Ashgabat,
 Khodzha-Mukhammed was abducted and beaten severely by unknown persons; he
 remains in very poor physical condition. Members of Khodzha-Mukhamed's family
 also reportedly have been threatened with harm if he resumes political activities.
 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty correspondent Yoshan Annakurbanov was re-
 leased in November 1997 from a KNB prison but remained under investigation for
 allegedly attempting to smuggle "military secrets" out of the country. He was forbid-
 den to leave his apartment, meet with journalists and foreign officials, or discuss
 his case. In August he left the country and now lives in the West.
 Intellectuals have reported that the security organs have instructed them to
 praise the President in their art and have warned them not to participate in recep-
 tions hosted by foreign diplomatic missions.
 The Government also restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of
 government policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research
 into areas it considers politically sensitive. The government-controlled Union of
 Writers has in the past expelled members who have criticized government policy;,
 libraries have removed their works.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution allows for
 peaceful assembly, but the Government restricts this right in practice. It does not
 permit peaceful demonstrations organized by alleged critics and in 1995 dispersed
 the first peaceful protest rally in years (see Section i.e.), convicting a number of per-
 sons for their participation. Permits are required for public meetings and dem-
 onstrations. There were reports of spontaneous demonstrations over bread prices in
 1996, but none in 1998.
 The Constitution allows for freedom of association, but the Government restricts
 this right in practice. A few unregistered organizations without political agendas are
 permitted to function publicly. Unregistered organizations with political agendas are
 not allowed to hold demonstrations or meetings outside but can hold small private
 meetings. No political groups critical of government policy have been able to meet
 the requirements for registration. The Government uses laws on the registration of
 political parties to prevent the emergence of potential opposition groups. At present
 the only registered political party is the Democratic Party, the former Turkmen
 Communist Party.
 
 
 1572
 
 Social and cultural organizations without political aims are allowed to function,
 but often have difficulty registering. Theoretically, citizens have the freedom to asso-
 ciate with whomever they please. However, the authorities have fired or threatened
 to fire supporters of opposition movements from their jobs, removed them from pro-
 fessional societies, and even threatened them with the loss of their homes. In addi-
 tion some citizens with links to foreigners are subject to official intimidation.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and
 does not establish a State religion; however, the Government imposes restrictions
 on some religious groups. Citizens are overwhelmingly Muslim, but Islam does not
 play a dominant role in society, in part due to the 70 years of Soviet rule.
 A modest revival of Islam has occurred since independence. The Government has
 incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition into its efforts to define a Turkmen
 identity, and it gives some financial, and other support to the Council on Religious
 Affairs, which plays an intermediary role between the government bureaucracy and
 religious organizations.
 Religious congregations are required to register with the Government. While re-
 affirming a number of important religious freedoms, the Law on Freedom of Con-
 science and Religious Organizations, amended in 1995 and again in 1996, also pro-
 vides for significant government control of religion. For example, the requirement
 that religious organizations have at least 500 Turkmen citizens over the age of 18
 as adherents to be registered legally-has prevented all but Sunni Muslims and Rus-
 sian Orthodox Christians from setting up legal religious organizations. Moreover,
 the Government applies the 500-member standard on a local/regional basis. For ex-
 ample, one representative of a major Christian religious group was told that the
 group would have to have 500 adherents in Ashgabat to be registered there, and
 another 500 in the city of Turkmenbashi to be registered there. This restriction also
 has caused problems for a number of minority religions, especially the Baha'i, who
 have been prevented from conducting services since 1997.
 Diplomats received reports of raids and seizures of religious materials at Protes-
 tant churches in other areas of the country.
 While protected by law, proselytizing by "foreign" (that is, non-Sunni Muslim) reli-
 gious groups can incur official displeasure. Government permission is required for
 any mass meetings or demonstrations for religious purposes, although small prayer
 groups meet in -informal settings. The Government also restricts the travel of clergy
 or members of religious groups to the country. Islamic religious literature is distrib-
 uted through the mosques. Orthodox churches offer Christian religious literature.
 d, Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not generally restrict movement within the coun-
 try, although travel to -southern border zones -is tightly controlled. Citizens still
 carry internal passports. These documents are used primarily as a form of identi-
 fication, rather than as a means of controlling movement. Residence permits are not
 required, although place of residence is registered and noted in passports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports and exit visas as a general
 means of restricting international travel. Most nonofficial travelers find the process
 of obtaining passports and exit visas to be difficult. Many allege that officials solicit
 bribes in exchange for permission to travel abroad. In 1997 the Government intro-
 duced new passports which eventually are to serve as combined foreign and internal
 travel documents,
 Most citizens are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction. In 1996 some
 government opponents were denied the opportunity to emigrate; however, there
 were no reports of similar government action this year. Ethnic Russians and other
 non-Turkmen residents, including Jewish residents, have been permitted to emi-
 grate during the year.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to the country and apply for citizenship. The
 Government, however, discourages immigration by ethnic Turkmen living in Iran,
 Iraq, Turkey, and other countries. Immigration of non-Turkmen from other areas of
 the former Soviet Union is discouraged by the unofficial policy of favoring employ-
 ment of ethnic Turkmen.
 In 1997, the Government adopted the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating
 to the Status of Refugee and Its 1967 Protocol, and its accession to the Convention
 was approved by the United Nations on March 3. The law on refugees also was
 adoptedin 1997. It establishes the procedure and conditions for recognizing refugee
 status and sets the legal, economic, and social rights of refugees. The country cur-
 rently provides first asylum if the person is recognized under the mandate of the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The Government has
 granted refugee or asylee status to some ethnic Turkmen from Afghanistan and has
 allowed some Tajik refugees and migrants to reside in the country. The Government
 
 
 1573
 cooperates with the UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations that assist refu-
 gees. There were no confirmed reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid
 aim to refugee status. There have been unconfirmed reports of small numbers of
 refugees being forcibly returned by individual border guards. However, according to
 the UNHCR, there is no clear pattern of abuse of forced expulsion of refugees, with
 the exception of such low-level harassment.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no real ability to effect peaceful change in the Government and
 have little influence on government policy or decisionmaking. The 1992 Constitution
 declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracy in the form of a presidential re-
 public. It calls for the separation of powers between the various branches of govern-
 ment, but vests a disproportionate share of power in the Presidency. In practice
 President Niyazov's power is absolute, and the country remains a one-party state.
 Despite the appearance of decisionmaking by consensus, most decisions are made
 at the presidential level. In his address to the Halk Maslahaty (People's Council)
 in July, President Niyazov called for local councils and village leaders to have great-
 er power and authority to deal with local issues. However, in reality, local leaders
 are selected and dismissed by the President.
 In the 1992 presidential election, the sole candidate was Saparmurad Niyazov, the
 incumbent and nominee of the Democratic Party. The Government announced the
 election barely a month before voting day, giving opposition groups insufficient time
 to organize and qualify to submit a candidate. A 1994 national referendum extended
 the President's term to 2002, obviating the need for the scheduled presidential elec-
 tion in 1997. According to the official results, 99.9 percent of those voting cast their
 ballots to extend his term. The policy of the Democratic Party, according to its lead-
 ership, is to implement the policy of the President.
 In the 1994 elections for a reconstituted Mejlis (Parliament), no opposition partici-
 pation was permitted. The Government claimed that 99.8 percent of all eligible vot-
 ers participated. The Mejlis routinely supports presidential decrees, and, as yet, has
 no genuine independence, although it has taken several measures to become a more
 professional body and does debate and amend draft legislation, including key bills
 SUCh as civil and criminal codes. President Niyazov has promised that the par-
 liamentary elections scheduled for December 1999 would be conducted on a "wide
 democratic basis."
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in the
 political process. Nine members of the Mejlis are women, although they constitute
 over 50 percent of the population. Women hold the positions of Minister of Textile
 Industry, Prosecutor General, Deputy Chairperson of Parliament, and the Ambas-
 sador to the United Nations. No women serve as provincial governors. Minorities
 are epresented in the Government although preference is given to ethnic Turkmen.
 There reportedly are only two nonethnic Turkmen in the Mejls.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups, and government restrictions
 on freedom of speech, press, and association would preclude any effort to investigate
 and criticize publicly the Government's human rights policies. Several independent
 journalists based in Russia report on these issues in the Russian press and have
 contact with international human rights organizations. On numerous occasions in
 the past, the Government has warned its critics against speaking with visiting jour-
 nalists or other foreigners wishing to discuss human rights issues.
 The National Institute for Democracy and Human Rights under the President
 completed its second year of operation in October. Its mandate is to support the de-
 mocratization of the government and society and to monitor the protection of human
 rights. The institute maintains five full-time staff members to receive and resolve
 citizen complaints of arbitrary government action. One-third of the a pproximately
 1,300 complaints received by the institute during the year concernedthe judicial
 process and judges, but there are no specific statistics on the number of complaints
 against law enforcement and security organizations. In general the Institute con-
 ducts a study of the complaint and returns its findings to the individual and the
 organizations involved. However, the institute is not an independent body, and the
 full extent of its ability to obtain redress remains unclear.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights and freedoms for all, independent of
 one's nationality, origin, language, and religion. It further specifies equal rights be-
 
 
 1574
 fore the law for both men and women. There is no legal basis for discrimination
 against women or religious or ethnic minorities. Cultural traditions and the Govern-
 ment's policy of promoting Turkmen nationalism, however, limit the employment
 and educational opportunities of women and nonethnic Turkmen.
 Women.-Anecdotal reports indicate that domestic violence against women is com-
 mon, but no statistics are available. The subject is not discussed in society. There
 are no court cases available and no references to domestic violence in the media.
 One unofficial group to support battered women operates in Ashgabat.
 Women are underrepresented in the upper levels of state-owned economic enter-
 prises and are concentrated in the health care and education professions and in
 service industries. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous and envi-
 ronmentally unsafe jobs. Under the law, women enjoy the same inheritance and
 marriage rights as men. In traditional Turkmen society, however, the woman's pri-
 mary role is as homemaker and mother, and family pressures often limit opportuni-
 ties for women to enter careers outside the home and advance their education. Reli-
 gious authorities, when proffering advice to practicing Muslims on matters concern-
 ing inheritance and property rights, often favor men over women.
 There is only one officially registered women's group, which is headed by the Dep-
 uty Chairperson of the Mejlis and dedicated in honor of the President's mother. The
 Government has no program specifically aimed at rectifying the disadvantaged posi-
 tion of women in society, as it does not acknowledge that women suffer discrimina-
 tion.
 Children.-The Government's social umbrella covers the welfare needs of children.
 The Government provides 9 to 10 years of education for children. Generally, there
 is little difference in the education provided to girls and boys. The Government has
 not taken effective steps to address the environmental and health problems that
 have resulted in a high rate of infant and maternal mortality.
 During the annual cotton harvest, some schools in agricultural areas are closed
 and children as young as 10 years of age work in the cotton fields (see Section 6.d.).
 Other than this activity, there is no societal pattern of abuse against children.
 People With Disabilities.-Government subsidies and pensions are provided for
 those with disabilities, although the pensions are inadequate to maintain a decent
 standard of living. Those capable of working are generally provided with jobs under
 still-valid preindependence policies that virtually guarantee employment to all. Ac-
 cording to existing legislation, facilities for the access of the disabled must be in-
 cluded in new construction projects. However, compliance is inconsistent and most
 older buildings are not so equipped. Care for the mentally retarded and mentally
 ill is provided on the local level. Mentally retarded and mentally ill children are
 placed in boarding schools, with educational and future employment opportunities
 if their condition is mild. Adults with disabilities requiring institutionalization are
 kept primarily in "psycho-narcological" hospitals in Geok-Depe, Bekrova, and Kakha
 and in theory provided with food, clothing, and medical care.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides for equal rights
 and freedoms for all citizens. Turkmen comprise approximately 77 percent of the
 population of about 4.7 million; Uzbeks, 9 percent; and Russians, 7 percent. There
 are smaller numbers of Kazakhs, Armenians, Azeris, and many other ethnic groups.
 Since independence, the country has not experienced ethnic turmoil.
 As part of its nation-building efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen as the official language, and it is a mandatory subject in school,
 although it is not necessarily the language of instruction.
 The Constitution also provides for the rights of speakers of other languages to use
 them. Russian remains in common usage in government and commerce. The Gov-
 ernment insists that discrimination against Russian speakers will not be tolerated.
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups, not solely ethnic Russians.
 Non-Turkmen fear that the designation of Turkmen as the official language will put
 their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They complain that
 some avenues for promotion and job advancement are no longer open to them. Only
 a handful of non-Turkmen occupy high-echelon jobs in the ministries, and govern-
 ment employees from minority ethnic groups are sometimes assigned lesser posi-
 tions than their experience and qualifications would merit.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government-controlled trade unions. There are no legal guarantees entitling workers
 to form or join unions. The Colleagues Union is the only legal central trade union
 federation permitted, and it claims a membership of 1.6 million; its member unions
 
 
 1575
 
 are divided along both sectoral and regional lines. Unions may not form or join
 other federations.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union during the year.
 The law neither prohibits nor permits strikes and does not address the issue of
 retaliation against strikers. Strikes are extremely rare and no strikes were known
 to have occurred during the year.
 There is no information available on union affiliation with international unions.
 Turkmenistan joined the International Labor Organization in 1993.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law does not protect the
 right to collective bargaining. In practice in the state-dominated economy, the close
 association of both the trade union and the state-owned enterprise with the Govern-
 ment seriously limits workers' ability to bargain, and workers often go months with-
 out pay or receive their paychecks late.
 The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares general guidelines for wages and
 sets wages in health care, culture, and some other areas. In other sectors, it allows
 for some leeway at the enterprise level, taking into account local factors. The Gov-
 ernment determines specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enter-
 prise.
 The law does not prohibit antiunion discrimination by employers against union
 members and organizers, and there are no mechanisms for resolving such com-
 plaints.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Comulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. No incidents of compulsory labor were reported.
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and generally en-
 forces this prohibition effectively, with the exception of cotton harvesting in rural
 areas (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment of children is 16 years; in a few heavy industries, it is
 18 years. The law prohibits children between the ages of 16 and 18 years from work-
 ing more than 6 hours per day (the normal workday is 8 hours).
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and generally en-
 forces this prohibition effectively, with the exception of cotton harvesting in rural
 areas (see Section 6.c.). A 15-year-old child may work 4 to 6 hours per day but only
 with the permission of the trade union and parents. This permission rarely is grant-
 ed. Violations of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the cotton harvesting
 season, when teenagers work in the fields and children as young as 10 years of age
 sometimes help with the harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage. As of August 1,
 the average wage in the state sector was approximately $40 (200,000 manats) per
 month. While the Government subsidizes the prices of many necessities and pro-
 vides others free of charge, this wage falls short of the amount required to meet the
 needs of an average family. Most households are multigenerational, with several
 members receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions. Even so, many people lack the
 resources to maintain an adequate diet, and meat is a luxury for most citizens.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours with 2 days off. Individuals who work
 fewer hours during the week or are in certain high-level positions may also work
 on Saturdays.
 The country inherited from the Soviet era an economic system with substandard
 working conditions-one in which production took precedence over the health and
 safety of workers. Industrial workers often labor in unsafe environments and are
 not provided proper protective equipment. Some agricultural workers are subjected
 to environmental health hazards. The Government recognizes that these problems
 exist and has taken some stps to address them, but it has not set comprehensive
 standards for occupational health and safety. Workers do not always have the right
 to remove themselves from work situations that endanger their health or safety
 without jeopardy to their continued employment.
