Turkmenistan
In the two years since the death of Turkmenistan’s president-for-life Saparmurad
Niazov, the government under President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has abolished
aspects of his cult of personality, adopted a new constitution, and has
begun to reverse some of Niazov’s most ruinous social policies. The government
ended the country’s self-imposed isolation and has attracted unprecedented
international interest in the country’s hydrocarbon wealth.
But Turkmenistan remains one of the most repressive and authoritarian countries
in the world because the government has not altered the institutions of repression
that characterized Niazov’s rule. Hundreds of people, perhaps more, languish
in Turkmen prisons following unfair trials on what would appear to be politically
motivated charges. Draconian restrictions on freedom of expression, association,
movement, and religion remain in place. Teaching of the Ruhnama,
Niazov’s “book of the soul,” has been cut back, but is still part of the state education
curriculum.
There is no possibility to establish and operate an independent NGO or media
outlet, and independent activists and journalists face government threats and
harassment. The severity of those restrictions, in particular, make it impossible to
assess a series of violent clashes in September 2008 that brought special forces
and armored vehicles to the streets of a neighborhood in Ashgabat, the capital.
The government stated that the clashes arose when law enforcement bodies
sought to disarm drug dealers. Independent sources blame law enforcement for
mishandling the situation, and put casualties at around a dozen dead and a similar
number wounded. Little is known about the clashes’ aftermath.
Constitutional Reform
The new constitution, adopted on September 26, 2008, dissolved the 2,507-
member People’s Council (Halk Maslakhaty), the supreme government body that
had mixed legislative and executive powers and had been used by Niazov to rubberstamp
his decisions. But the constitutional reform otherwise strengthened the
already dominant institution of the presidency. The president appoints and dismisses
judges without parliamentary review, forms the central election commission, and has the right to issue edicts that are mandatory. There are no presidential
term limits. Political parties can be created, but a residency requirement
would automatically prevent all members of Turkmen opposition movements who
have been driven into exile from running for office. The constitution does not provide
for a constitutional court or ombudsman.
Civil Society and Media Freedom
Independent activists and journalists in Turkmenistan and in exile are under constant
threat of government reprisal for their work. Security services warned
activists in Turkmenistan not to meet with European Union and other officials who
visited the country, including the United Nations special rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief. Government proxies tried to pressure at least two exiled human
rights activists to stop their work, and one exiled political activist, Annadyurdy
Khajiev, received death threats by phone in August 2008.
Sazak Durdymuradov, an unpaid contributor to Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty,
was seized in his home in June 2008, detained, and transferred to a psychiatric
clinic, where he was held for two weeks and beaten.
No independent organization has been permitted to carry out research on human
rights abuses inside the country, and no international agency—governmental or
nongovernmental—has had access to detention facilities. The utter vacuum of
human rights monitoring in Turkmenistan was highlighted by a June 2008
European Court of Human Rights decision (Ryabikin v. Russia), which held that a
Turkmen businessman living in Russia could not be extradited to Turkmenistan, in
part because the authorities systematically refused international observers
access to the country.
Political Prisoners, Government Purges, and
Enforced Disappearances
The harsh repression that prevents civic activism impedes determining the number
of political prisoners. Only one individual believed to be imprisoned for political
reasons was released in 2008, having served his full prison term. None benefited
from any of the three presidential pardons granting release to about 3,700 inmates. Well-known Niazov-era political prisoners, including Mukhmetkuli
Aimuradov, Annakurban Amanklychev, and Sapardurdy Khajiev remain behind
bars, the latter two in incommunicado detention.
Moreover, at least two persons were arrested in 2008 on politically motivated
grounds. Civil activist Valery Pal was arrested in February and sentenced in May to
12 years’ imprisonment on bogus embezzlement charges. In September Pal suffered
a stroke in prison. Gulgeldy Annaniazov, a former dissident who had
refugee status in Norway, returned to Ashgabat in June and was promptly arrested
and charged with illegal border crossing. On October 7, he was sentenced to 11
years’ imprisonment, the exact charges are unknown.
Still imprisoned are Ovezgeldy Ataev, the constitutionally designated successor to
Niazov, and his wife. The fate of about 50 prisoners implicated in the alleged
November 2002 attack on Niazov’s life remains unknown, as do the whereabouts
of imprisoned former foreign minister Boris Shikhmuradov, his brother Konstantin
Shikhmuradov, and the former ambassador to the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), Batyr Berdiev.
In a July 2008 decision (Komarovski v. Turkmenistan), the UN Human Rights
Committee found that in the aftermath of the alleged November 2002 attack the
authorities flagrantly abused the justice process and failed to investigate and
prosecute torture and arbitrary detention of suspects. The government so far has
taken no action to implement the decision. The utter lack of a system to prevent
torture and ill-treatment in Turkmenistan prompted the European Court of Human
Rights to issue a ruling in October 2008 (Soldatenko v. Ukraine) amounting to a
de facto ban on extraditions to the country.
Freedom of Movement
While some individuals have been permitted to travel abroad, the system of arbitrary
restrictions on foreign travel remains in place. For example, after spending
several months trying to clarify his status, Andrei Zatoka, an environmental
activist, in July 2008 received a letter from the Prosecutor General’s Office stating
that he is still prohibited from travelling abroad. No explanation was provided.
Rashid Ruzimatov and Irina Kakabaeva, relatives of an exiled former government
official, have been banned from travel abroad since 2003. Svetlana Orazova, sister
of opposition leader Khudaiberdy Orazov, and her husband Ovez Annaev cannot
travel abroad despite numerous attempts to challenge their travel ban in
court, most recently in April 2008. In October the daughter of Gulgeldy
Annaniazov and her family were not allowed to leave Turkmenistan.
Freedom of Religion
Following her September 2008 trip to Turkmenistan, the UN special rapporteur on
freedom of religion or belief noted that religious freedom has improved since
2007. But she raised concerns about vague or excessive legislation regulating religion
and its arbitrary implementation, prohibition of the activities of unregistered
religious communities, and continued restrictions on places of worship and on
importing religious material.
Key International Actors
Turkmenistan has hosted an unprecedented number of international delegations
and conferences, some of which have included policy discussions with the government
on human rights and the rule of law. The Turkmen government has misrepresented
these occasions as unequivocal support for government policies.
In February 2008 the European Parliament upheld the human rights benchmarks
previously adopted by its international trade committee. The Turkmen government
must fulfill the benchmarks before the European Union can proceed with an
Interim Trade Agreement with the country. These benchmarks include the release
of political prisoners, abolishing the impediments to travel abroad, realigning the
educational system with international standards, allowing free access for NGOs,
and permitting UN bodies to operate freely. Under the EU’s Central Asia Strategy
the EU will guarantee loans by the European Investment Bank for projects in the
region. A European Parliament resolution adopted in September would impose
human rights conditionality on the lending, although at this writing the conditionality
mechanism has not been elaborated.
In June the EU held a structured human rights dialogue with Turkmenistan, as
part of its Central Asia strategy. But it failed publicly to comment on the numerous
serious problems marring the Turkmen government’s human rights record,
including the arrests of Durdymuradov and Annaniazov, which coincided with the
talks.
The United States’ interest in Turkmenistan’s energy wealth prompted active
engagement with the Turkmen government and a reluctance to prioritize human
rights. President Bush met President Berdymukhamedov on the sidelines of the
April 2008 NATO summit.
The UN special rapporteur on religious freedom became the first UN special mandate
holder to gain access to the country. Nine other UN special procedures
remain barred from Turkmenistan as a result of the government’s failure to extend
these monitors the required invitations for country visits. Turkmenistan appears
to treat its reporting obligation to various UN human rights bodies as a mere formality.
In its report for the UN Human Right’s Council’s Universal Periodic Review
due in December 2008, the Turkmen government did not recognize any serious
problems in meeting its human rights obligations. In September Turkmenistan
was also reviewed by the Human Rights Council’s confidential complaint procedure,
a body which considers “consistent patterns of gross and reliably attested
violations of all human rights.” While the council did not appoint a special rapporteur
on Turkmenistan, it requested that the government respond to the numerous
individual complaints received and agreed to reexamine the situation during
its March 2009 session.