 TURKMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan a one-party state dominated by the President and his closest ad-
 visers, made little progress in 1994 in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian style
 
 
 1011
 of government to a democratic system. A national referendum held on January 15
 extended until 2002 the term of office of Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Com-
 munist Party from 1985 to its dissolution and President since October 1990 when
 the post was created. The Democratic Party of Turkmenistan, the old Communist
 Party under a new name, retained its monopoly on power, the Government reg-
 istered no opposition parties in 1994 and by its actions continued to inhibit opposi-
 tion political aciities. Only government-approved candidates were permitted to
 contest the December 11 parliamentary elections, in which all 50 candidates ran un-
 opposed. Emphasizing stability over reform, the President's nationbuilding efforts
 continued to focus on renewing Turkmen nationalism, a feature of which has been
 a personality cult around the President.
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) has the responsibilities formerly held
 by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB) with membership and oprations
 essentially unchanged. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal police,
 which works closely with the KNw on matters of national security. These agencies
 have been resPonsible for human rights abuses in enforcing the Government's policy
 of repressing poitical Opposition.
 Turkmenistan remained a centrally planned economy, although the Government
 continued to take small steps to reduce state intervention, e.g., yphasing out the
 state order system. Turkmenistan is the world's fourth largest producer of natural
 gas and is heavily dependent on revenue from natural gas exports. Payment prob-
 lemns by its major customers in the former Soviet Unon have led it to consider con-
 struction of new gas pipelines to or through neighboring Iran. Agriculture, particu-
 larly cotton cultivation, accounts for nearly half of total employment.
 Turkmen authorities continued severely to restrict olitical and civil liberties and
 maintain tight controls over opposition political organizations. They completely cn-
 trolled the media, censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting criticism of gov-
 ernment policy or officials. All trade unions are government controlled. The Govern-
 ment generally gave favored treatment to ethnic Turkmen over minorities and to
 men over women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Rilling.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killings.
 b. Diaappearane.--Political activist and underground journalist Durdymn urad
 Khojamukhamed disappeared in mid-July. On June 26, six assailants believed to be
 linked to the security apparatus beat him severely (see Section 2.a). It is not known
 if he is in custody, has ted aubroad, or is in hiding.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.--
 The 1992 Constitution prohibits torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment. While systematic torture was not known to have occurred in 1994, criminal
 suspects, prisoners, and witnesses are routinely beaten both before and after trial
 processes. Agents of the security apparatus have also used force to suppress Political
 opposition (see Section 2.a.).
 Turkmen prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe. Food is oor and facili-
 ties for prisoner rehabilitation and recreation are extremely limited. In August an
 outbreak of cholera reportedly struck the Bairam Alyfprison facility,.e
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In several cases, government agentsde
 tained or arrested persons associated with the Moscow-based opPosition and warned
 them not to engage in Political activities.
 On October 29, several days aftr the President called for the extradition to
 Turkmenistan of several Turken dissidents, authorities in Uzbekistan arrested
 two individuals associated with the Turkmen opposition, Mukhammad Aimuradv
 and Khoshali Garaev, and deported them to Turkmenistan. Although the two men,
 both Russian citizens, were originaly charged only with the illegal transfer of
 money from Turkmenistan the Government eventually announced Its intention to
 try them in connection wth an alleged plot to assassinate the President. At year's
 end, security organs were holding them pending trial.
 On October 20, security authorities took journalist Iusup Kuliev from his home
 and detained him for over 2 weeks, apparently without formal charges. They report-
 edly beat him while in custody and subjected him to pyschotropic drugs. At year's
 end, he was under house arrest in his home in Ashgabat.
 The authorities detained at least three other poople--Khudaiverdy Khaly,
 m    sMukhammed Garachis'ev-for several days, appar-
 ey without form     chaes, around the time of the October 27 Independence Day
 celebration.
 
 
 1012
 In January 1994, the authorities temporarily exiled political activist Durdymurad
 Khojamukhamed to Baku, Azerbaijan, without either his consent or due process. Al-
 most all prominent political opponents of the present Government have chosen to
 move to Moscow for reasons of personal safety.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution theoretically established judicial
 indepndence; however the President's power regarding the selection and dismissal
 _ofjudgs effectively subordinates the judiciary to the presidency. The court system
 has not been reformed since Soviet days. It consists of a Supreme Court, 6 provin-
 cial courts (including 1 for the capital city of Ashgabat only), and at the lowest level,
 61 district and city courts. There are also military courts, which handle crimes in-
 vlving military discipline, criminal cases onerning military personnel, and crimes
 by civilians against militar personnel; and a Supreme Economic Court, which hears
 cases invol ving disputes between state eonomic enterprises and ministries.
 The President appoints alljudges for a term of 5 years without legislative review,
 except for the Chairman (chief justice) of the Supreme Court, and-he has the sole
 authority to remove them from the bench before the completion of their terms.
 Turkmen law provides for the rights of due process for defendants, including a
 public tria the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatoiy material, and the
 rightto call witnesses to testify on behalf of the accused. The accused has the right
 to select counsel, but there are no independent lawyers, with the exception of a few
 retired legal officials. When a person cannot affor-d the servies of a lawyer, the
 court appoints one. A person may represent himself in court.
 Decisions of the lower ourts may be appe .aled to higher ourts, and in the case
 of the death penalty the defendant may petition the President for clemency. In prac-
 tice, adherence to due process rights is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts
 in rural areas. Even when due process rights are observed, the authority of the
 prosecutor vis-a-vis the defense attrney is so great that it is almost impossible for
 the defendant to receive a fair trial.
 Mukhammad Aimuradov and Khoshali Garaev (see Section 1.d.), who were to be
 tried on charges connected to an alleged assassination plot, were arrested and held
 on charges that appeared to be politiclly motivated. There are no other known po-
 litical prisoners. Some opponents of the Government have charged that the authori-
 ties occasionally prosecute political opponents for economic crimes they did not com-
 mit.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that a citizen has the right to protection from arbitrary inter-
 ference in his or her personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate
 the conduct of surveillance by the state security apparatus, which regularly mon-
 itors the activities of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use
 physical surveillance, telephone tapping, electronic eavesdropping, and recruit in-
 formers. Critics of the Government and other citizens report credibly that their mail
 is intercepted before delivery.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however, freedom of
 speech is severely restricted, and there is no freedom of the press. The Government
 completely controls radio and television. Its budget funds all print media. The Gov-
 ernment censors all newspapers; the Committee for the Protection of State Secrets
 must approve all prepublication galleys. In September the President publicly called
 for the punishment of those who spread "rumors."
 The Government prohibits the media from reporting the views of opposition politi-
 cal leaders and critics, and it rarely allows the mildest form of criticism in print.
 The Government press has condemned the foreign media, including Radio Liberty
 for broadcasting or publishing opposing views, and the Government has subjected
 those involved in critical foreign press items to threats and harassment.
 The Government restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of gov-
 ernment policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research into
 areas it considers politically sensitive. In the past the government-controlled Union
 of Writers has expelled members who criticized government policy; libraries have re-
 moved their works. Critics of the Government in all fields were frequently reminded
 that continued criticism could have many repercussions, including the loss of em-
 ployment and opportunities for advancement for themselves and their families. In
 at least one case, the authorities dismissed a child from school because of public
 statements made by the father. In another case, a woman was removed from her
 job because of her exiled father's political activities.
 On rare occasions the authorities resorted to stronger methods to silence their
 critics. During the January 15 national referendum on extending the presidential
 
 
 1013
 term of office, they arrested Valentin Nikolaevich Kopusov immediately after he tore
 up his ballot in the presence of election officials. Kopusov, who has a history of er-
 ratic behavior, was placed in a psychiatric hospital pending determination of his
 mental health. After several months Kopusov was declared mentally ill and trans-
 ferred to another hospital.
 On the night of June 26, six assailants, believed to be connected to the security
 apparatus, broke into the home of political activist and underground journalist
 Durdymurad Khojamukhamed. They abducted him, severely beat him, and left him
 in a ditch at the side of a road see Section 1.b.).
 On November 24, Russian authorities in Moscow, reportedly at the request of the
 Government of Turkmenistan, took into custody Murad Essenov and Khalmurad
 Suyunov, two journalists associated with the Moscow-based Turkmen opposition. Al-
 though no chas were known to have been filed against the two, the Government
 reportedly sought their extradition in connection with the same alleged assassina-
 tion plot for which two others were arrested in Asbgabat (see Section 1.d.). Russian
 authorities released Essenov and Suyunov on December 21. In October six or seven
 men had accosted Essenov on a Moscow street and beaten him. Opposition leaders
 claimed the assailants were linked to Turkmen security organs.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts the
 freedom of peaceful assembly. Unregistered organizations, including those with a
 political agenda, are not allowed to hold demonstrations or meetings. No political
 groups critical of government policy have been able to meet the requirements for
 registration (see Section 3).
 Social and cultural organizations without political aims may normally register
 and hold meetings without difficulty. However, the authorities often refuse registra-
 tion to those with an ethnic or religious orientation under constitutional provisions
 that prohibit political parties based on nationality or religion.
 Theoretically, citizens have the freedom to associate with whomever they please.
 However, supporters of opposition movements have been fired from their jobs for po-
 litical activities and removed from professional societies or threatened with dismis-
 sal or with the loss of their homes or work space. On numerous occasions in 1994,
 the Director of the KN and a deputy chairman of the Cabinet summoned political
 opponents and warned them not to meet with foreigners or give press interviews.
 The Government also discourages the access of foreigners to Islamic leaders, often
 by insisting that a government official sit in on any meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Turkmen are overwhelmingly Muslim, but Islam does not
 play a dominating role in society, in part due to the 70 years of repression under
 Soviet rule. The Constitution provides for freedom of religion and does not establish
 a state religion. Official harassment of religious groups has largely ended, and the
 State generally respects religious freedom.
 A modest revival of Islam has occurred since independence. The Government has
 incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition into its efforts to define a Turkmen
 identity, and it gives some financial and other support to the Council on Religious
 Affairs, which plays an intermediary role between the government bureaucracy and
 religious organizations.
 Religious congregations are technically required to register with the Government,
 but there were no reports that the Government enforced this requirement or denied
 registration to any religious group.
 There is no law specifically addressing religious proselytizing. The authorities,
 however did cut short the planned stay of two American citizens, apparently be-
 cause of? their proselytizing activities, Also, the Government would have to grant
 permission for any mass meetings or demonstrations for this purpose and would not
 do so for nonregistered groups. The Government does not restrict the travel of clergy
 or members of religious groups to Turkmenistan. Islamic religious literature, largely
 donated from abroad, is distributed through the mosques. Eastern (or Russian) Or-
 thodox churches also offer a variety of Christian religious literature.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government generally does not restrict movement within the coun-
 try, although it tightly controls travel to the border zones. Turkmen citizens still
 carry internal passports which are used more as a form of identification than a
 means of controlling movement. Residence permits are not required, although place
 of residence is registered and noted in passports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports and exit visas as a means of
 restricting international travel for its critics, and most ordinary travelers find the
 process to be difficult. Many allege that officials, including some on the presidential
 staff, solicit bribes in exchange for permission to travel abroad. Although legally the
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for issuing passport and exit visas, the
 
 
 1014
 International Department of the Presidency and the security services must also sig-
 niv their approval.
 Citizens are generally permitted to emigrate without undue restriction. In Decem-
 ber Turkmen authorities denied journalist Mameduiyaz Sakhatov and his family the
 passports and exit visas they needed to emigrate to the United States. Some ethnic
 Russians and other non-Tukmen residents left for other former Soviet republics
 during 1994.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to Turkmenistan and apply for citizenship. The
 Government, however, has not permitted many ethnic Turkmen from ran, Afghani-
 stan, and other countries to resettle in Turkmenistan.
 Authorities discouraged the influx of non-Turkmen workers from other areas of
 the former Soviet Union. In mid-March, Turkmen police detained and immediately
 expelled as many as several thousand nonresident workers from Tajikistan,
 Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Armenia, and Ukraine.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The 1992 Constitution declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracy in the
 form of a presidential republic. In practice, it remains a one-party State dominated
 by the President and his closest advisers within the Cabinet. Citizens have no real
 ability peacefully to change the Government and have little influence on government
 policy or decisionmaking. In the 1992 presidential election, the sole candidate was
 aparmurad Niyazov the incumbent and nominee of the Democratic (formerly Com-
 munist) Party. The iovernment announced the election barely a month before vot-
 ing da, giving opposition groups insufficient time to organize and qualify to submit
 a cadIdate.
 On January 25, a national referendum extended Niyazov's term in office until
 2002, obviating the need for a presidential election in 1997. The referendum was
 announced only on December 28, 1993, again allowing insufficient time for any op-
 position to organize. According to the official results, 99.9 percent of those voting
 cast their ballots to extend Niyazov's term. On December 11, 1994, elections were
 held for a reconstituted Meilis (parliament). Again, no opposition participation was
 permitted. Candidates for the 50 seats were all approved by the ruling party, and
 all ran unopposed. The Government claimed that 99.8 percent of eligible voters par-
 ticipated.
 The Constitution calls for the separation of powers between the various branches,
 with concomitant checks and balances. However, it vests a disproportionate share
 of power in the Presidency, particularly at the expense of the judiciary. In practice,
 the Presidency in concert with the Cabinet of Ministers makes all policy decisions,
 appoints government officials down to the level of city mayors, anadecides which
 legislation the Mejlis will consider. The Mejlis has no genuinely independent author-
 ity.
 Government officials state that their goal is political pluralism and the establish-
 ment of a multiparty system, perhaps as soon as 1996. However, there were few in-
 dications in 1994 that the present leadership will permit any meaningful opposition
 to develop.
 In addition to its almost total control over the flow of information, the Govern-
 ment also uses laws on the registration of political parties to curb the emergence
 of would-be opposition groups. At present the only registered p arty is the Demo-
 cratic Party of Turkmenistan_ the successor to the Communist Party. The policy of
 wo";    .0W'IPntn                                                  -y...
 the Democratic Party, according to its leadership, is to implement the policy of the
 President.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups, and government restrictions
 on freedom of speech, press, and association would preclude any effort to investigate
 and criticize publicly the Government's human rights policies. Several independent
 journalists report on these issues in the Russian press in Russia and have contact
 with international human rights organizations. On numerous occasions in the past,
 the Government has warned its critics against speaking with visiting journalists or
 other foreigners wishing to discuss human rights issues.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disabil4, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution provides for full equality for women. In practice, how-
 ever, women are greatly underrepresented in the upper levels of government and
 state economic enterprises and are concentrated in health care, education, and serv-
 
 
 1015
 
 ice industries. Women are also restricted from working in some dangerous and eco-
 logically unsafe jobs. In traditional Turkmen society, the woman's primary role is
 as homemaker and mother, and family pressure often limits opportunities for
 women to enter outside careers or advance their education. The law protects women
 from discrimination in inheritance and marriage rights. Religious authorities, when
 proffering advice to practicing Muslims on matters concerning inheritance and prop-
 erty rights, often favor men over women.
 The Women's Council of Turkmenistan, a carryover from the Soviet system, ad-
 dresses issues of concern to women, and a professional businesswomen's organiza-
 tion has recently been founded. While no reliable statistics on domestic violence
 against women are available, women's groups and medical personnel assert that it
 is not a major problem. The Government has no program specifically aimed at rec-
 tifying the disadvantaged position of women in Turkmen society because it does not
 believe that women suffer discrimination.
 Children.-Turkmenistan's social welfare umbrella adequately covers the welfare
 needs of children. The Government has not, however, taken effective steps to ad-
 dress the severe environmental and health hazards that have resulted in a high rate
 of infant and maternal mortality, particularly in the Aral Sea area.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution provides for equal rights
 and freedoms to all citizens. Turkmen comprise 72 percent of the population of
 about 4 million, Russians 9.5 percent, and Uzbeks 9 percent. There are smaller
 numbers of Kazakhs, Armenians, Azerbaijanis, and many other ethnic groups. In
 1994 Turkmenistan was spared the ethnic turmoil that afflicted many other parts
 of the former Soviet Union.
 As part of its nationbuilding efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen the official language, and it is a mandatory subject in school, al-
 though not necessarily the language of instruction.
 The Constitution also guarantees speakers of other languages the right to use
 them. Russian remains in common usage in government and commerce. The Gov-
 ernment insists that it will not tolerate discrimination against Russian speakers.
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups, not solely ethnic Russians.
 Non-Turkmen fear that the designation of Turkmen as the official language will put
 their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They complain that
 some avenues for promotion and job advancement are no longer open to them. Only
 a handful of non-Turkmen occupy high-echelon jobs in the ministries, and minority
 government employees from other ethnic groups are sometimes assigned lesser posi-
 tions than their experience and qualifications would warrant.
 People With Disabilities.-Government subsidies and pensions are available to
 those with disabilities, and those capable of working are generally provided with
 jobs under still-valid preindependence policies that virtually guarantee employment
 to all. According to existing legislation, facilities for access by the disabled must be
 included in new construction projects. Compliance is not complete, however, and
 most older buildings are not so equipped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Associatio .-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government- associated trade unions. The Federation of Trade Unions claims a
 membership of some 1.6 million and is divided along both sectoral and regional
 lines. Turkmenistan joined the International Labor Organization in late 1993.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions. No attempts were made to register an independent trade union
 in 1994. The state-sponsored unions control key social benefits such as sick leave,
 health care, maternal and childcare benefits, and funeral expenses. Deductions from
 payrolls to cover these benefits are transferred directly to the Federation.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, but no strikes are known to have occurred in
 1994. Disputes over work conditions or other grievances were resolved through ne-
 gotiation among the trade union, government, and management (which represents,
 invariably, a government enterrise).
 b. The Right to Organize anctBargain Collectiely-Turkmen law does not protect
 the right to collective bargaining. The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares
 general guidelines for wages and sets wages in health care, culture and some other
 areas. In other sectors, it allows for some leeway at the enterprise evel, taking into
 account local factors. Annual negotiations between the trade union and management
 determine specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enterprise. In prac-
 tice, in the predominantly state-controlled economy, the close associaton of both the
 
 
 1016
 trade union and the enterprise with the Government seriously limits the workers'
 ability to bargain effectively.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution specifically pro-
 hibits forced labor. Despite claims that several years ago the Government aban-
 doned its policy of requiring students to pick cotton at minimal rates of pay during
 the annual harvest, thousands of high shool students were forced to work in the
 cotton fields in 1994. No other incidents of compulsory labor were reported in 1994.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 16; in a few 7heavy industries it is 18. The law prohibits children aged
 16 through 18 from working more than 6 hours per day (the normal workday is 8
 hours). Fifteen-year-old children may work only with the permission of the trade
 union and parents; this rarely is granted. Such children are permitted to work only
 4 to 6 hours per day. Violations of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the
 cotton harvesting season, when teenagers work in the fields and children less than
 10 years of age sometimes help with the harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government sets the national minimum
 wage quarterly, based on a market basket of commodities reviewed by the Ministry
 of Economics and Finance. On July 1, the Government increased the minimum wage
 to $3.33 (250 manats) per month and increased it again to $4.55 (1,000 manats) on
 December 21. This figure falls far short of the amount required to meet the needs
 of an average family. Most households are multigenerational, with several members
 receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions. Even so, many people lack the resources
 topurchase an adequate diet, and meat is a luxury for most of them.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours and provides at least one 24-hour rest
 period. Turkmenistan inherited an economic system with substandard working con-
 ditions from the Soviet era, when productivity took precedence over the health and
 safety of workers. Industrial workers often labor in an unsafe environment and are
 not provided proper protective equipment. Some agricultural workers are subjected
 to ecological health hazards. The Government recognizes that these problems exist
 and has taken some steps to deal with them but has not set comprehensive stand-
 ards for occupational health and safety.
