 TURKMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan became independent following a referendum on October 27, 1991,
 with the support of 94 percent of those who voted. Sapsrmurad Niyazov, head of
 the Commumst Party since 1985 and President since October 1990 when the post
 was created, was elected President of the country in a direct election on June 21,
 1992. He ran unopposed in the election, announced barely a month before voting
 day, leaving the opposition insufficient time to organize. According to official govern-
 ment results, 99.9 percent of eligible voters participated, with 99.5 percent support-
 ing the President.
 Progress in moving from the Soviet-era authoritarian style of government toward
 a democratic system was nonexistent in 192, and economic reform was cautious.
 The Communist Party, renamed the Democratic Party, retained a monopoly on
 p ower; the Government registered no opposition political parties and actively inhib-
 ited their activities. The President emphasized stability over reform and worked to
 create a renewed sense of Turkmen nationalism as part of his declared effort to
 build a nation. This nationbuilding effort took place amidst growing signs of a per-
 sonality cult dvelopig around the President.
 The Committee on National Security (KNB) took on the responsibilities formerly
 held by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), with membership and oper-
 ations essentially unchanged. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal
 police which works closely with the KNB on matters of national security.
 Tuamenistan remained a centrally planned economy. Although the Government
 announced a step-by-step transition to a market economy, and laws and regulations
 encouraging foreign investment were passed, little progress was made toward pri-
 vatization. Under the transition plan, the Government will maintain control over 80
 percent of the economy for at least the next 3 years, including the lucrative natural
 gas oil, and minerals industries and the important cottn industry.
 turkmenistan largely avoided abuses against the integrity of the person (e.g.,
 extrajudicial killing, torture), but the Government severely restricted political pr-
 ties. It maintained strict controls over the political opposition and completely con-
 trolled the media, censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting criticism of gv-
 
 
 ernment policy or officials. The Government deported two members of Amnesty
 International in October, after they met with members of the opposition. As part
 of its efforts to foster a sense of nationhood among the Turkmen, the Government
 reversed decades of favoritism toward Russians; ethnic Turkmen now receive fa-
 vored treatment, leading ethnic minorities to complain of discrimination, especially
 in employment practices.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-There were no reports of political
 or extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of abductions or disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution specifically prohibits torture and "cruel, inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment." There were no reports of torture. Police beat one political
 opponent after apprehending him following his escape from detention in October,
 but police brutality is not a common complaint. On at least two occasions, unknown
 assailants attacked political dissidents; police made no arrests in these cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-On several occasions, political critics
 were temporarily detained during 1992. Authorities held at least one member of the
 opposition Agzybirlik movement at a police station during the brief visit of U.S. Sec-
 retary of State James Baker in February. Police stationed outside the doors of other
 political dissidents prevented them from leaving their homes during the visit. Police
 also took in for questioning some of the same activists and closely monitored their
 activities during the October National Day celebrations. The police in Ashgabat, the
 capital, also briefly detained a former deputy of the then Supreme Soviet who had
 attempted to organize a meeting in May to discuss the draft national constitution.
 They returned him to his provincial home, where local authorities held him under
 house arrest, preventing him from participating in deliberations on the constitution.
 Later, unknown assailants attacked and shot him. At year's end he was undergoing
 medical rehabilitation in Moscow.
 Members of the political opposition claimed that the Government routinely si-
 lenced political critics by arresting them on trumped-up criminal charges-for exam-
 ple, by planting illegal drugs on the person or property of political dissidents. The
 Government has publicly linked one of their most vocalopponents, the editor of the
 journal Dayanch, to known criminal elements. His alleged links with a local crime
 gang have been a subject of discussion on local television and in front of student
 groups. Supporters of the editor fear that the Government is laying the groundwork
 to bring trumped-up charges against him.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The court system in Turkmenistan consists of a
 Supreme Court, 6 provincial courts (including 1 for the city of Ashgabat only), and
 61 district and city courts. There are also military courts, which handle crimes in-
 volvingmilitary discipline, criminal cases concerning military personnel, and crimes
 by civilians against military personnel; and a Supreme Economic Court, which hears
 cases involving disputes between state economic concerns and ministries. The Presi-
 dent appoints all judges for a term of 5 years without legislative review, except for
 the Chairman (Chief Justice) of the Supreme Court, an has the sole authority to
 remove them from the bench before the completion of their terms. The new Con-
 stitution theoretically established judicial independence; however, this concentration
 of power regarding selection and dismissal of judges effectively subordinates the ju-
 diciary to the Presidency.
 Turkmen law provides for due process rights, including a public trial, the right
 to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right to call witnesses
 to testify on behalf of the accused. The accused has the right to select counsel, but
 independent lawyers, with the exception of a few retired legal officials, do not exist.
 When a person cannot afford the services of a lawyer, the court appoints one. A per-
 son may represent himself in court. Decisions of the lower courts may be appealed
 to higher courts, and, in the case of the death penalty, the defendant may petition
 the President for clemency.
 Adherence to due process rights is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts
 in rural areas. A young shepherd, Bairumgeldi Chariyev, was convicted and exe-
 cuted cf the murder of two men who allegedly attempted to rape his wife in his
 presence. Chariyev's family claims that he did not receive a fair trial because of the
 political connections of the families of the alleged rapists. His family noted that the
 court refused to consider evidence that would have demonstrated that the killings
 were justifiable. Human rights monitors also claim that the failed appeal of
 
 
 947
 Chariyev's death sentence was illegal because neither the defendant nor his lawyer
 were present.
 There are no known political prisoners in Turkmenistan.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution guarantees the right to protection from arbitrary interference in a citi-
 zen's personal life. However, no meaningful legal scheme exists to regulate these
 kinds of surveillance activities. The state security apparatus regularly monitors the
 activities of opponents and critics of the Government. This takes the form of routine
 surveillane, telephone tap ping and electronic eavesdropping, and the use of inform-
 er. Government critics also report credibly that their mail is intercepted before de-
 livery, with correspondence to and from international human rights organizations
 being confiscated.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution guarantees the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however freedom of
 speech is severely restricted, and there is no freedom of the press. Raaio and tele-
 vision are completely government controlled. Only one print entity, a bimonthly
 business newspaper, is not funded through the government budget. The Government
 censors all newspapers; their prepublication galleys must be submitted for approval
 to the Committee for the Protection of State Secrets. The Government also refuses
 to allow the media to report the views of opposition political leaders and generally
 allows criticism of government policy only in those areas where it has already de-
 cided to implement reform.
 During a brief period at the beginning of 1992, before its censorship procedures
 were fully in place, the Government permitted a limited degree of free expression
 in the press. Since then, however, it repeatedly threatened to close the Turkmen-
 language newspaper Yash Kommunist, which published independent views regu-
 larly during that period, and subsequently replaced its editorial leadership. Journal-
 ists who protested the change in management and reimposition of censorship lost
 their positions.
 The authorities confiscated more than 20,000 copies of the first issue of the oppo-
 sition journal Dayanch, published in Moscow, upon arrival in Ashgabat in February.
 They ustified their action on the grounds that the publication was produced by an
 unregistered grup which advocated the overthrow of the Government. They also
 fined people for distributing Dayanch and confiscated subsruent issues, along with
 those of a second opposition publication, Ata-Vatan, published in Azerbaijan. The
 editor of Dayanch appeared in court and was fined three times for preparing and
 distributing an illegal publication. In October, the day after his last court appear-
 ance, unidentified assailants attacked and beat him in the street.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assoeiation.-The Government restricts the
 freedom of peaceful assembly. Unregistered organizations, including ~political par-
 ties, are not allowed to hold demonstrations or meetings. No political groups that
 are critical of government policy have been able to meet the requirements or reg-
 istration (see Section 3). Social and cultural organizations without political aims
 normally may register and hold meetings without difficultwohe     i  i  h
 Citizens theoretically have the freedom to associate with  or   pease. and
 ever, supporters of opposition movements have been fired from their jobs for politi-
 cal activities or threatened with dismissal or with the loss of their homes or work
 space. Police questioning of organizers thwarted attempts to hold discussions on the
 new Constitution prior to its adoption. Security personnel have also at times warned
 members of opposition groups not to meet with foreigners (see Section 4).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Tumen are overwhelmingly Muslim, but after 70 years
 of Soviet domination Islam does not play a dominating role in society. The new Con-
 stitution guarantees freedom of religion and does not establish a state religion.
 State harassment of religious groups has largely ended, and religious freedom is
 generally respected. While antirligious sentiment remains in some elements of the
 vernment, there is another element that has given preference to Islamic groups
 as part of Turkmenistan's efforts at nationbuilding. The revival of Islam is closely
 tied in this respect to resurgent Turkmen nationalism. One evidence of Islam's re-
 vival is the great increase that has occurred in mosque construction, which the Gov-
 ernment has helped facilitate.
 The Government's Council on Religious Affairs plays an intermediary role be-
 tween the government bureaucracy and religious organizations.Religious congrega-
 tions are technically required to register wit the Government, but there are no re-
 ports that the Government prevented those that have not yet done so from practic-
 ing their faith. Nor were there any reports that attempts to register religious groups
 were denied.
 
 
 948
 There is no law specifically addressing religious proselytizin  Permission to hold
 mass meetings or demonstrations for this purpose would, however, have to be
 sought from the Government and would not be granted to nonregistered groups. The
 Government does not restrict the travel of clergy or members of religious groups to
 Turkmenistan. Religious literature is generally available, but some religious groups
 voluntarily limit the public distribution of their publications for fear of a negative
 reaction from Muslims.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 pat riation.-The  Government does not generally      restrict movement within
 Turkmenistan. Turkmen citizens still carry internal passports, more as a form of
 identification than a means of controlling movement. Persons may be asked to
 produce identification when purchasing air tickets, but identification is not required
 or other modes of transportation. Residence permits are not required, although
 place of residence is registered and noted in passports.
 Travel between the former republics of the Soviet Union requires no passport or
 visas and is generally unhindered. However, the Government has limited the move-
 ment of political critics who it feared would attempt to spread negative information
 about its policies abroad. In August police detained the editor of the opposition
 newspaper Ata-Vatan while he was trying to board a domestic train and later re-
 moved him from a public bus. Both incidents apparently were aimed at preventing
 his departure from the country. The Government warned at least eight political op-
 ponents not to leave Turkmenistan in December to attend an international human
 rights conference in Kyrgyzstan.
 Travel outside the former Soviet Union requires an exit visa. Citizens of
 Turkmenistan are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction. Many Russians
 and other non-Turkmen residents left for other former Soviet republics during the
 year, and many members of the small Jewish community emigrated to Israel.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to Turkmenistan and claim citizenship; several
 thousand did so in 1992.
 Over 40,000 refugees of various ethnic groups entered Turkmenistan during the
 year to flee the fighting in Tajikistan. The Government provided them temporary
 housing and other social assistance.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The 1992 Constitution declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracy in the
 form of a presidential republic. In practice, it remains a one-party state dominated
 by the President and his closest advisers within the Cabinet of Ministers. Citizens
 have no real ability peacefully to change the government and have little influence
 on government policy or decisionmaking.
 In the June presidential election, the sole candidate was Saparmurad Niyazov,
 the incumbent and nominee of the Democratic (formerly Communist) Party. The
 Government announced the election barely a month before voting day, giving opposi-
 tion groups insufficient time to organize and qualify to submit a candidate. Accord-
 ing to official government results, 99.9 percent of eligible voters participated, and
 99.5 percent of them supported Niyazov. The members of the MeIis (parliament)
 were last elected in 1990, under the old Communist system which allowed little pop-
 ular participation in the selection of candidates. These members will remain in of-
 fice until the next scheduled elections in 1995. The next Presidential election will
 be in 1997. In December 1992, 60 members of the Halk Maslahaty (People's Council)
 were elected by popular vote. Registered political and other organizations nominated
 candidates in the 60 nationwide election districts. The Government prevented the
 only attempt to put forward a genuine opposition candidate by disrupting a nomi-
 nating meeting in the provincial town of Essenguly. In the actual election, only 61
 candidates competed for the 60 seats.
 The Constitution establishes the'various branches of government, including: the
 Presidency, the Mejlis (National Assembly), the Cabinet of Ministers, the Supreme
 Court, and the Supreme Economic Court. The Halk Maslahaty (People's Council),
 defined as the supreme representative body of popular rule, encompasses all of the
 above plus 60 popularly elected members and local government officials. Primarily
 an advisory body, it has some authority to ratify treaties.
 The Constitution calls for the separation of powers between the various branches,
 with concomitant checks and balances. However, it vests a disproportionate share
 of power in the Presidency, particularly at the expense of the judiciary. In practice,
 the President, in concert with his Cabinet of Ministers, makes all policy decisions,
 appoints government officials down to the level of city mayors, and decides on which
 
 
 949
 legislation will be considered by the Mejlis. The Mejlis has no genuinely independ-
 ent authority.
 Government officials state that their goal is political pluralism and the establish-
 ment of a multiparty system. However, there were few indications in 1992 that the
 Republic's present leadership will permit any serious opposition to develop. In addi-
 tion to its near total control over the flow of information, the Government also used
 laws on the registration of political parties to control the opposition. At present the
 only registered party is the]emocratic Party of Turkmenistan, which is the succes-
 sor to the Communist Party of the Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic. The policy
 of the Democratic Party, according to its leadership, is to Implement the policy of
 the President.
 Allies of the President are attempting to form a second party, the Peasants' Party.
 The Government has refused to register any of the genuine opposition parties,
 claiming that they do not meet the legal requirements for registration. According
 to the Government, opposition parties may register once they have done three
 things: shown that they hav  e support of at least 1,000 voters; developed a party
 program spelling out internal rules and regulations; and presented a party platform
 detailing its proposals for governing.
 The opposition movement Agzybirlik attempted to hold a members' convention on
 January    to    rove party rules and platform. The authorities broke up the meet-
 ing and arrested the movement's 15 principal leaders, holding them for a day under
 a Communist-era law prohibiting mass political gatherings. Opposition leaders
 claim that the Government refuses to permit them to organize the meeting nec-
 essay to fulfill the requirements of registration.
 The Constitution also prohibits the formation of political parties based on religion
 and ethnicity, and one Russian organization was reportedly denied registration for
 that reason in 1992.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights groups in Turkmenistan. In October the Govern-
 ment deported two representatives of Amnesty International (AI) who had traveled
 to Ashgabat to investigate the human rights situation. They reportedly met with
 leaders of an opposition political movement. While the Government forced the Al
 representatives to leave because they did not hold proper visas, it said they could
 come back once they had obtained proper documentation, which would be issued
 promptly. However, security police reportedly warned the opposition leaders about
 meeting with foreigners, and the Al representatives did not return before the end
 of 1992.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Segd Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution guarantees equal rights and freedoms to all citizens. Turkmen
 comprise 72 percent of the population of about 4 million, Russians 9.5 perent, and
 Uzbeks 9 perent. There are smaller numbers of Kazakhs, Armenians, Azerbaijanis,
 and many other ethnic groups. In 1992 Turkmenistan was spared    thenic turmoil
 that afflicted other parts of the former Soviet Union. However, as part of its
 nationbuilding efforts, the Government has attempted to foster Turkmn national
 pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution designated Turkmen the
 official language and made it a mandatory subject in schools. There is an expecta-
 tion that all citizens of Turkmenistan will eventually speak Turkmen. However, the
 Constitution also guarantees speakers of other languages the right to use them.
 Russian remains in common usage in government and commerce. The Govern-
 ment insists that discrimination against Russian speakers will not be tolerated.
 However, efforts to reverse past policies that favored Russians work to the benefit
 of Turkmen at the expense of the other ethnic groups and not solely ethnic Rus-
 sians. Non-Tuirkmen fear that the designation of rkmen as the official language
 will put their children at a disadvantage educationally and economically. They com-
 plain with some justification.that some avenues for promotion and job advancement
 are no longer open to them, and there are reports that some non-Turkmen have
 been threatened with job dismissal unless they le tUrkmen. To date, the Govern-
 ment has not established a program for teaching Turkmen to non-Turkmen speak-
 ers.
 The Constitution guarantees full equality for women. In practice, however, women
 are underrepresented in the upper levels of government and state economic enter-
 prises and are conentrated in health care, education, light industry, and other trn-
 ditionallow-paing sectors. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous
 and ecologically unsafe jobs. Under the law, women are protected from diserimina-
 tion in inheritance and marriage rights. In traditional Turkmen society, however,
 
 
 950
 the woman's primary role is as homemaker and mother, and family pressure often
 limits opportunities for women to enter outside careers and advance their education.
 Among practicing Muslims who seek the advice of religious authorities on matters
 concerning inheritance and property rights, men often take precedence over women.
 The Women's Council of Turkmenistan addresses issues of concern to women.
 While no reliable statistics on domestic violence against women are available, wom-
 en's groups and medical personnel say that it is not a major problem. The Govern-
 ment has no program specifically aimed at rectifying the disadvantaged position of
 women in Turkmen society, as it does not believe women suffer discrimination.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government-associated trade unions. The Federation of Trade Unions claims a mem-
 bership of some 1.6 million and is divided along both sectoral and regional lines.
 Turkmenistan has announced it will seek membership in the International Labor
 Organization.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 are no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union in 1992. The state-sponsored unions control key social benefits such as sick
 leave, health care, maternal and childcare benefits, and funeral expenses. Deduc-
 tions from payrolls to cover these benefits are transferred directly to the Federation,
 raising uncertainty as to how or whether members of independent unions would be
 covered.
 Strikes are not prohibited by law, but no strikes occurred in 1992. Disputes over
 working conditions or other grievances were resolved through negotiations among
 the trade union, government, and management (which represents, invariably, a
 state-owned enterprise).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-Turkmen law does not protect
 the right to collective bargaining. The Ministry for Economics and Finance prepares
 general guidelines for wages and sets wages in health care, culture, and some other
 areas. In other sectors, it allows for some leeway at the factory level, taking into
 account local factors. Annual negotiations involving the trade union and manage-
 ment determine specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enterprise.
 In practice, the association of both the trade union and the enterprise with the Gov-
 ernment seriously limits the workers' ability to bargain. The Turkmen economy re-
 mains almost entirely state controlled, and while the Government has passed laws
 facilitating privatization, little progress towards that end has been made. There are
 no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution specifically pro-
 hibits forced labor. No incidents of compulsory labor were reported in 1992. For-
 mally, the Government no longer requires students to pick cotton at minimal rates
 of a during the annual harvest.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 16; in a fewheavy industries it is 18. The law prohibits children aged
 16 through 18 from working more than 6 hours per day (the normal wokday is 8
 hours). Fifteen-year-old children may work only with the permission of the trade
 union and parents; this rarely is granted. Such children are permitted to work only
 4 to 6 hours per day. Violations of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the
 cotton harvesting season, when enterprises regularly take teenagers away from
 school and sometimes employ children less than 10 years of age to help with the
 harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In January the Government set the national
 minimum wage for Turkmenistan and subsequently raised it on July 1 and again
 on October 1. The Ministry of Economics and Finance reviews a market basket of
 commodities quarterly to adjust the minimum wage toprevailing prices. Despite low
 rents and other subsidies, the minimum wage is inadequate to support the needs
 of an average family, given rising prices for food, clothing, and other basic commod-
 iiThe standard legal workweek is 40 hours. Turkmenistan inherited an economic
 system with substandard working conditions from the Soviet era, when productivity
 took precedence over the health and safety of workers. Industrial workers often
 labor in an unsafe environment and are not provided proper protective equipment.
 Agricultural workers in particular are subjected to ecological health hazards. The
 Government recognizes these problems exist but has not moved effectively to deal
 with them.
 
 
 951
