 TURKMENISTAN
 Turkmenistan, a one-party state dominated by the President and his closest ad-
 visers, made virtually no progress in 1993 in moving from a Soviet-era authoritarian
 style of government to a democratic system. Saparmurad Niyazov, head of the Com-
 munist Party since 1985 and President since October 1990 when the post was cre-
 ated, was elected President in a direct election on June 21, 1992. The Democratic
 Party the old Communist Party under a new name, retained a monopoly on power;
 the Government registered no oppsition parties in 1993 and continued to inhibit
 opposition political activities. Empasizing stability over reform, the President's na-
 ti0on-building efforts centered on renewing Turkmen nationalism, a feature of which
 has been a personality cult around the President which continued to grow in 1993.
 The Committee on Nationl Security (KNB) took on the responsibilities formerly
 held by the Soviet Committee for State Security (KGB), with membership and oper-
 ations essentially unchanged. The Ministry of Internal Affairs directs the criminal
 policeewhich works closely with the KNB on matters of national security.
 Turkmenistan remained a centrally planned economy, although the Government
 took small steps toward a transition to a market economy. The Government an-
 nounced a land privatization policy and continued to encourage private investment
 from abroad, including in the energy sector which was previously completely under
 government control. In October it ceased subsidizing most prices.
 Turkmen authorities severely restricted political and civil liberties. They main-
 tained strict controls over oppsition political organizations and completely con-
 trolled the media, censoring all newspapers and rarely permitting criticism of gov-
 ernment policy or officials. The Government used its powers to issue passports and
 exit visas as a means of restricting the movement of political opponents and it in-
 hibited attempts by foreign visitors to talk with its domestic critics. Thie Govern-
 ment generally gave favored treatment to ethnic Turkmen over minorities and to
 men over women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Incuding Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-No political or extrajudicial killings
 are known to have occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-aAn economic editor of a government daily newspaper dis-
 appeared in June. The or      press suggested that her disappearance may have
 had a olitical dimension  owever, there was no evidence to support this allega-
 tion. Te Government investigated the disappearanei   but did not report any resuIts.
 It also restricted publicity about the case.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1992 Constitution prohibits torture or other crue, inhuman, or degrading treat-
 ment, and such practices are not known to have occurred.
 Turkmen prisons are unsanitary, overcrowded, and unsafe. Food is poor, and fa-
 cilities for prisoner rehabilitation and recreation are extremely limited.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-kOn two occasions in 1993, the Govern-
 ment temporarily detained political critics to prevent them from meetingwith for-
 eign visitors. In April the authorities briefly detained the cochairman of the opposi-
 tion Agzybirlik movement to prevent him from meeting with a delegation from the
 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (oSCE). They held two others
 under house srrest. In August the authorities detained four opposition leaders for
 questioning after they met with a visiting U.S. Congressman. They held two others
 under house arrest to prevent their participation in the meeting and arrested a
 third while he was walking to the meeting site. In all cases, authorities questioned
 the detainees for a few hours and did not hold them overnight.
 The authorities in August arrested an independent journalist, who had written
 critically about the Government for the Moscow press, and investigated charges that
 he had embezzled funds from the government enterprise which employed him. The
 journalist claimed the charges were trumped up in a government attempt to silence
 him. Ater more than 4 months of pretrial detention, the court heard his case and
 found him guilty. The authorities released the journalist after he signed an admis-
 sion of guilt. He still maintains his innocence.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial -The Constitution theoretically established judicial
 independence; however, the President's power regarding the selection and dismissal
 of judges subordinates the judiciary to the P residency. The court system  in
 Turkmenistan has not been reformed since Soviet days. It consists of a Supreme
 Court, 6 provincial courts (including 1 for the capital city of Ashgabat only), and,
 at the lowest level, 61 district and city courts. There are also military courts to han-
 
 
 1109
 dle crimes involving military discipline, criminal cases concerning military person-
 nel, and crimes by civilians against military personnel; and a Supreme Economic
 Court, which hears cases involving disputes between state economic enterprises and
 ministries. The President appoints all judges for a term of 5 years without legisla-
 tive review, except for the Chairman (chief justice) of the Supreme Court, and he
 has the sole authority to remove them from the bench before the completion of their
 terms.
 Turkmen law provides for due process rights for defendants, including a public
 trial, the right to a defense attorney, access to accusatory material, and the right
 to call witnesses. The accused has the right to select counsel, but there are few inde-
 pendent lawyers. When a person cannot afford the services of a lawyer, the court
 appoints one. A person may represent himself in court. Decisions of the lower courts
 may be appealed to higher courts, and in the case of the death penalty, the defend-
 ant may petition the President for clemency. In practice, adherence to due process
 rights is not uniform, particularly in the lower courts in rural areas.
 There are no known political prisoners in Turkmenistan.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to protection from arbitrary interference in a citi-
 zen's personal life. However, there are no legal means to regulate the conduct of
 surveillanceby the state security apparatus, which regularly monitors the activities
 of opponents and critics of the Government. Security officials use physical surveil-
 lance, telephone tapping, and electronic eavesdropping, and recruit informers. Crit-
 ics of the Government report credibly that their mail is intercepted before delivery.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres-The Constitution provides for the right to hold
 personal convictions and to express them freely. In practice, however, freedom of
 speech is severely restricted, and there is no freedom of the press. The Government
 completely controls radio and television. Its budget funds all print media. The Gov-
 ernment censors all newspapers; the Committee for the Protection of State Secrets
 must approve all prepublication galleys. The Government also refuses to allow the
 media to report the views of opposition political leaders and critics, and it rarely
 allows the mildst form of criticism in print. The Government press has condemned
 the foreign media, including Radio Liberty, for broadcasting or publishing opposition
 views, and the Government has subjected those mentioned in critical foreign press
 items to throeats and harassment.
 The Governmient also restricts academic freedom. It does not tolerate criticism of
 poVernment policy or the President in academic circles, and it discourages research
 tareas it considers politically sensitive. The government-controlled Union of
 Writers expelled members who have criticized government policy; libraries have re-
 moved ther works.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government restricts the
 freedom of peaceful assembly. Unregistered organizations, including those with a
 political agenda, are not allowed to hold demonstrations or meetings. No political
 groups critical of government policy have been able to meet the requirements for
 registration (see Section 3). Social and cultural organizations without political aims
 may normally register and hold meetings without difficulty. Those with an ethnic
 or religious orientation may, however, be refused registration under constitutional
 provisions that prohibit political parties and other organizations based on national-
 ity or religion.
 Citizens theoretically hav  e    cfreedom to associate with whomever they please.
 However, supporters of opposition movements have been fired from their jobs for po-
 litical activities, removed from professional societies, or threatened with dismissal
 or with the loss of their homes or work space. On numerous occasions in 1993, the
 Director of the KNB and a Deputy Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers summoned
 political opponents to warn them not to meet with foreigners or give press inter-
 views. The Government also limited the access of foreigners to Islamic leaders and
 oten insisted that a government official sit in on any meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-Turkmen are overwhelmingly Muslim, but Islam does not
 Slay a dominating role in society, largely due to the 70 years of repression under
 Soviet rule. The Constitution provides for freedom of reliion and does not establish
 a state religion. Official harassment of religious groupshas largely ended, and the
 State generally respects religious freedom. A revivalof Islam has occurred since
 independence. The Govenment has incorporated some aspects of Muslim tradition
 into its efforts to define a Turkmen identity, and it gives some financial and other
 support to Islamic  roups.
 The Governments Council on Religious Affairs plays an intermediary role be-
 tween the government bureaucracy and religious organizations. Religious congrega-
 
 
 1110
 tions are technically required to register with the Government, but there were no
 reports that the Government prevented those that had not yet complied from prac-
 ticing their faith. Nor were there any reports that attempts to register religious
 groups were denied.
 There is no law specifically addressing religious proselytizing. The Government,
 however, would have to grant permission for any mass meetings or demonstrations
 for this purpose and would not do so for nonregistered groups. The Government does
 not restrict the travel of clergy or members of religious groups to Turkmenistan. Is-
 lamic religious literature, largely donated from abroad, is distributed through the
 mosques. Orthodox churches also offer a variety of Christian religious literature.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not generally restrict movement within the coun-
 try. Turkmen citizens still carry internal passports, which are used more as a form
 of identification than a means of controlling movement. Residence permits are not
 required, although the place of residence is registered and noted in internal pass-
 ports.
 The Government uses its power to issue passports and exit visas as a means of
 restricting international travel for its critics. Although legally the Ministry of For-
 eign Affairs is responsible for issuing passport and exit visas, the International De-
 partment of the Presidency must also signify its approval. The Government denied
 travel documents to three human rights advocates who wanted to travel to the Unit-
 ed States to attend a conference in April. It used similar tactics to prevent a pro-
 spective intern with Radio Liberty from traveling to Germany and an opposition
 journalist from attending a conference in the Netherlands.
 Citizens of Turkmenistan are permitted to emigrate without undue restriction.
 Russians and other non-Turkmen residents left for other former Soviet republics
 during 1993, and members of the small Jewish community continued to emigrate
 to Israel.
 The government-funded Council of World Turkmen provides assistance to ethnic
 Turkmen abroad who wish to return to Turkmenistan and apply for citizenship. A
 large number of refugees from the turmoil in Tajikistan fled to Turkmenistan in
 1992-93. The Government provided housing and social assistance. Most were ethnic
 Turkmen, and some were Uzbeks with historical ties to Turkmen territory. The Gov-
 ernment deported some ethnic Tajik refugees who entered Turkmenistan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution declares Turkmenistan to be a secular democracyin the form of
 a presidential republic. In practice, it remains a one-party state dominated by the
 President and his closest advisers within the Cabinet of Ministers. Citizens have no
 real ability peacefully to change the government and have little influence on govern-
 ment policy or decisionmaking. In the 1992 presidential election, the sole candidate
 was Saparmurad Niyazov, the incumbent and nominee of the Democratic (formerly
 Communist) Party. The Government announced the election barely a month before
 voting day, giving opposition groups insufficient time to organize and qualify to sub-
 mit a candidate. Niyazov was elected to a 5-year term with, according to govern-
 ment statistics, 99.5 percent of the vote.
 The members of the Mejlis (Parliament) were elected for 5-year terms in 1990
 under the old Communist system which allowed little popular participation in the
 selection of candidates. The Parliament passed a resolution on December 28 callinrg
 for a national referendum on January 15, 1994, on whether to extend the Presi-
 dent's term of office for an additional 5 years, thereby canceling the 1997 presi-
 dential election.
 The Constitution calls for the separation of powers between the various branchee,
 with concomitant checks and balances. However, it vests a disproportionate share
 of power in the Presidency, particularly at the expense of the judiciary. In practice,
 the President, in concert with his Cabinet of Ministers, makes all policy decisions,
 appoints government officials down to the level of city mayors, and decides which
 legislation will be considered by the Mejlis. The Mejlis has no genuinely independ-
 ent authority.
 Government officials state that their goal is political pluralism and the establish-
 ment of a multiparty system, perhaps as soon as 1996. However, there were few in-
 dications in 1993 that the present leadership will permit any meaningful opposition
 to develop. In addition to its near total control over the flow of information, the Gov-
 ernent also uses laws on the registration of political parties to prevent the emer-
 gnce of would-be o    sition groups. At present the only registered party is the
 Democratic Party of urkmenistan, the successor to the Communist Party. The pol-
 
 
 1111
 icy of the Democratic Party, according to its leadership, is to implement the policy
 of the President.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local human rights monitoring groups in Turkmenistan, and govern-
 ment restrictions on freedom of speech, press, andassciation would preclude any
 effort to investigate and criticize publicly the Government's human rights policies.
 Several independent journalists report on these issues in the Russian press and
 have contact with international human rights organizations. Midlevel government
 officials met with a visiting Helsinki Watch deleqation in May, providing assistance
 in making appointments and permitting meetings with opposition elements. A
 month earlier, however, the Government had detained some of its critics and at-
 tempted to prevent members of a CSCE delegation from meeting with opposition
 leaders. The Government also on numerous occasions warned its critics against
 speaking with visiting journalists or other foreigners wishing to discuss human
 rights issues.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution provides for full equality for women. In practice,
 women are greatly underrepresented in the upper levels of government and state
 economic enterprises and are concentrated in health care, education, and service in-
 dustries. Women are restricted from working in some dangerous and ecologically un-
 safe jobs. Under the law, women are protected from discrimination in inheritance
 and marriage rights. In traditional Turkmen society, however, the woman's primary
 role is as homemaker and mother, and family pressure often limits opportunities for
 women to enter outside careers and advance their education. Among practicing Mus-
 lims who seek the advice of religious authorities on matters concerning inheritance
 and proerty rights, men often take precedence over women.
 The Women's Council of Turkmenistan, a carryover from the Soviet system, ad-
 dresses issues of concern to women, and a professional businesswomen's organiza-
 tion has recently been founded. While no reliable statistics on domestic violence
 against women are available, womens' groups and medical personnel say that it is
 not a major problem. Women are subject to harassment on the streets by males, and
 such incidents may be on the increase, particularly against women of non-Turkmen
 appearance. The Government has no program specifically aimed at rectifying the
 disadvantaged position of women in Turkmen society, as it does not believe women
 suffer discrimination.
 Children.-Turkmenistan's social welfare umbrella adequately covers the welfare
 needs of children. The Government has not, however, taken effective steps to ad-
 dress the environmental and health problems that have resulted in a high rate of
 infant and maternal mortality, particularly in areas affected by the Aral Sea ecologi-
 cal disaster.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution guarantees equal rights
 and freedoms to all citizens. Turkmen comprise 72 percent of the population of
 about 4 million, Russians 9.5 percent, and Uzbeks 9 percent. There are smaller
 numbers of Kazakhs, Armenians, Azerbabanis, and many other ethnic groups. In
 1993 Turkmenistan was spared the ethnic turmoil that afflicted other parts of the
 former Soviet Union.
 As part of its nation-building efforts, the Government has attempted to foster
 Turkmen national pride, in part through its language policy. The Constitution des-
 ignates Turkmen the official language, and it is a mandatory subject in school, al-
 though not necessarily the language of instruction. The Constitution also $uarantees
 speakers of other languages the right to use them. Russian remains in common
 usage in government and commerce. The Government insists that discrimination
 against Russian speakers will not be tolerated. However, efforts to reverse past poli-
 cies that favored Russians work to the benefit of Turkmen at the expense of other
 ethnic groups and not solely ethnic Russians. Non-Turkmen fear that the designa-
 tion of Turkmen as the official language will put their children at a disadvantage
 educationally and economically. They complain with justification that some avenues
 for promotionand job advancement are no longer open to them. Only a handful of
 non-Turkmen occupy high-level government jobs, and minority government employ-
 ees are often shunted off to lesser positions than their experience and qualifications
 would warrant. The Ministry of Education, which controls access to numerous edu-
 cational opportunities and exchanges, acted in flagrant violation of equal rights in
 insisting on reserving these opportunities for ethnic Turkmen males. Higher au-
 thorities, however, overturned many of its decisions.
 
 
 1112
 
 People with Disabilities.--Government subsidies and pensions are provided for
 those with disabilities, and those capable of working are generally provided with
 jobs under still-valid preindependence policies which virtually guarantee employ.
 ment to all. According to existing legislation, facilities for the access of the disabled
 must be included in new construction projects. Compliance is not, however, com-
 plete, and most older buildings are not so equipped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Turkmenistan has inherited the Soviet system of
 government-associated trade unions. The Federation of Trade Unions claims a mem-
 bership of some 1.6 million and is divided along both sectoral and regional lines.
 Turkmenistan is not a member of the International Labor Organization (ILO). It
 has submitted an application for membership, but the ILO has not formally accept.
 ed the application.
 While no law specifically prohibits the establishment of independent unions, there
 ar no such unions, and no attempts were made to register an independent trade
 union in 1993. The state-ssonsred unions control key social benefits such as sick
 leave, health care, maternal and childcare benefits, and funeral expenses. Automatic
 deductions from payrolls to cover these benefits am transferred directly to the Fed-
 eration, raising uncertainty as to how or whether members of independent unions
 would be covered.
 The law does not prohibit strikes, but none occurred in 1993. Disputes over work-
 ing conditions and other grievances were resolved through negotiation among the
 trade union, government, and the employer (which represents, invariably, a state-
 owned enterprise).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Turkmen law does not protect
 the right to collective bargaining. The Ministry of Economics and Finance prepares
 general guidelines for wages and sets wages in health care, culture, and some other
 areas. In other sectors, it allows for some leeway at the enterprise level, taking into
 account local factors. Annual negotiations between the trade union and management
 determine specific wage and benefit packages for each factory or enterprise. Inprac-
 tice in the predominantly state-controlled economy, the close association of both the
 trade union and the enterprise with the Government seriously limits the workers'
 abilit to bargain. There am no export processsing zones.
 rhibiton of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution specifical
 hibits forced labor. No incidents of compulsory labor were reported in 1993. he
 Government has abandoned its past policy of requiring students to pick cotton at
 minimal rates of pay during the annual harvest.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 of children is 16; in a few heavy industries it is 18. The law prohibits children aged
 16 through 18 from working more than 6 hours per day (the normal workday is 8
 hours).
 Fifteen-year-old children may work only with the permission of the trade union
 and their parents this rarely is granted. Such children are permitted to work only
 4 to 6 hours per day. Violations of child labor laws occur in rural areas during the
 cotton harvesting season, when teenagers work in the fields and children less than
 10 years of age sometimes help with the harvest.
 e. Acceptable Conditions or Work.-The Government sets the national minimum
 wage quarterly, based on the cost of a market basket of commodities reviewed by
 the Ministry of Economics and Finance. On November 1, with the introduction of
 a new national currency, the Government set new minimum wages at $75 (150
 manats). This figure falls far short of the amount required to meet the needs of an
 average family. Most households, however, are multigenerational, with several
 members receiving salaries, stipends, or pensions.
 The standard legal workweek is 40 hours. Turkmenistan inherited an economic
 system with substandard working conditions from the Soviet era, when productivity
 took precedence over the health and safety of workers. Industrial workers often
 labor in an unsafe environment and are not provided proper protective equipment.
 Agricultural workers in particular are subjected to ecological health hazards. The
 Government recognizes that these problems exist but has not moved effectively to
 deal with them.
 
 Ukraine was governed in 1993 by the 1978 Constitution of the Ukrainian Soviet
 Socialist Republic, modified by the introduction of a Presidency and a multiparty
 
 
 1113
 
 system. The President, elected for a 5-year term, nominates the Prime Minister and
 members of the Cabinet, who are subject to confirmation by the Parliament. Day-
 to-day government operations are the responsibility of the Prime Minister and the
 Cabinet. The 450-member parliament, called the Supreme Rada (Council), was elect-
 ed in 1990, before Ukraine a 1991 declaration of independence and while the country
 was still dominated by the Communist Party. It is responsible for initiating legisla-
 tion, ratifying international treaties and agreements, and approving the state budg-
 et.
 A parliamentary commission formed in 1992 to prepare a new constitution, had
 not completed its work by years end. In general, 1993 was a year of increasing gov-
 ernmental and executive-legislative deadlock. As an extension of his de facto control
 over economic and administrative reforms, President Leonid Kravchuk continued to
 use his authority to appoint presidential representatives with broad powers to each
 oblast (provincial) government; the Rada curtailed some of their powers during
 1993. The ability of the legislative and 4udicial branches to function independently
 from the executive branch remained limited. In an effort to break the deadlock, the
 Rada called for early parliamentary elections in March 1994 and presidential elec-
 tions in June 1994.
 The National Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), the Ministry of Internal Affairs
 (MVD), and the Ministry of Defense all have equal status and report directly to the
 President through the Council of Ministers. The chairmen of these institutions sit
 on the Council of Ministers and simultaneously chair executive committees of the
 Council responsible for each of their ministries. The senior leadership of each of
 these services and officials in related ministries comprise the membership of these
 execative committees. The Rada confirms the appointment of each chairman after
 hearings and has established committees to advise and consult with the executive
 committees on a regular basis.
 The armed forces have largely remained outside politics. The SBU participates in
 parliamentary debate in a technical advisory capacity. Although the SBU has af-
 fected the political process with its corruption investigations against leading politi-
 cians, it has not engaged in purely partisan political activity. Human rights organi-
 zations have not reported any violations of human rights by the SBU.
 * In November 1992, the Rada granted extraordinary powers to the Prime Minister
 for reform and regulation of the economy. The Prime Minister was empowered to
 * issue economic decrees with the force of law, unless vetoed by the Rada within 10
 days. The Government used this authority to introduce small-scale privatization,
 some financial stabilization, and limited land reform. Because of the opposition of
 conservative factions to broader reforms, in May 1993 the Rada refused to extend
 the extraordinary powers. The economy did poorly in 1993: production in state-
 owned industries declined rapidly while state subsidies increased, the budget deficit
 jumped, the    currency  remained   unstabilized, and  the  economy    fell into
 hypenfain
 The human rights picture remains mixed. While there are few significant viola-
 tions, the populace as a whole lacks an understanding of its human rights. The 1991
 law on the rights of ethnic minorities (enhanced by the 1992 law on national minori-
 ties) guarantees persons belonging to ethnic minorities the right to schools and cul-
 tural facilities and the use of their languages in business and official correspond-
 ence. While some ethnic tension persists, particularly between Ukrainians and Rus-
 sians in Crimea, Ukraine has been remarkably free of interethnic antagonism and
 conflict. There is residual anti-Semitism. Other human rights problems include con-
 tinuing restrictions on freedom of the press and unreformed Soviet-era prison and
 legal systems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Several political killings (of officers
 of the Black Sea fleet and a political candidate) were alleged to have occurred in
 Crimea in late 1993. Some accused the Government of participating in these killings
 and of refusing to conduct thorough and timely investigations. At year's end, there
 was no conclusive evidence that the killings were politically motivated or that they
 were perpetrated by government agencies.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported incidents of abductions or disappear-
 ances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The 1978 Constitution prohibits torture. However, police beatings occasionally occur,
 and there is no mechanism for refistering complaints about mistreatment or for ob-
 taining redress. Visitors to Ukrainian prisons describe conditions as severely sub-
 
 
 1114
 
 standard. Prisons are overcrowded, with the number of prisoners sometimes four
 times capacity. Because of poor hygenic conditions and inadequate diet, full-scale
 riots have erupted. Prison authorities and the MVD have done little to reform pris-
 on conditions and have also refused to discuss the subject with foreign governments,
 other Ukrainian government bodies, human rights groups, or Ukrainian civic orga-
 nizations.
 The Ukrainian psychiatric community has begun to adopt more humane methods
 of treatment. Some in the Government support the adoption of less coercive and de-
 grading modes of treatment. Despite the resource constraints imposed by the eco-
 nomic crisis, efforts to improve medical training, hospital conditions, patients'
 rights, and legal norms are proceeding
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reported cases in 1993 of
 arbitrary arrest or detention of persons. Ukraine has only slightly amended its So-
 viet-era law on detentions. A person suspected of a crime may be detained for 3 days
 without warrant. A prosecutor must issue an arrest order permitting detention be-
 yond 3 days. The maximum period of detention after charges have been filed could
 be as much as 1V2 years. The law permits citizens to appeal the legality of an arrest
 either to the court or to the prosecutor. As citizens gain a better understanding of
 their rights under a 1992 law, they are increasingly filing appeals with the courts.
 The authorities have dismissed individual officials for not adering to legal guide-
 lines. There is no bail system, although once charges are filed the court may release
 the defendant on his own recognizance.
 A judge must initiate a trial within 3 weeks from the time charges are filed, a
 limit that not always met in practice. In the overloaded court system, months may
 pass before a defendant is brought to court. The law provides for a detainee's access
 to a defense attorney from the moment of detention or the filing of charges, which-
 ever comes first. To protect the defendant, each investigative file must contain a
 document signed by the defendant and his counsel attesting that the defendant's
 rights were explained to him in the presence of an attorney. An appeals court may
 dismiss a conviction or order a new trial if this document is missing.
 As defendants became aware of their rights, they increasingly took advantage of
 the changes in criminal procedure. However, many still do not know about, and
 therefore cannot avail themselves of, these procedures. Defense attorneys' fees also
 have become prohibitively expensive.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Ukrainian court system follows the Soviet
 model. Aside from a December 1991 law modifying the Ukrainian system of prosecu-
 tion and a June 1992 law creating the Constitutional Court, there has not been
 major structural reform. All the candidates selected by the Government for the Con-
 stitutional. Court refused appointments, and the Court has not been able to begin
 work.
 The courts are undifferentiated as to function. In the same day judes may hear
 criminal, civil, and juvenile cases. The courts are organized on three evels: rayon
 courts (regional, also known as people's courts); oblast (provincial) courts; and the
 Supreme Court. All may act as the court of first instance depending on the severity
 of the crime. A case heard in the first instance by the Supreme Court, therefore,
 may not be appealed or reviewed. There are no clear rules to determine which court
 first hears a case. As a rule, military tribunals handle cases involving military per-
 sonnel only.
 Prosecutors, like the courts, are organized into offices at the rayon, oblast, and
 republic levels. They are ultimately responsible to the Prosecutor General appointed
 by the Rada. Prosecutors and defense attorneys have equal status before the courts.
 Prosecutors still are very influential in court proceedings. The prosecutor directs the
 Security Service in an investigation or uses the investigative resources of the pros-
 ecutor's office.
 While the defendant is presumed innocent and tried before a panel of judges, con-
 viction rates have not changed from the Soviet era. Nearly 99 percent of cases end
 in convictions. However, the structure of the system is such that judges frequently
 send back for additional investigation those cases unlikely to end in convictions.
 These cases are then sometimes dropped or closed, occasionally without informing
 the court or the defendant. Consequently, convictions rates are a somewhat mislead-
 ng statistic.
 Oblast and Supreme Court judges may not be members of political parties and
 must have at least 5 years of legal experience. The Rada selects judges on the basis
 of recommendations from the Ministry of Justice which are based in part on exam-
 ination results. The chief prosecutor and deputy chief prosecutor are nominated by
 the President and confirmed by Parliament. State and local prosecutors are ap-
 pointed by the chief prosecutor. Many current judges and prosecutors were ap-
 
 
 1115
 pointed in Soviet times when political influence pervaded the Judicial system. It is
 unclear how free the judiciary now is from influence and intimidation by the execu-
 tive branch of government. At the oblast level especially, judges, prosecutors, and
 other court officials appear to remain closely attuned to local government interests.
 f. Arbitray Interference with Privacy, Family. Home or Correspondence.-The
 SBU may conduct intrusive surveillance and searces without a warrant on national
 security grounds. Human rights observers report receiving no complaints of invasion
 of privacy by the SBU. According to the SBU charter, persons subject to surveillance
 must be informed after a month's time. The Prosecutor General's office has over-
 sight responsibility over the SBU and is utilizing its authority to monitor its activi-
 ties and to curb excesses by security officials. In the past, excesses have included
 overzealous surveillance and searches, and unwarranted detentions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-A 1991 Ukrainian law purports to protect free-
 dom of speech and press. However, there are significant impediments to the exercise
 of these freedoms, and the 1991 law only covers printed media. Criticism of the Gov-
 ernment is tolerated, but lack of independent funding and of public support for inde-
 pendent media make it difficult for opposition leaders to disseminate their views
 widely. Most newspapers continue to receive state subsidies, a form of indirect con-
 trol over their activities. While no direct government censorship mechanism exists,
 official newspapers in the past have been reluctant to publish antigovernment edi-
 torials or information that could offend the Government because of the ingrained
 habit of following the party line formed during Soviet times.
 In December opposition parties and candidates asserted that the Government re-
 duced media availability and access for candidates for public office. One paper criti-
 cal of the Government was closed for nonpayment of debt to the state monopoly en-
 terprise selling newsprint. The editor of the most popular newspaper in Ukraine,
 ,also critical of the Government (and the opposition), was replaced with a more
 progovernment editor. The parent company asserts that the editor was replaced be-
 cause the newspaper was 12 billion karbvontni in debt to the State. Opposition
 politicians claim that the parent company, subject to pressure from the Government,
 actually was practicing self-censorship. Official publications, heavily subsidized de-
 spite the economic crisis, continue to publish without hindrance.
 A recent Ukrainian decree placed newsprint in the category of a strategic mate-
 rial, giving the Government control over the distribution of all paper. The President,
 in announcing the decree, stated that this would enable the Government to ensure
 equal distribution of paper to all government and independent newspapers in a time
 ofshortage. Generally, paper shortages appear to affect all papers regardless of po-
 litical orientation.
 In the second half of 1993, press criticism of the Government was more open, no-
 tably regarding the Government's economic program and policy toward Russia.
 A new threat to free and open discussion of issues came from criminal elements
 and organized crime. This is an aspect of Ukrainian life that has grown dramati-
 cally, nearly undeterred by the Government, since independence. Some journalists
 and editors report they fear reprisals from criminal elements if they expose how
 Ukrainian organized crime has come to control much of private and governmental
 life.
 No law protects or defines the role of government in the electronic media. In the
 state-sponsored broadcast media, the Government has been known to restrict dis-
 cussion of such domestic problems as inter-Orthodox Church squabbles. Several pri-
 vate Ukrainian television channels rebroadcast uncensored foreign news programs
 and create their own programming. Foreign broadcasts are received without inter-
 ference. Russian broadcast media are more popular than their Ukrainian counter-
 parts and frequently criticize the Ukrainian Government. , e.nior government offi-
 cials are highly critical of the Russian media, but the Government does not attempt
 to jam Russian broadcasts.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law on public assembly,
 which dates from 1989, stipulates that organizations must apply or permission to
 the respective local administration 10 days before a planned demonstration. Partici-
 pants in demonstrations are prohibited by law from instigating violence or ethnic
 conflict and from calling for the violent overthrow of the constitutional order. Dem-
 onstrations may not interfere with traffic, take part near the Rada when it is in
 session, or otherwise hinder municipal life. In Kiev permits are routinely granted.
 Unlicensed demonstrations, including demonstrations and hunger strikes at the
 Parliament building when the Rada is in session, often occur without police inter-
 ference.
 
 
 1116
 The 1992 law on public organizations prohibits the State from financing political
 parties and other public organizations. According to the law, political parties may
 not receive funds from abroad or maintain accounts in foreign banks. The law pro-
 hibits organizations advocating the violent overthrow of the Government and con-
 stitutional order or undermining Ukraine's state security by collaboration with other
 states. Political parties are barred from having administrative or organizational
 structures abroad. The law prohibits police, members of the armed forces, and exec-
 utive branch officials from joining political parties, but many such individuals none-
 theless publicly associate themselves with specific parties.
 Political parties may be dissolved only by a court decision. The Supreme Court
 may dissolve a party for advocating the overthrow of the State, for anti-Ukrainian
 activities, for violating or advocating the violation of the constitutional rights of citi-
 zens, or for urging citizens not to honor their constitutional duties. Because there
 have been no dissolutions since independence, the criteria are not yet set by prece-
 dent. The Communist Party of Ukraine, a subsidiary of the former Communist
 Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), was banned immediately after the coup attempt
 of 1991, and many Communists participated in establishing the Socialist Party of
 Ukraine. In December 1993, the Government reregistered the Communist Party.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1991 law on freedom of conscience and religion per-
 mits religious organizations to establish places of worship and train clergy. Reli-
 gious organizations are required to register with local authorities and with the Gov-
 ernment s Council of Religious Affairs. As a rule, the registration process lasts about
 1 month. The State has not interfered with the registration of minority religions
 (e.., Islam, Mormon, Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Church of the Nazarene).
 Obstacles to complete religious freedom still exist at the local level where in some
 places the bureaucracy has delayed registration of religious organizations. However,
 a Ukrainian religious organization may not be denied registration. Any Ukrainian
 group representing itself as a church can apply for registration. While technically
 no curch has been denied registration to date, the application of the Ukrainian
 Autocephalous Orthodox Church has not been acted upon for over a year, pending'
 the resolution of very contentious property issues between Ukrainian communions.
 Churches are permitted to maintain links with coreligionists in other countries.
 Religious publications are freely allowed. Greek Catholic, Orthodox, and Jewish
 services are televised on major religious holidays. Easter and Christmas are official
 holidays. Religious groups are allowed to proselytize and distribute Bibles and other
 religious publications.
 An amendment to the 1991 law, passed by the Rada on December 23, 1993, raised
 religious freedom concerns. President Kravchuk, as of the end of the year, had not
 signed this legislation. The amendment in question states: "Clergymen, religious
 preachers, teachers, other representatives of foreign organizations who are foreign
 citizens and come to visit temporarily in Ukraine may preach religious doctrines,
 administer religious ordinances, or practice other canonic activities only in those re-
 ligious organizations which invited them to Ukraine and with official approval of the
 governmental body that has registered the statutes (and) the articles of the perti-
 nent religious organization." This amendment could be used to restrict the activities
 of non-native Ukrainian religious organizations.
 Some government officials, citing a desire to preserve Ukrainian culture, have
 stated that restrictions on the activities of non-native religious organizations would
 be appropriate.
 Religious education classes are permitted in public schools as an extracurricular
 activity. The Greek Catholic and Orthodox churches have seminaries. Jewish reli-
 ious schools (yeshivas) operate in Kiev, L'viv, Odesa, Kharkiv, Uman, and
 Vinytsia.
 Jews in Ukraine have expanded opportunities to pursue their religious and cul-
 tural activities, but anti-Semitic incidents continue to occur. In September a Jewish
 leader's home was set on fire, and another leader received anonymous death threats.
 Jewish cemeteries in Cherkasy oblast were desecrated by construction authorized by
 local authorities that resulted in remains being unearthed. The authorities re-
 sponded to protests by halting the construction. In addition, several synagogues
 were restored to Jewish communities, and approvals were given for the construction
 of new ones.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Ukraine continues to require its citizens to register with a local Visas
 and Registration Office (OVIR), a Soviet-era relic. In 1993 Ukraine dropped its re-
 quirement for exit visas, and all citizens are eligible for passports that permit free
 travel abroad. Passports issued before independence must be submitted for certifi-
 cation of citizenship status.
 
 
 1117
 Ukraine assures the right of return for all those it considers its citizens. Persons
 born in Ukraine and living in Ukraine at the time of independence are considered
 citizens. The right of return is available to people of Ukrainian descent who left the
 country prior to independence and did not assume other citizenship. Dual citizen-
 ship is not permitted. In mid-1992 the Government issued a statement allowing all
 those born in Ukraine to receive a document from any Ukrainian diplomatic mission
 abroad that would serve as a travel document to Ukraine.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The peaceful, democratic transfer of power from an incumbent government to an
 opposition party has yet to be tested. The present Rada was elected under the Soviet
 system and during Communist party domination. On September 24, the Rada, al-
 ready rendered ineffective by a continuing deadiock with the Government, voted to
 hold early elections for a new p resident and a new Rada. The parliamentary elec-
 tions are scheduled for March 27, 1994, and presidential elections are to be held on
 June 26, 1994. However, a new law on elections has yet to be adopted. The right
 to vote is granted to all adult citizens regardless of nationality religion or sex.
 In 1992 the Rada gave extraordinary powers to President Kravchui and tempo-
 rarily (until May 1993) relinquished its powers to the Prime Minister in a number
 of crucial economic areas. The Rada recovered those powers from the Prime Minister
 in May 1993 without a serious confrontation with the executive branch.
 President Kravchuk continues to dominate political life. During 1992, at
 Kravchuk's request, the Rada passed a law on "presidential representation" which
 gives the President authority to appoint a representative to each oblast. The law
 gave the representative broad powers over local government and further con-
 centrated political power in the executive branch. In many cases, presidential rep-
 resentatives used these powers to promote reform in oblasts and cities. In 1993,
 however, the Rada, many of whose members were alarmed at the pace of reform
 or at the growth of presidential authority, successfully curtailed the powers of presi-
 dential representatives. The effect was to slow economic reforms.
 Deputies to the Rada, as well as the members of oblast councils, were elected to
 5-year terms in 1990, before independence. Most of the deputies at both the national
 and local levels are conservatives drawn from the Communist Party nomenclatura.
 A number of reform-minded Communist deputies formed new parties or joined
 forces with the opposition, and the Rada is now divided about equally between the
 conservatives and the opposition coalition of nationalists and reform-oriented depu-
 ties.
 The Rada continues to debate the provisions of a new constitution but there is
 no clear timetable for its adoption. The division of power between tie legislature
 and the executive has yet to be determined. Many deputies have criticized the draft
 for gving the President too much authority. A coalition of democratic forces, includ-
 ingRukh and a political alliance, New Ukraine, spearheaded a campaign to hold
 a popular referendum on the President and the Rada that eventually led to the
 Rada s decision to call early parliamentary and presidential elections.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed local and international human rights groups to operate
 freely. The Union of Councils for Soviet Jews has an active office in Kiev, staffed
 with local human rights monitors. The Government also welcomed visits by foreign
 human rights organizations. The U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation im
 Europe was invited to observe the independence referendum (later canceled) and
 presidential elections.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and other grounds is prohibited in the
 Constitution.
 Women.-There are reports of violence against women, often involving the high
 incidence of alcoholism, but no statistics are available. Ukrainian labor law guaran-
 tees all work-related rights to women as well as men. Although equal pay for equal
 work is the law, women are seldom seen in high-level managerial positions or in
 high political office. However, educational opportunities for women are improving,
 and more women are entering the legal, medical, and journalism professions.
 Women may be the chief victims of unemployment caused by the economic crisis.
 Some estimates indicate that women account for 90 percent of the unemployed.
 There is poor understanding of the meaning of discrimination against women and
 no widespread women's rights activity.
 
 
 1118
 There is a lack of awareness of spouse abuse and other violence against women
 as a women's rights issue. There are no separate statistics on prosecutions for wife
 beating or on average sentences. Some sources assert that the low incidence of re-
 ported crimes against women is evidence that violence against women is not a prob-
 lem. However, other sources assert that women may not report crimes against them
 because they perceive the legal system to be ineffective and inhospitable. Govern-
 ment officials have acknowledged that women are often pressured by authorities to
 dro charges against their husbands to preserve the family.
 Ch=e.--Government officials assert that the Government is committed to chil-
 dren's rights. Because of the deepening economic crisis, the Government has taken
 few specific steps to further a children's rights agenda. Much of the social welfare
 system is dedicated -to the support of children, including supplemental state pay-
 ments to families with children, generous postpartum paid leave benefits, numerous
 children's hospitals, and universal free education at aI levels.
 . National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although a 1989 law promotes Ukrainian as
 -the state language, the November 1991 law on the rights of national minorities al-
 lows individual citizens to use their respective nationa languages in conducting per-
 sonal business. Laws and decrees are published in both Russian and Ukrainian. In
 areas where there are large Russian minorities (Crimea and eastern Ukraine), Rus-
 sian is permitted as a language of official correspondence alongside Ukrainian and
 is also the language of instruction in schools. Russian is recognized as the official
 language of Crimea. Elsewhere, the Russian minority complained of language dis-
 crimination. There was no evidence of serious Russian-Ukrainian ethnic tension ex-
 cept in Crimea, where the Ukrainian minority complains of discrimination by the
 Russian majority, and in some parts of western Ukraine, where local Ukrainian na-
 tionalists discriminate agais the minority Russian population.
 Some Russians (and Ukrainians) in Ukraine have complained about the increased
 use of Ukrainian (the official state language) in schools and in the media. The Rus-
 sian-spaking people of easiern Ukraine have claimed that their children are forced
 to take Ukrainian-language tests, and their poor showings on these tests negatively
 affect their scholastic careers. It is up to the municipaity, not the central Govern-
 ment, to determine the language of instruction in the schools. The draft constitution
 also guarantees local minorities the choice of language in public and private life.
 Polish, Hungarian, and other ethnic minorities have been granted sites for schools
 and cultural organizations. While there may be some isolated cases of discrimina-
 tion against ethnic Russians, the majority of Ukrainian citizens do not appear to
 differentiate between Ukrainian and Russian ethnicity.
 The Ukrainian citizenship law confers the same legal status on all citizens regard-
 less of ethnic affiliation. However, it does not recognize dual citizenship, unless spe-
 cifically guaranteed by a bilateral treaty. Russia and Ukraine, for example, have no
 bilateral treaty on this subject, although Russia has repeatedly urged Ukraine to
 discuss dual citizenship. In 1991 the Rada amended the citizenship law to remove
 notations in passports identifying citizens by ethnicity and religion.
 E~eligious Minorities.-Jews are the second largest minority in Ukraine. Emigra-
 tion to the West and Israel has resulted in a decline in their population. Despite
 government statements denouncing anti-Semitism, manifestations of it continue, ex-
 emplified by the growth of an ultranationalist extremist group in western Ukraine
 which professes strong anti-Semitic s.intiment. The group applied for recognition as
 a political party, but the Government refused to register it. Distribution of anti-Se-
 mitic posters and literature appeared to increase during the year.
 People with Disabilities.-By law, no discrimination based on disability is per-
 mitted; however, persons with disabilities are rarely employed. In the present eco-
 nomic crisis with high unemployment, there are no effective governmental programs
 targeted at increasing opportunities for the disabled. Public facilities are poorly
 adapted for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Soviet law, or pertinent parts of the 1978 Ukrainian
 Constitution, continue to regulate the activities of trade unions. The law on citizens'
 organizations passed in 1992 guarantees noninterference by public authorities in
 the activities of citizens' organizations and the right of these organizations to estab-
 lish and join federations, and to affiliate with international organizations on a vol-
 untary basis. A new constitution and new law on trade unions are being debated
 which will affect the future status and activities of trade unions. In principle, all
 workers and civil servants (including members of the armed forces) are free to form
 unions. In practice, the Government discourages certain categories of workers (e.g.,
 nuclear power plant employees) from doing so.
 
 
 1119
 A successor to the former official Soviet trade unions, the official Ukrainian trade
 union, known as the Federation of Trade Unions (FTU), has begun to work inde-
 pendently of the Government and has been vocal in opposing draft legislation that
 would restrict the right to strike. The FTU is considered a partner with manage-
 ment in the running of state enterprises. The Government provides this organiza.
 tion with office buildings and resort properties. The FTU has no official or legal re-
 lationship with the Socialist Party of Ukraine.
 Many independent Ukrainian unions now provide an alternative to the official
 unions in most sectors of the economy. Some, such as the Independent Miners'
 Union of Ukraine (NPGU), emerged out of the 1989 strike committees and were in-
 strumental in creating the independent miners' unions of the U.S.S.R. but broke
 away when Ukraine became independent. Independent unions were established in
 the Black Sea fleet, among the military officers of Ukraine, and among the scientific
 workers of the academy of sciences. In early 1992, the NPGU, pilots, civil air dis-
 patchers, locomotive engineers, and aviation ground crews unions formed the Con-
 sultative Council of Free Trade Unions. This entity acts independently of the FTU.
 In negotiating wages, the Government has invited all unions, not just the FTU, to
 participate.
 The law on labor conflict resolution guarantees the right to strike to all but mem-
 bers of the armed forces, civil and security services, and employees of "continuing
 process plants" (e.g., metallurgical factories). The law prohibits strikes that "may in-
 fringe on the basic needs of the population" (e.g., rail and air transportation).
 Strikes based on political demands are illegal. However, this did not stop miners
 and transportation workers from making political as well as economic demands dur-
 ing their September strike. The law forbids penalizing union members who partici-
 pate in strikes. The Government has relied on the courts to deal with strikes that
 it feels have violated the law. The courts, however, have not always ruled in favor
 of government views.
 There are no official restrictions on the right of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national trade union bodies; the NPGU is a member of the International Miners'
 Union. The American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations has
 a permanent representative in Kiev who interacts freely with the Consultative
 Council of Independent Trade Unions. Independent unions have not been pressured
 to limit their contacts with international nongovernmental organizations.
 In October a leader of one of the independent labor organizations alleged that the
 Security Sevice seized documents relating to international activities and detained
 a union official responsible for international affairs. While the union official remains
 in custody, due to the lack of bail in the Ukrainian system, this incident appears
 to be an isolated case which may involve criminal activity. No similar reports of har-
 assment, before or after this incident, have been noted.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-In accordance with the law
 on enterprises, joint worker-management commissions should resolve issues con-
 cerning wages, working conditions, and the rights and duties of management at the
 enterprise level, a system that is not clearly defined. Overlapping spheres of respon-
 sibility frequently impede the collective bargaining process. Wages in each indus-
 trial sector are established by government agreements with trade unions. All unions
 are invited to participate in the negotiations. The law on labor conflict resolution
 introduced another bureaucracy, the National Mediation and Reconciliation Service,
 to mitigate labor-management disputes that cannot be resolved at the enterprise
 level. The President appoints the head of this service.
 Collective bargaining law prejudices the bargaining process against the independ-
 ent trade unions and favors the official unions. The collective bargaining law pro-
 vides for dues to be taken from the pay of every worker in a collective and paid
 to the official union. The social welfare benefits of workers paid by an enterprise
 are administered for the enterprise by the official union.
 Most workers are never informed that they are not obligated to join the official
 union, and joining an independent union can be bureaucratically onerous. Three
 steps must be followed to direct one's dues to an independent union. First, the work-
 er must submit a form to the official union stating that the worker does not wish
 the official union to represent the worker. Second, the worker must submit a form
 to the independent union declaring the worker's desire to join the independent
 union. Finally, a third form must be submitted to the enterprise directing that pay-
 roll deductions be given to the indpendent union. Independent unions are not given
 resoures to administer social welfare benefits. Enterprise directors discourage de-
 partures from the offical union by meeting with workers to discuss the benefits of
 official union membership.
 
 
 1120
 
 The collective bargaining law prohibits antiunion discrimination. The courts re-
 solve disputes under that law. There have been cases in which such disputes have
 not been resolved in a fair and equitable manner.
 There are no export processing zones in Ukraine.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids compul-
 sory labor, and it is not known to exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 17. However, in certain nonhazardous industries, enterprises can negotiate with the
 Government to hire employees between 15 and 17 years of age. Education is compul-
 sory up to age 15. The Ministry of Education vigorously enforces the law on edu-
 cation.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In 1992 the Government established a country-
 wide minimum wage. Prior to the onset of high inflation, the minimum wage and
 numerous other mandatory subsidies provided a decent income for a family. How.
 ever, monthly inflation rose dramatically during 1993, beginning at about 40 per-
 cent in January, according to unofficial estimates, and reaching about 70 percent
 in December. This hyperinflation has seriously eroded incomes, and over half the
 population of Ukraine now lives below the poverty level, with further declines ex-
 ected. In theory, the current law on wages, pensions, and social security provides
 or mechanisms to index the minimum wage to inflation.
 The Labor Code provides for a maximum 41-hour workweek and at least 15 work-
 days of paid vacation per year. Ukrainian labor law provides for at least one 24-
 hour rest period per week. Economic stagnation in some industries (e.g., defense)
 have significantly reduced the workweek for some categories of workers. Gross
 undercompensation for overtime work in some sectors (e.g., railroad workers) has
 resulted in strikes.
 The Constitution and other laws contain occupational safety and health stand-
 ards, but these are frequently ignored in practice. Lax safety conditions were the
 principal causes of two serious mine accidents that occurred in the summer of 1992,
 resulting in dozens of casualties. In theory, workers have the legal right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardizing continued emloy-
 ment. In reality, however, labor experts say that continued employment would be
 in question. The Labor Ministry is currently rewriting the mine safety law. The
 NPGU is demanding that the Government improve worker safety in the mines.
