Turkmenistan
Turkmenistan remains one of the most repressive countries in the world, despite
a change in leadership brought about by the death of president-for-life
Saparmurat Niazov in December 2006. The new president, Gurbanguly
Berdymukhamedov, has taken steps to reverse some of the most ruinous social
policies of Niazov’s rule and to end the country’s international isolation. But the
human rights situation in Turkmenistan remains disastrous, and the government
has yet to commit to a reform agenda that guarantees fundamental rights.
New President
Berdymukhamedov, formerly a deputy prime minister and health minister, was
named acting president upon Niazov’s death, and on February 11, 2007, he was
elected president. The election was neither free nor fair: five low-ranking “alternative”
candidates ran against Berdymukhamedov, but no opposition leaders were
able to return from exile abroad to stand as candidates, and all candidates represented
the country’s sole political party.
To his credit, after his election Berdymukhamedov announced a number of
reforms, including reinstating pensions and social allowances and restoring the
tenth year of secondary education and the five-year course of university-level education.
Persecution of Civil Society Activists
On December 17, 2006, environmental activist Andrei Zatoka was arrested in
Dashaguz. He was charged with possession of firearms and poison, but the arrest
appears to have been motivated by his contacts with environmental groups
abroad. As a result of intense international pressure, Zatoka was ultimately given
a three-year suspended sentence in January 2007.
The new government has continued to harass and persecute civil society actors
and independent media. The unofficial ban on registering independent nongovernmental
organizations remains in effect, and these groups face ongoing
harassment.
During the year, government agents prevented activists from meeting with visiting
international delegations. In February six persons were warned not to leave their
homes during a visit to Turkmenistan by a delegation of the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe’s (OSCE) Parliamentary Assembly. Three
activists reported that their telephone lines did not work and that Ministry of
National Security agents waited in cars parked close to the activists’ homes the
day of the visit. This intimidation was repeated several days later, during a visit by
EU Special Representative for Central Asia Pierre Morel. Similarly, one activist was
held at the Ministry of National Security (MNB) for an entire day during the visit of
the United Nations high commissioner for human rights in May.
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information
The new government continues to severely limit free expression and to harass
those who express their peaceful opinions or seek independent sources of information,
as well as to use a variety of means to intimidate and impede the work of
independent journalists. The government continues to restrict much foreign
media access to the country.
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) reported the ongoing harassment and
surveillance of its correspondents by security officials. At least seven RFE/RL correspondents
had their land-line and mobile telephones blocked during the
spring. On April 26 the son of an RFE/RL correspondent and his girlfriend were
detained and questioned for eight hours in Ashgabat; the woman was threatened
with unspecified consequences should she marry the correspondent.
In April an independent journalist, Sona Chuli-Kuli, was barred from leaving
Turkmenistan to attend the Eurasian Media Forum in Almaty, Kazakhstan. She
was taken to the MNB, where she was held for three days and questioned about
the contents of her computer’s hard drive. The hard drive was confiscated for
examination and returned to her only after she signed a statement promising not
to cooperate with international media. Human Rights Watch is aware of two other
cases in which journalists were subjected to similar intimidation.
Despite Berdymukhamedov’s pledge early in his presidency to increase access to
the internet, the state does not permit independent service providers. Most websites that contain information perceived to be critical of the government are
blocked. Security services reportedly visit internet cafes and intimidate customers.
Freedom of Religion
Forum 18, an independent, international religious freedom group, has reported a
rise in arrests, deportations, raids, and threats against religious minorities since
Niazov’s death.
Some individuals have been arrested and harassed simply for their peaceful religious
expression, according to Forum 18. On May 14, 2007, Vyacheslav
Kalataevsky, a Turkmenistan-born Baptist with Ukrainian citizenship, was sentenced
to three years in a labor camp. Although charged with illegal border crossing,
his family reports that most of the questions asked of him during pretrial
interrogations related to his religious activities. Russian citizen Yevgeny Potolov, a
Baptist pastor arrested with Kalataevsky, was expelled from Turkmenistan in early
July after having been detained for seven weeks. Although the grounds for his
deportation remain unclear, Potolov reported that while he was detained, officials
of the MNB reported to the Migration Service that he was a “dangerous person,”
an accusation he rejects. On August 12 local officials in the city of Turkmenbashi
also threatened to deport Potolov’s wife and children.
Members of a Protestant church near the northeastern town of Turkmenabat
reportedly had their houses raided by local officials and secret police on May 20.
On the following two days, public meetings were held at which church members
were humiliated and warned to stop attending Protestant services. Local government
representatives accused the believers of “conducting criminal activity and
political action against the government.”
Freedom of Movement
The government under President Berdymukhamedov has softened some restrictions
on freedom of movement. In July 2007 it formally abolished the requirement
that residents wishing to travel to closed areas along the border obtain prior government
permission. At least seven individuals are known to have been removed from the list of people forbidden from travel abroad. Nonetheless, numerous people,
including journalists, religious minorities, and perceived dissidents and their
relatives, remain on a blacklist banning them from leaving the country. While it is
difficult to estimate the exact number of people forbidden from foreign travel,
knowledgeable sources believe the number to be in the thousands.
Political Prisoners
Large numbers of prisoners who were convicted in closed, unfair trials during the
Niazov era are still believed to be imprisoned. During 2007 Berdymukhamedov
granted two presidential pardons that affected approximately 9,000 prisoners.
Among those released were 15 persons believed to have been sentenced on politically
motivated charges, as well as more than 10 relatives of dissidents and former
high-ranking officials. They included Nasrullah Ibn Ibadullah, the former chief
mufti of Turkmenistan, who had been serving a 22-year sentence on politically
motivated charges of involvement in a 2002 plot to assassinate Niazov. However,
well-known Niazov-era political prisoners including Mukhametkuli Aymuradov,
Annakurban Amanklychev, and Sapardurdy Khajiev, remain deprived of their liberty.
Dozens of prisoners are held incommunicado. The fate of imprisoned former
foreign minister Boris Shikhmuradov and former ambassador to the OSCE Batyr
Berdiev remains unknown, although Berdymukhamedov told an audience at New
York’s Colombia University in September he was “positive that they are alive.”
Politically motivated arrests continue to be a concern under Berdymukhamedov.
Ovezgeldy Ataev, the constitutionally designated successor to Niazov as interim
president, was removed from succession in December 2006 and imprisoned on
charges of driving a relative to attempt suicide.
The government has taken no steps to investigate credible allegations of torture
or to outline a process for reviewing the convictions that are the basis for ongoing
imprisonment for thousands. No independent investigation has been conducted
into the 2006 death in custody of human rights defender Olgusapar Muradova.
Key International Actors
In contrast to previous years of self-imposed isolation, the new president demonstrated
a willingness to engage with the international community. This greater
openness presented a significant opportunity to press specific reform, such as
the release of all political prisoners—an opportunity the many foreign diplomatic
visitors to Turkmenistan during 2007 have largely squandered.
The government continues to refuse access to places of detention for any independent
national or international observers, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross. With the exception of the special rapporteur for religious
freedom, it has failed to extend invitations to the special procedures of the
United Nations Human Rights Council that have requested to visit Turkmenistan,
including those on torture, education, health, human rights defenders, independence
of judges and lawyers, the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and
on arbitrary detention.
The European Union held a first round of its newly established human rights dialogue
with Turkmenistan in September, in the framework of the EU’s new Central
Asia strategy, but it failed publicly to articulate any specific human rights reforms
it intended to advance through this dialogue. Rights issues were raised during
Berdymukhamedov’s November visit to Brussels, though no benchmarks for
progress were set.
The United States government increased its engagement with the government of
Turkmenistan after the death of Niazov, including on issues of human rights concern.
The US Department of State’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
continued to cite serious human rights violations in Turkmenistan. In August the
Turkmen government received a delegation from the US Commission for
International Religious Freedom, which considers Turkmenistan a “country of particular
concern” and which sought to assess the government’s commitments to
improve human rights, in particular the right to freedom of religion. At this writing
the report of the visit has not been made public.