Turkmenistan
In 2010 the Turkmenistan government continued a return to the repressive methods
of a previous era. President Gurbanguly Berdymukhamedov has ruled
Turkmenistan for nearly four years, since the 2006 death of dictator Saparmurad
Niazov. During his first two years in office, Berdymukhamedov began to reverse
some of Niazov’s most ruinous social policies. But then his course appeared to
reverse. The government increasingly repressed NGOs and Turkmen activists, and
prevented citizens from leaving the country; indeed freedom of movement sharply
declined in 2009 and 2010. Instead of continuing needed reforms in education in
2010, the government introduced burdensome requirements for students seeking
to travel abroad for university, and allowed “Ruhnama” (The Book of the Soul),
Niazov’s propaganda book, to remain a subject in university entrance exams.
Instead of expanding access to the internet and other media, the government
blocked websites and banned the import of some printed materials. Prisons
remained closed to the outside for observation. Turkmenistan continued to
expand relations with foreign governments and international organizations, but
with no meaningful outcomes for human rights.
Civil Society
The repressive atmosphere makes it extremely difficult for independent NGOs to
operate. Almost no organizations have applied for registration in recent years.
On September 30, 2010, Berdymukhamedov instructed the Ministry of National
Security to lead an “uncompromising fight against those who slander our democratic…
secular state.” His speech came the day after a satellite channel broadcast
an interview with exiled Turkmen activist Farid Tukhbatullin, chair of the
Vienna-based Turkmen Initiative for Human Rights (TIHR). In subsequent days
hackers disabled the website of the TIHR, and there were credible threats that the
Turkmen security services planned to physically harm Tukhbatullin.
In June 2010, the authorities in Turkmenistan began questioning the former classmates
and teachers of Tukhbatullin’s sons. At least three were threatened with
treason charges if they maintained ties with the family.
In December 2009 Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) decided to close its
Turkmenistan office after the Turkmen authorities repeatedly rejected project proposals,
making it impossible for the organization to carry out its work in the country.
MSF was the last remaining international humanitarian organization operating
in Turkmenistan.
Within Turkmenistan, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations can carry out seminars and offer technical assistance,
but little more.
In 2010, for the third year in a row, the Turkmen delegation tried to bar exiled
Turkmen activists from registering for the OSCE human dimension review conference
and walked out when the activists were admitted to the conference.
Media Freedoms
There continues to be a complete absence of media freedoms. Almost all print
and electronic media are controlled by the state. Reporters from foreign media
outlets often cannot access the country and, in recent years, local stringers for
foreign outlets have been beaten, harassed, and otherwise intimidated.
Many websites are blocked, internet cafes require visitors to present their passports,
and the government monitors electronic communications.
It is extremely difficult to obtain foreign newspapers and magazines with any
political content. Border guards are known to confiscate foreign printed materials.
In August 2010 Berdymukhamedov stated that there were enough publications
issued in Turkmenistan to “satisfy domestic demand,” so “there is no need to
import any,” indicating that access to foreign publications would remain limited.
Freedom of Movement
Turkmen authorities arbitrarily interfere with people’s right to travel abroad
through an informal and arbitrary system of travel bans, commonly imposed on
activists and relatives of exiled dissidents.
On July 16, 2010, Turkmen border officials stopped Umida Jumbaeva, an activist,
from leaving the country for Kazakhstan. Jumbaeva had helped environmental
activist Andrei Zatoka in 2009, when he was arrested on false charges, given an
unfair trial, and expelled from Turkmenistan. On June 28, Turkmen authorities
barred civic activists Annamamed and Elena Miatiev from traveling abroad for
medical treatment. Following an international outcry the couple was allowed to
depart on July 10.
For years Radio Liberty stringer Gurbansoltan Achilova and her family endured
various forms of harassment by the authorities and were barred from foreign travel.
Her son Mukhammetmyrat, who had repeatedly been denied permission to
travel abroad, committed suicide on June 12, 2010. One month later the family
received a letter from the Turkmen migration services granting him permission to
travel.
In 2009, the authorities prevented hundreds of students bound for foreign private
universities from leaving the country, and introduced new, burdensome requirements
for studying abroad. By August 2010, many of the students were able to
depart, except those pursuing their studies at the American University of Central
Asia in Kyrgyzstan (AUCA). Throughout 2010 the Ministry of Education, the border
services, and the migration service failed explain why students could not leave
for study at AUCA; to written requests for information, students received a standard
reply of “request declined.” By September 2010 the government banned
people from leaving the country if they had valid Kyrgyz visas in their passports.
In July 2010 the Turkmen government barred Turkmen citizens who also held
Russian passports from traveling to Russia unless they had Russian visas.
Turkmenistan abrogated its dual citizenship treaty with Russia in 2003, but had
allowed holders of Russian passports to use them for travel to Russia unitl July
2010.
Political Prisoners and the Penitentiary System
As in previous years, in 2010 it was difficult to determine the number of political
prisoners because of the wall of secrecy that surrounds their detention. Wellknown
political prisoners include Annakurban Amanklychev and Sapardurdy Khajiev, who worked with human rights organizations, and political dissident
Gulgeldy Annaniazov.
A report published jointly in February 2010 by two independent human rights
groups in exile highlighted serious problems in Turkmenistan’s prison system,
including overcrowding, degrading treatment of inmates, corruption, and lack of
public oversight. In an unprecedented move, Berdymukhamedov responded to
the report by acknowledging problems and promising reform. But amendments
subsequently made to the criminal code did not address the report’s main concerns.
No international agency—governmental or non-governmental—has access
to monitor Turkmen detention facilities.
Interference with Family Life
Turkmenistan has an unwritten policy against registering marriages of foreign
nationals, which, combined with the difficulty of obtaining Turkmen visas, separates
families. In April 2010, the authorities expelled to Uzbekistan approximately
30 female Uzbek nationals married to Turkmen men, along with their young children,
who were born and raised in Turkmenistan.
In October 2009 a group of 500 ethnic Turkmen from Iran issued a statement
against the separation of families of mixed Turkmen-Iranian families. The Iranian
nationals said that Turkmen authorities refused to issue long-term visas to non-
Turkmen family members.
Freedom of Religion
The government’s undeclared campaign against terrorism has involved a crackdown
on Muslims branded “Wahhabi,”a term the Turkmen government uses to
defame followers of a more austere form of Islam and imply their association with
terrorism. For example, in June a mullah in Dashagouz province received a threeyear
prison sentence after security services searched his home and found a fake
grenade, which inexplicably vanished from the case materials. Police officers
compelled all of the mullah’s followers to shave their beards.
In April 2010 an Islamic cleric, Shiri Geldimuradov, was arrested with three of his
sons, and all four were convicted on weapons possession charges.
Geldimuradov’s other four sons are also in prison on unknown charges. In June
Geldimuradov died in prison.
The authorities raid sites of worship of unregistered religious groups. Forum 18,
an independent, international religious freedom group, reported a raid on a
Baptist congregation in Dashagouz in December 2009. Officials confiscated religious
books, and congregants were questioned and pressured to sign statements
promising to desist from worshipping with the congregation in the future. In June
2010 the authorities again pressured several members of that church to sign similar
statements.
On October 21, 2010, a court sentenced Ilmurad Nurliev, head of the Light to the
World Pentecostal Church, to four years in prison on what appear to be bogus
swindling charges. The prosecution argued that Nurliev had swindled four people
who visited a shelter run by the church, even though one of the alleged victims
was in prison for much of the time the swindling allegedly took place, and two did
not testify in court. The trial judge refused to allow all but three church members
to testify for the defense, and the court failed to provide the defense with the
written verdict in time to appeal. Light to the World worship services were raided
in 2008, and Nuraliev and congregants have endured harassment by government
agencies in recent years.
On June 20 the security services detained a group of 47 Protestants who had
gathered in Geoktepe for two days of prayer and Bible study. The group was held
overnight in a police station, questioned, and released.
The Turkmen government continues to imprison Jehovah’s Witnesses for refusing
compulsory military service on grounds of religious conscience, and at this writing
holds at least eight in custody.
Key International Actors
Seeking to leverage Turkmenistan’s energy wealth and strategic importance, several
key international actors continued to mute criticism of the government’s
human rights record. The European Union in particular stood out for its failure to use the prospect of enhanced relations to advance concrete human rights
improvements, pressing forward with a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement
(PCA), frozen since 1998 over human rights concerns, without requiring any
human rights reforms in exchange. At this writing, the PCA was pending approval
by the European Parliament. An initial draft opinion green-lighting the agreement
stirred significant controversy.
The PCA also requires ratification by two national EU member state parliaments—
France and the United Kingdom—before it can enter into force. In a welcome
move, the French parliament’s Foreign Affairs Committee in April 2010 adopted a
resolution requesting the government to refrain from submitting the agreement
for ratification until it had secured certain human rights improvements, including
the release of political prisoners Amanklychev and Khajiev.
During his early April visit to Turkmenistan, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
was uncharacteristically outspoken about human rights concerns, highlighting in
particular the need to allow access to the country for UN special rapporteurs and
address prison conditions.
In a new country strategy for Turkmenistan, adopted in April, the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) revised its policy of no public sector
investment by reserving the right to increase its engagement with Turkmenistan.
In a welcome move, the EBRD set specific human rights benchmarks for the government
to fulfill, and made clear the bank’s level of engagement would depend
on Turkmenistan’s progress in meeting them.