East Timor
Since gaining its independence on May 20, 2002, after two-and-a-half
decades of Indonesian occupation, East Timor has taken important
steps to protect human rights. East Timor’s new constitution includes
significant rights guarantees and, with the support of the United
Nations, the government has moved forward in a number of areas
including policing. In December 2002 East Timor’s first government,
under the presidency of former guerilla fighter Xanana Gusmao, signed
all main United Nations human rights treaties.
East Timor still faces myriad problems caused by the legacy of
Indonesia’s brutal occupation and the destruction of much of the country’s
limited infrastructure by withdrawing Indonesian troops following
the U.N.-supervised referendum on independence in 1999. East Timor
faces severe economic hardship, and has yet to rebuild much of what
was destroyed. U.N. peacekeeping forces remain deployed in the country
because of sporadic but at times lethal border raids by militias based
in Indonesian West Timor.
Efforts to bring Indonesian military and militia leaders to justice for the
killing of more than one thousand East Timorese after the 1999 referendum
have been frustrated by lack of resources, poor cooperation from
Indonesia, and systemic problems in East Timor’s criminal justice system.
Justice and Reconciliation
Important obstacles to justice remain for victims of the violence that
accompanied Indonesia’s rule and eventual withdrawal from East Timor.
In 1999 alone, an estimated 1,400 political murders were committed
while a large U.N. mission, present in East Timor to supervise and
monitor the independence referendum, stood helplessly by. Few perpetrators
and no high-level officers have been prosecuted. There has been no judicial accounting whatsoever for previous atrocities committed
during Indonesia’s twenty-four-year occupation of the former
Portuguese colony.
In late 1999, the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor created the Serious Crimes Investigation Unit (SCIU) to investigate
and prosecute cases in front of two Special Panels for Serious
Crimes (Special Panels) of the Dili District Court. Now under the
authority of East Timor’s prosecutor general, the SCIU is responsible
for preparing indictments against those responsible for crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes committed in East Timor in 1999.
The two Special Panels are part of the Dili District Court system, and
are comprised of one East Timorese and two international judges. They
have exclusive jurisdiction over murder and sexual offenses that were
committed in East Timor between January 1, 1999, and October 25,
1999, but also have jurisdiction over genocide, torture, war crimes, and
crimes against humanity committed before 1999. The first Special
Panel commenced operations in January 2001.
While the SCIU has been largely successful in prosecuting lower ranking
East Timorese militia in Dili’s district court, the Indonesian architects
of the 1999 violence remain at large in Indonesia. International
pressure and arrest warrants have failed to ensure extradition of these
defendants to Dili for trial.
Among those wanted are former Indonesian minister of Defence and
Armed Forces Commander Wiranto, six high-ranking Indonesian military
commanders, and the former governor of East Timor who were
indicted by the SCIU on February 24, 2003. All remain at large in
Indonesia.
Calls in 1999 and 2000 for the establishment of an international tribunal
were blunted when the U.N. secretary-general entrusted Indonesian authorities with responsibility for pursuing justice for the 1999 crimes,
believing that domestic trials should be the first recourse for East
Timor’s victims. However, despite significant international pressure and
interest, trials of senior Indonesian officers in Jakarta failed to give a
credible judicial accounting for the 1999 atrocities. Twelve of the eighteen
defendants were acquitted. Four defendants who were found guilty
received nominal sentences, which were all overturned on appeal. The
appeals court upheld guilty verdicts for the two East Timorese defendants
on trial, one of which was overturned by Indonesia’s Supreme
Court in November 2004.
These results have created widespread cynicism among the East
Timorese public, who questions the fairness of a process that leads to
the prosecution of relatively low-ranking Timorese in Dili while the
sponsors of the violence remain free––and in many cases politically
prominent––in Indonesia. East Timorese leaders, most notably
President Xanana Gusmao, have publicly stated an unwillingness to
pursue justice through the courts, instead preferring a reconciliationbased
approach. However, Foreign Affairs Minister and Nobel Prize
Laureate Jose Ramos Horta has publicly supported the idea of a U.N
commission to explore future options for justice.
Due to lack of donor support, the SCIU is scheduled to finish all pending
investigations by December 2004, with trials slated to end by May
2005. As a result, the Special Panels are not likely to address the vast
majority of political murders that took place in 1999.
At this writing, it was expected that by December 2004 or early 2005,
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan would announce the establishment
of a commission of experts. The commission likely will be charged with
assessing the successes and failings of both the Jakarta ad hoc trials on
East Timor and the parallel process at Dili’s Special Panels for Serious
Crimes.
The Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in East
Timor (Comissao de Acolhimento, Verdade e Reconciliao de Timor
Leste, CAVR) is a national, independent, statutory authority mandated
to undertake truth-seeking, facilitate community reconciliation, report
on its work and findings, and make recommendations for further action.
Complementing the work of the SCIU, the CAVR has been largely successful
in its initial efforts to promote community-based national reconciliation,
an ambitious task after twenty-five years of violence in East
Timor.
East Timor’s national judiciary and criminal justice system remain weak,
under-resourced, and overburdened. As a result of insufficient staffing,
the Court of Appeal was shut down for eighteen months in 2002 and
2003. Due to public frustrations with formal judicial processes, many
serious crimes, including rape and domestic violence, are habitually
referred to traditional customary law mechanisms rather than to the
courts. Such mechanisms lack basic due process protections and regularly
fail to provide justice for victims, especially victims of sexual violence.
Police
The National Police Service of East Timor (Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste, PNTL), overseen by the United Nations, has grown in strength
and expertise. However, the service remains fragile and underdeveloped
with inadequate training and resources to maintain law and order in a
manner consistent with international human rights standards. Reports
continue of excessive use of force by police when arresting suspects and
abuse of detainees in police detention. The PNTL has now taken over
full control of East Timor’s thirteen districts from U.N. civilian police.
Key International Actors
The United Nations continues to have a presence in East Timor.
Although armed U.N. peacekeepers are likely to remain in the country
for the foreseeable future, the civilian arm of the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) started phasing out in
May 2004, and the Mission is scheduled to finish in May 2005.
East Timor remains in desperate need of long-term international financial
assistance and receives its largest financial contributions from Japan,
Portugal, the United Kingdom, the European Union, the United States,
and Australia.
East Timor continues to have cordial relations with Indonesia, its
largest trading partner. Unresolved issues continue to be negotiated
through a series of bi-lateral talks between the two countries, including
the official border demarcation and how to resolve the ongoing problem
of East Timorese refugees and missing and separated children in
Indonesia.