Timor-Leste
Timor-Leste faced one of its gravest challenges since independence with the near
fatal shooting of President Jose Ramos-Horta in February 2008. The police and
military united in efforts to maintain order and search for rebels following the
attack, a positive development given recent clashes between the services, but the
response was marred by continuing reports of security force abuses.
Failures of justice remain a central human rights concern. The most prominent
examples are continuing impunity for crimes committed during the 2006 crisis,
when fighting between soldiers and police triggered wider violence in which at
least 37 people were killed and crimes committed before, during, and after the
1999 UN-sponsored referendum on independence, in which Indonesian-armybacked
militias killed hundreds of Timorese and destroyed much of Timor-Leste’s
physical infrastructure. Impunity for human rights crimes was boosted in 2008 by
a series of presidential pardons.
Attacks on Leaders
On February 11, 2008, Alfredo Reinado, former commander of Timor-Leste’s military
police unit, led an armed group to attack the prime minister and president of
Timor-Leste. Reinado and his militia had been in hiding since 2006, when he
played a pivotal role in initiating violence in Dili. During the 2008 attack, Reinado
was shot and killed and Horta suffered a near fatal injury, requiring treatment for
two months in Australia before he was able to resume his presidential duties.
Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão escaped unharmed. After the attacks, Reinado
associate Gastoa Salsinha assumed command of the armed group and fled with
the rebels to the Ermera district. Salsinha and his 11 armed rebels surrendered
peacefully on April 29, 2008.
Impunity
On July 15, 2008, the Indonesian and Timorese joint Commission on Truth and
Friendship released its report to the leaders of both countries. The report concludes
that crimes against humanity occurred in Timor-Leste in 1999 and attributes institutional responsibility to the Indonesian military, police, and government.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged the leaders of Indonesia and Timor-
Leste to follow the release of the report with initiatives to “ensure full accountability”
and “end impunity.” The leaders, however, rejected calls to bring individuals
to account and formally accepted the findings of the report, emphasizing their
determination to “bring closure to a chapter of our recent past.”
In May President Horta issued a decree granting full and partial pardons to 94
prisoners. As a result at least 20 prisoners have been released, including former
Interior Minister Rogerio Lobato, who played an instrumental role in the 2006 crisis
and had been jailed for manslaughter and illegal distribution of weapons.
Nine prisoners serving sentences for committing crimes against humanity in 1999
also received commuted sentences with four released in June 2008. A petition
against the president’s decision to pardon the criminals was rejected by the court
of appeal in September 2008. Timorese politicians and human rights activists
backing the petition felt that the decision “strengthens impunity, weakens the
people’s faith in the justice system and undermines the rule of law.”
In July 2008 Horta unveiled new draft legislation addressing the 2006 crisis. If
passed by parliament, the law would provide a wide-ranging amnesty for perpetrators:
even individuals responsible for murder and other serious crimes would
be able to immunize themselves from prosecution by issuing an apology. Several
individuals responsible for crimes against humanity in the 1999 carnage already
enjoy impunity under a May 2008 clemency decree. Continuing failure to hold
those behind the 2006 violence to account will further erode confidence in the
Timorese justice system and send a message to disaffected former fighters and
other armed groups that politics trumps justice.
Security Sector
The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police continue to
act as the primary law enforcement agency while taking steps to train and
strengthen the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL). In December 2007
UNMIT established a PNTL Task Force of 100 police officers in Dili. UNMIT recorded a significant decrease in Dili-based crime in the months following the creation of
the Task Force. But UNMIT reported that this was accompanied by an increase in
allegations of “excessive use of force and ill-treatment during arrest, unlawful
searches of houses and abusive behaviour.”
Following the February 11 attacks on Timor-Leste’s leaders, the government
declared a state of emergency and members from the army and police of Timor-
Leste temporarily formed a Joint Command. The Joint Command was tasked with
coordinating the response, assisting in apprehending the rebels, and preventing
violence from spreading.
Under the state of emergency citizens were subject to a night curfew limiting their
freedom of movement. Freedom of assembly was suspended and security forces
had authority to conduct searches at night without warrants.
During the state of emergency, 58 incidents of ill-treatment by the Joint Command
were reported to UNMIT. Allegations included death threats and beatings resulting
in hospitalization. The state of emergency had ended by the end of April
everywhere except Ermera district, which remained under a state of emergency
until May 22.
Human Rights Defenders
Despite a rise in allegations of human rights violations, no attacks on human
rights defenders were reported in Timor-Leste in 2008.
The Office of the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice encouraged the public to
report human rights violations during the state of emergency and opened investigations
into 44 allegations of human rights abuses. Following investigations of
these alleged abuses, cases deemed to warrant further action will be sent to the
Prosecutor General’s Office, though there is a current backlog of 4,700 criminal
cases before the courts.
Key International Actors
Relations strengthened between the leaders of Timor-Leste and Indonesia after
both countries accepted the findings of the Commission on Truth and Friendship report and agreed not to pursue individual accountability for gross human rights
violations committed in Timor-Leste in 1999.
On February 25, 2008, the United Nations Security Council extended UNMIT’s
mandate for 12 months. In September Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced
the appointment of Takahisa Kawakami of Japan as Deputy Special
Representative for Security Sector Support and Rule of Law in Timor-Leste.
In August Prime Minister Gusmão visited Australia hoping to secure the inclusion
of Timor-Leste in the Pacific Islander guest worker scheme. Australian Prime
Minister Kevin Rudd did not commit to including Timor-Leste in the scheme. Rudd
did pledge an increase in grants for Timorese students and funding of approximately
US$5 million to build a military training centre in Timor-Leste. During his
visit Gusmão announced that security was improving in Timor-Leste and suggested
that Australia’s troop commitment could be reduced in 2009.
From May to September 2008 the International Organization for Migration assisted
Timor-Leste in returning and reintegrating 5,930 families (displaced by the
2006 unrest) from camps in and around Dili. As of November 2008, the government
had closed 24 such camps but some 30 camps remained in operation. 