INDONESIA AND EAST TIMOR
The report on Indonesia continues a trend of more candid reporting begun by the State Department last year. Nonetheless, there are still many significant omissions and misleading statements that ought to be corrected in next year's report.
Some examples of the positive changes in this year's report are worth noting, as they appear to represent a conscious attempt to provide a more accurate portrayal of hiunan rights conditions in Indonesia. The structure of this year's report is very similar to the report for 1986, and this permits us to demonstrate the improvements by reproducing corresponding excerpts from both reports. In the examples below, the text of last year's report is presented first, followed by the franker, more informed and/or more complete assessment in this year's report.
•	Section on freedom of movement:
1986	report: "A majority of riu^al East Timorese hving in the central and eastern parts of the province have been resettled in government-provided housing smce 1979 to isolate them from Fretilin rebels and to facilitate their access to health, education and other government services."
1987	report: "The government has relocated many rural East Timorese living in the central and eastern parts of the province since 1979 to isolate them from Fretilin rebels and, according to the Government, to facihtate their access to health, education, and other government services. Most Timorese require permission to travel outside their home districts (Kecamatan). In some areas of East Timor residents may not farm beyond their immediate village area, and are restricted to their village itself during military operations in the area."
•	Section on freedom of movement:
1986 report: "Former poUtical detainees associated with the abortive 1965 coup attempt are required to notify authorities of travel away from their homes."
71
Critique
1987 report: "Former political detainees associated with the abortive 1965 coup attempt are required to notify authorities of their movements, may not change their place of residence without official permission, and have restrictions placed on their employment."
Section on redress for arbitrary arrest:
1986	report: "...the v^aries of the legal system preclude redress of grievances in most cases."
1987	report: "...there are no legal mechanisms for redress of grievances."
Section on denial of fair public trial:
1986	report: "...judges in Indonesia come under the jurisdiction of the executive branch."
1987	report: "...judges in Indonesia come under the jurisdiction of the executive branch, which greatly affects the independence of the judiciary."
Section on subversion trials against Muslim activists:
1986	report: "There were no reports that in any such trials the accused were foimd innocent."
1987	report: "The accused were always found guilty." Section on warrantless searches:
1986	report: "...forced or surreptitious entry by security agencies reportedly occurs periodically."
1987	report: "...forced or surreptitious entry by security agencies occurs periodically, especially in East Timor.
Section on monitoring of communications:
1986	report: "...letter mail to and from East Timor is subject to official scrutiny."
1987	report: "...letter mail to and from East Timor is subject to official scrutiny. Telephone communication to and from East Timor requires special government approval."
Section on the right of citizens to change their goverrmient:
1986 report: "The Parliament, political parties, and the general public have little ability to influence government decisions. However, particularly in budgetary matters, including military procurement, civilian technocrats exercise decisive influence, and government ministers are obliged to defend their departments' budgets and programs
72
Indonesia and East Timor
before parliamentary committees, the proceedings of which receive good press coverage."
1987 report: "The Parliament, political parties and the general public have little ability to influence government decisions or to change the system or its leadership."
•	Section on discrimination (topic sentence):
1986	report: "Indonesian women generally enjoy a high degree of economic and social freedom..."
1987	report: "Some women enjoy a high degree of economic and social freedom."
•	Section on discrimination:
1986 report: "Ethnic Chinese are pressured to take Indonesian names." 1987report: "Strong official and informal discrimination affects people of Chinese ancestry resident in Indonesia. Ethnic Chinese are pressured to take Indonesian names."
Despite these improvements, there are a number of significant omissions and misleading statements in the report. For the third year running, the report is silent on the lack of access by international humanitarian organizations to hundreds of Islamic political prisoners held in Indonesia. To our knowledge, the government has thus far given no indication that it is prepared to permit access to these prisoners by international humanitarian groups that operate confidentially.
In the section on political killing, the report refers to the conflict in East Timor as a "rebellion." Given the fact that the State Department has indicated that no valid act of self-determination has taken place in the territory, the Report's use of the term is inappropriate.
The Report fails to mention the November execution of Sukarman, a former member of the Fartai Komunis Indonesia (PKI). Sukarman was 68, and had been imprisoned for nearly twenty years since his July 1968 arrest. He was sentenced to death for subversion by Malang District Court in 1976. We note that this execution occurred late in the year, and that we did not receive reports of it until early 1988. We will examine next year's report to see if this execution is included. Executions of ex-PKI activists and others charged in connection
73
Critique
with t^x; political events of the 1960s are of concern to us because of serious questions regarding the fairness of the trials, and because of the cruelty of ordering executions after such long periods of detention.
The report does not mention the May and December deaths in mysterious circumstances of two persons from East Timor who had been studying in Indonesia. The first student attended the Agricultural Institute of Semarang, Central Java, and was reported to have been an active member of the clandestine resistance. He was reported to have been found dead inside a well in suspicious circumstances. The second student had just completed his studies in Yogyakarta; it is believed he had been a member of the resistance movement at the time of the invasion of East Timor in 1975 and had been taken prisoner in about 1979. According to reports, he began studies in Yogyakarta in 1981 after his release. In July 1987, in response to an appeal from East Timor's government asking for input of Timorese students on Timor's development, the student apparently wrote a critical analysis of the poUtical aspects of development in East Timor. It is believed that the document was sent to the Governor but intercepted by military intelligence, that the student was visited by an official from East Timor in August 1987, and was told that he would be visited by a commission from Jakarta to question him about his analysis. The commission never arrived, but on December 15,1987, the student died in what was reported to have been an unusual accident. According to the police, he was killed when his motorcycle ran over a child. However, reports from Indonesia about the circumstances of this purported accident cast serious doubts upon the official account. Sources in Indonesia claim that no child was admitted to a hospital or treated at any emergency medical post in that area on that day; that the motorcycle was imdamaged; that the only injury the student sustained was to the back of his head; and that an official from East Timor acknowledged to the student's colleagues that the causes of his death were political.
The report's treatment of trials of Muslim activists is inadequate. Since early 1985, well over 100 Muslim activists have been tried for their opposition to government policy. Many are believed to have been imprisoned for peaceful activities, such as organizing study groups and talks or distributing literature.
74
Indonesia and East Timor
The report does not voice these concerns; in fact, the only explicit reference to
the trials is the following:
Several subversion trials took place in 1987, most related to alleged Muslim extremist activity. The accused were always found guilty.
There is no mention of these trials in the section on freedom of religion. And,
the introduction to the report declares that the government "has effectively
reduced religious tensions by encouraging legally recognized religions to coexist
in peace," and does not question the appropriateness of government actions
against Muslim activists.
In the fair trial section, the report makes only passing and, we believe,
inaccurate reference to new controls on the legal profession:
The Minister of Justice announced in 1987 that local prosecutors will have authority in their district to discipline attorneys whose behavior is deemed inappropriate.
We were not aware of such an announcement, and believe the report may have been referring to a 1987 "Joint Decision of the Supreme Court Chairman and Justice Minister of the Republic of Indonesia," which severely limits the autonomy of the legal profession. The controls imposed by this measure empower both the courts and the Ministry to take a wide range of disciplinary actions (including disbarment) against attorneys, based on ill- defined standards. Reacting to the Joint Decision, the Indonesian Advocates League (Ikadin) stated:
[I]t may be concluded that the District Court Chairmen, High Court Chairmen, Supreme Court Chairman, and Justice Minister have assumed control and supervision over the entire life and conduct of a legal advisor, inside and outside the court, in his conduct of duties as a legal adwsor and in his conduct as an ordinary human being, in his attitudes toward life and in his political attitudes.
The report should have described, or at least mentioned, these issues.
The section also discusses the one-year suspension of human r^ts
lawyer Adnan Buyung Nasution, who lost his license to practice in apparent
retaliation for his spirited defense in the political trial of retired General H.R.
Dharsono in 1985 and early 1986. At the trial, Buyung Nasution sharply chal-
75
Critique
lenged the presiding judge for his hostility toward the defense and protested the resulting entry of the police into the coiu^troom. Unfortunately, the section does not state clearly that one of the laws relied upon by the Minister of Justice to impose the suspension — Law Number 2 of 1986 — was promulgated after the action for which Buyung Nasution is being pimished. The relevant sentence reads: "The Government acknowledges that there was no contempt of court law at the time, but based its actions on law 2 of 1986 which empowers the Minister of Justice to discipline members of the legal profession." Nor does it state that the law in question, even if had not been imposed retroactively, provided questionable authority for the actions taken by the Minister. The report also fails to note that the Minister's decision came after a drawn out disciplinary process, involNing both the courts and the bar, which was fraught with questionable procedures. Finally, the report does not mention that the government also cited a 1985 law on the Supreme Court in asserting its authority to make this decision. That law also provides dubious authority for the Minister's action.
The report's discussion of legal aid appears to be inaccurate, as it states simply that "no direct system ensts for public funding of court-appointed attorneys for those unable to afford legal assistance." According to our information, courts are required to appoint counsel in capital cases where indigent defendants cannot secure attorneys; moreover, in non-capital cases, courts do have a small amount of funds to be distributed at their discretion in order to provide some representation of indigents.
The section on freedom of movement states that "[mjost Timorese require permission to travel outside their home districts (Kecamatan)." The section should have also indicated explicitly that over much of the territory, the same permission is required for movements from one village to another within a district.
The section on freedom of movement also states that the government has "apparently taken no further action on its plan to move several thousand *il-legal immigrants' to the island of Sumba." According to our information, the government is indeed proceeding with this plan. And the section suggests that while local authorities several times pushed reftigee boats away from Indonesian territory, these actions are not condoned by central government authorities. In
76
Indonesia and East Timor
fac^, OUT information suggests that the push-offs usually are effected by the armed forces whose activities are more likely to represent central government policy.
The section on freedom of the press should have mentioned that Prisma, a publication of the Institute for Economic and Social Research, Education and Information (LP3ES), received a strong written warning from the government in the middle of the year. The warning concerned the content of its articles and mentioned four authors by name. Among other allegations, the warning stated that the articles "tend to constitute misleading exhibition of knowledge and can arouse unrest among the public." In addition, although the report states that the government "permitted Suara Pembaruan, the successor to Sinar Harapan, a Jakarta daily banned in 1986, to be^ publishing with much of the same staff as the earlier paper," it did not indicate that the paper's content has changed considerably. The new paper has avoided dealing with many controversial issues that were discussed in its predecessor.
The section on freedom of assembly and association inaccurately states that the Social Organizations Law requires that the Supreme Court approve government decisions to disband any organization it believes is acting against the tenets of the state ideology, Pancasila. The section also states that the government took no such actions in 1987. This is misleading, as the Interior Department refused to recognize two organizations, the Indonesian Islamic High School Students organization (PII) and the Marhaenist Youth Movement (GPM), thereby preventing these organizations from holding meetings legally. The central bodies of these groups had refiised to register the existence of their organizations under the Act, as they did not wish to alter their statutes to accommodate its requirements. In addition, the Indonesian Embassy in Egypt is reported to have dissolved one or more Indonesian student organizations that did not register with the Embassy.
In the section on freedom of association, the report suggests that Indonesian workers have the right to strike:
Strikes in the private sector are permitted by law, though officially discoursed. Notification to the Government of a strike call is required, but not prior government approval.
77
Critique
This comment is a change from last year's report, which states simply that 'The law requires government permission for strikes, which as a matter of practice is never given."
We have a number of concerns about this change, which we fear may have been made in anticipation of the need to justify retaining Indonesia's status as a beneficiary of the Generalized System of Preferences Program. (The U.S. Trade Act prohibits a government from receiving trade preferences under the Generalized System of Preferences if it has not taken or is not taking steps to grant internationally recognized worker rights to workers in the country, including the right of association and the right to organize and bargain collectively. In 1987, Asia Watch and the AFL-CIO, in separate testimony, challenged Indonesia's beneficiary status; earlier this year, the Administration announced its decision that Indonesia would maintain its beneficiary status.) Presidential Decision No. 7 of 1963 restricts the ability to strike in a wide range of private entities. In addition, Law No. 22 of 1957 institutes for all unionized workers a procedure that appears to be akin to compulsory arbitration; this also restricts the right to strike.
In addition, we are concerned that the report's new comments on the right to strike comes just after its discussion of a decree of October 30,1986, dealing with formation of unions in private work places, and thus creates the impression that the decree may have addressed the right to strike. To our knowledge, the decree did not address this issue.
The freedom of association section mentions that the All- Indonesian Workers Union (SPSI), established by the government in 1985 to replace the previous quasi-independent national labor federation (FBSI), pro\ides representation in the Workers' Delegation to the International Labor Organization. However, the report fails to mention that the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), questioning whether the SPSI truly represents the interests of Indonesian workers, has resisted participation of SPSI representatives in its proceedings. The section also did not mention, as it should have, other restrictions on freedom of association in the area of labor rights, such as requiring that members of the civil service be members of a government-controlled association (KORPRI) and that specified civil servants not become
78
Indonesia and East Timor
members of political parties without official permission. The section should also have mentioned the limits on employment opportunities of hundreds of thousands of persons because of their real or purported former connections with now-banned imions. (These restrictions on the rights of suspected "leftists" are, however, discussed in the section on freedom of movement.)
The discussion of labor rights should have mentioned the Inkopkar cooperative movement, which was initially met with official hostility but has now developed an uneasy peace with the national labor union. In addition, the section should have discussed the former component unions of the previous union structure, the FBSI. FBSI personnel were still meeting informally in 1987, despite the government's efforts to eliminate this quasi-independent structure. Thus, the new organizational structure remains contested.
The section on political rights contains a number of inaccuracies. It states that the "two parties and Golkar are prohibited from organizing and operating officially below the district level except during election campaigns." This is incorrect in three respects. First, all political parties may have commissioners (and therefore can "operate" to some extent) at the village {i.e., below the district) level. Second, because so many civil servants are members of Golkar (which is, in effect, the government party), Golkar has a continuous presence at the village level. Finally, we are not aware that these circumstances materially change during an election.
The section also states that "[vjoters cast ballots for party lists of candidates for national, district, and local assemblies." It would have been more accurate to list the bodies as national, provincial, and district/city. With respect to the village level, many village heads are not elected. Moreover, village heads are considered ci^il servants (v,ith greater responsibilities to their superiors than to the electorate), and those elections that might take place are likely to be completely/?/»/o/TWû exercises.
Finally, the section states that civil servants and employees of state-owned companies must join Golkar. We are not aware of any explicit requirement to this effect, although there are very strong pressures to join and support Golkar. However, all civil servants are required to join the civil servants organization KORPRI.
79
Critique
The section on discrimination makes no mention of a legal suit brought in 1987 to establish an equal retirement age for women in Indonesia.
In its discussion of the Jehovah's Witnesses, the freedom of religion section states that the "Supreme Prosecutor" reiterated a ban on the practice of that faith in 1972. We believe the correct title for this official is Attorney General.
80
