Timor-Leste
2006 was a tumultuous year for Timor-Leste (formerly East Timor) with violence in
the capital Dili leading to the intervention of an Australian led peacekeeping force
and the resignation of Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri in June.
After almost five years in operation, Timor-Leste’s Commission for Reception,
Truth, and Reconciliation submitted its final report to parliament in November
2005. Timor-Leste’s President Gusmao distanced himself from the comprehensive
findings and detailed recommendations, which said that at least 102,800
Timorese people had died as a result of the Indonesian occupation and accused
Indonesian authorities of crimes against humanity and war crimes. The report was
largely ignored by the Timorese government and the international community.
Dili Violence
Up to 38 people were killed in fighting in Timor-Leste’s capital Dili after clashes
between the military and police, and between gangs of youths taking advantage
of the security vacuum, erupted in April. The trigger for the violence was the government’s
sacking of almost 600 disaffected soldiers. The sacked soldiers
(known as “petitioners”) staged a five-day demonstration in the capital, which
deteriorated into rioting, torching cars, and looting government buildings. Some
members of the police force defected to join the petitioners and openly fought
the military.
At the request of the Timorese government a joint task force, made up of forces
from Australia, New Zealand, Portugal, and Malaysia, arrived in May in an effort to
quell the violence. Their efforts, and those of the UN peacekeepers who succeeded
them, were moderately successful but outbreaks of violence and arson continued
throughout the year. The violence caused at least 150,000 people to flee their
homes in and around Dili.
Timor-Leste’s Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri resigned his post in June in response to
mounting public criticism and to a request from President Xanana Gusmao.
Former Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense Jose Ramos Horta replaced
Alkatiri. At this writing Alkatiri had not answered a summons to appear before prosecutors investigating his alleged involvement in setting up and arming a private
militia. However, former Interior Minister Rogerio Lobato was formally
charged in September 2006 for distributing arms to militia leader Vicente da
Conceição, also known as “Rai Los,” who was widely believed to be responsible
for instigating much of the year’s violence.
In June United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan appointed an Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-Leste, tasked with establishing the facts
and circumstances of the April and May violence. One of the incidents under
investigation was the May 25, 2006, massacre of eight unarmed police officers
who were shot dead as they were being surrendered to Timor-Leste soldiers by
UN personnel in Dili. Its report, released in October, identified numerous persons
reasonably suspected of direct participation in criminal activity during the crisis,
including the interior and defense ministers and defense force chief, and recommended
they be prosecuted. The commission also concluded that the fragility of
various state institutions and the weakness of the rule of law were the underlining
factors that contributed to the crisis.
Justice and Reconciliation
Following the closure in May 2005 of the UN tribunal in Dili—comprising an investigator’s
office (the Serious Crimes Unit or SCU) and courts (the Special Panels for
Serious Crimes)—there remained a significant gap in efforts to provide accountability
and justice for victims of the Indonesian invasion, occupation, and withdrawal
(1975-1999).
The Timorese judiciary undertook some trials for militiamen indicted by the UN
tribunal but not tried by the Special Panels. The Office of the Prosecutor General
also received at least fifteen inquiries from third countries concerning individuals
whose names appeared on Interpol lists after they were indicted by the SCU.
Timor-Leste’s Commission for Reception, Truth, and Reconciliation (Comissao de
Acolhimento, Verdade e Reconciliao de Timor-Leste, CAVR) submitted its final
report to parliament in November 2005, and a copy was handed to the UN
Secretary General by President Gusmao in January 2006. The report, which is
more than 2,000 pages long, drew on the commission’s work of taking over 8,000 individual statements and listening to hundreds of victims’ testimonies
through public hearings. The comprehensive report concluded that “the demand
for justice and accountability remains a fundamental issue in the lives of many
East Timorese and a potential obstacle to building a democratic society based
upon respect for the rule of law and authentic reconciliation between individuals,
families, communities and nations.” The CAVR investigation also found that the
crimes committed in 1999, while egregious, “were far outweighed by those committed
during the previous 24 years of occupation.” The report contained over
200 recommendations for the Timorese government, the UN, and the international
community. A post-CAVR secretariat was established to disseminate the report
and perform outstanding administrative tasks.
In July 2006 the UN secretary-general issued a report on justice and reconciliation
for Timor-Leste in which he recommended the resumption of the investigative
functions of the SCU but not the judicial functions of the Special Panels. The
report did however note that crimes against humanity, gross violations of human
rights, and grave breaches of humanitarian law were committed in East Timor in
1999, and there should be no impunity regarding such acts.
Police
Prior to the riots of April 2006 police abuse was already one of Timor-Leste’s most
worrying human rights problems. Police officers regularly use excessive force during
arrests, and beat detainees once they are in custody. Under Timor-Leste law,
no charges need be filed against suspects during the initial 72 hours following
arrest, and police officers reportedly often use this period as a punitive rather
than procedural measure. Many detainees, moreover, are held without charges
for more than 72 hours.
Police and other state institutions often fail to respond to incidents of police
abuse appropriately. Most notably, cases of police officers alleged to have committed
crimes such as assault rarely move from investigation to prosecution in
either the criminal justice system or the internal disciplinary system. Insufficient
police training on internal investigations and follow up, and the absence of a
functioning external, independent oversight and accountability mechanism for
the police service, mean that complaints are often dealt with inconsistently, or in some cases not at all. Where cases are taken up, victims are usually left uninformed
about developments and outcomes.
Previous training by the UN and other bilateral programs has been weak, often
inconsistent, and sometimes contradictory.
Freedom of Press
In May 2006 two of the country’s daily newspapers, Timor Pos and Suara Timor
Lorosae, stopped publishing for several days due to violence and instability in the
capital. Journalists at the Timor Pos office were threatened by an army officer, and
in June two Timor Pos employees were attacked by youths outside its premises in
Dili.
In December 2005, Timor-Leste’s former Prime Minister, Mari Alkatiri, signed an
executive decree approving a new penal code for Timor-Leste. The new code contains
several articles restricting press freedom, including one criminalizing
defamation. Journalists now face up to three years in prison if they are found to
have defamed anyone in a public authority role, with no limits on fines for this
offense.
Human Rights Defenders
Timor-Leste’s nongovernmental human rights defenders operated freely and
played an active role in lobbying the UN and government. There were no attacks
on human rights defenders in 2006.
Timor-Leste’s Office of the Provedor started receiving complaints from the public
in March 2006. The office has far-reaching powers to investigate and report on
complaints against government officials and institutions, including human rights
abuses by police, but suffers from a lack of human and other resources. As with
other institutions in Dili, many of the office’s staff were affected by the year’s violence
and unable to work, due to fear of remaining in the capital.
Key International Actors
Due to concern over the apparent fragile security, political, and humanitarian situation
in Timor-Leste, the UN Security Council established a new, expanded mission
there in August 2006. The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) replaced the smaller United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) that
had been established in May 2005. The new mission has a much bigger UN Police
component and will focus on consolidating gains in institution building, and will
have a key role in preparing for national parliamentary and presidential elections
scheduled for 2007.
Timor-Leste remains wholly dependent on international aid and assistance. The
World Bank is supporting a multi-donor strategy to implement a National
Development Plan in coordination with the government. However, Timor-Leste
remains in desperate need of long-term international financial assistance. It
receives its largest financial contributions from Japan, Portugal, the United
Kingdom, the European Union, the United States, and Australia.