 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over an area of 860,000
 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All but a handful of the approximately
 103,000 inhabitants are Polynesian. Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which
 political life is dominated by the King, the nobility, and a few prominent com-
 moners. Formerly a British protectorate, Tonga is fully independent and a member
 of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The securit apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 polie force. kine 300-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense. Total military expenditures are not available. There are no signs of pres-
 sure to reduce the country's small military force. The Commissioner of Police super-
 vises a 300-man police force.
 Tonga's economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has largely been offset
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and, to a lesser degree,
 tourism. World recessionary conditions in 1992, however, led to a serious diminution
 in remittances from overseas.
 The principal areas of human rights concerns remain severe restrictions on the
 right of citizens to change their government and discrimination against women. The
 Constitution, dating frim 1875, has been increasingly challenged by commoners who
 feel disadvantaged by it, most recently in a Septefber parliamentary motion calling
 for extensive reform of the legislature and at a convention held in the capital in No-
 vember.
 
 
 671
 RESPBCt FOR HUMAN FIGH75
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Induding Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No such killings occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no disappearances and no evidence of people being
 abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such treatment are forbid-
 den by the Constitution, and there were no reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The right to judicial determination of the
 legality of arrest is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice. There
 is no preventive detention and no exile, internal or external.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent of the King and the
 executive branch. The Court of Appeal, as the appellate court of last resort, is the
 highest court in the land. TheKing's Privy Council presides over cases relating to
 disputes over titles of nobility and estate boundaries. The King has the right to com-
 mute a death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In addition, Tonga's court sys-
 tem consists of the Supreme Court (which has original jurisdiction over all major
 cases), the police magistrate's courts, a general court, a court martial for the Tongan
 Defense Services, a court tribunal for the police force, and a court of review for the
 Inland Revenue Department.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and honored in practice. No
 one may be summoned before any court without in-st having received a written in-
 dictment clearly stating the offense with which that person is charged. Defendants
 are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law,
 no one may enter or search the home of another, or remove any item of property
 unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary in-
 trusion by the state or political organizations into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution. Tonga has five newspapers (one of which is government owned)
 and one national magazine. The only radio station is government owned. While
 there is generally little editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition
 opinion appears reglarly alongside government statements and letters. A privately
 owned news paper, Kele'a, openy criticizes the Government without government in-
 terference. The Catholic monthly, Taumu'a Lelei, also speaks out freely. The Min-
 ister of Police has threatened action against the independent media in one or two
 cases, but none has ever been taken. One serious infringement of press freedom oc-
 curred when Radio Tonga was ordered not to broadcast or report on the proceedings
 of a 1991 special session of Parliament called to consider the issue of sales of natu-
 ralization certificates and passports. Another was the Government's decision to im-
 pose a broadcast ban on local, live radio coverage of a conference sponsored by the
 Pro-Democracy Movement (see Section 3), as well as the radio station's refusal to
 accept any paid announcements by the organizers of this event. Concern also is
 raised by the late 1992 Supreme Court injunction preventing publication of informa-
 tion on controversial loans and other activities of the Tongan Development Bank.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Peaceful assembly and associa-
 tion are provided for by law. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country. Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and
 abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There are no displaced persons in
 Tonga.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate political life in
 Tonga. They assert authority a ely through their control of substantial land-
 holdings and their predominant role in the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution
 allows the monarch broad powers, many of which do not require the endorsement
 of the legislative branch. The King appoints and preside over the Privy Council,
 which makes major policy decisions. (When the ing is not presiding, the Privy
 
 
 672
 Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects the Prime Minister and other
 cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure.
 Tonga's unicameral legislature, the Uegislative Assembly, consists of 12 cabinet
 ministers, 9 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 People's Representatives elected by
 all literate, tax-paying males and all literate females. Those above 21 years of age
 are eligible to vote. The Speaker is appointed by the King from among the nobles'
 representatives. C-overnment ministers generally vote with the nobles' representa-
 tives as a bloc. People's Representatives sometimes vote against the Government.
 Elections are held every 3 years, with the next balloting set for early 1993. There
 are no political parties. In 1989 frustration over their minorit status in the house
 led six People's Representatives to walk out. In August the lender of the People's
 Representatives called on the Speaker to allow members to inspect the financial
 records of the legislature. The Speaker refused and subsequently suspended the
 People's Representative for 14 days. Three other People's Representatives walked
 out to show their solidarit.
 Since 1991 there have been continued calls for more democratic change both by
 people inside and outside the government establishment. I September, six of the
 nine Peoples' Representatives in the Legislative Assembly submitted a motion call-
 ing for extensive reform of Tongs's legislative system. The motion calls for popular
 election of all 30 member of the Assmbly, election of the House Speaker from
 among Assembly member, and extension of their terms of office from 3 to 5 years.
 The Pro-Democrcy Movement, which originated in 1986, was formally estab-
 lished in 1992. This organiz"ation maintains that the monarchy is an inalienable
 part of the Tongs identity, but it believes that the Government must become much
 more relevant to today's world and that this can be achieved only through greater
 powersharing by the King. It held an international conference on the Constitution
 and democracy in the capital, Nuku'alofa, in November. Although no consensus was
 achieved on either the mechanics or ultimate outcome of reform, the conference did
 raise serious questions about Tonga's future political structures. Only a few speak-
 ers called for the dissolution of the monarchy; most sought openness, accountability,
 and an end to corruption among the nobles. The Government boycotted the event,
 virtually blacked out domestic media coverage of it and prevented foreigners from
 attending it. However, no action was taken to mile good threats to lay sedition
 charges against speakers for their outspoken criticism of the Constitution.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations that concern themselves with human rights, no such organizations exist
 in Tonga. No outside organizations have made requests to investigate human rights
 violations. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. however, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages in Tongan society. These include control over most of the land and a gen-
 eraily privileged status. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to cabinet
 positions in government and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private
 sector.
 In Tonga's male dominated society, women generally occupy a subordinate role.
 While the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has discouraged the rise of women
 to positions of leadership, some have become members of thelegislature and served
 in responsible positions in various occupations.
 Domestic violence is not a major problem in Tonga. As a result, the country does
 not have a women's crisis center. Incidents of wife beating that do occur are gen-
 erally dealt with in traditional ways between the families and village elders; abused
 wives sometimes return to their families if mediation fails.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. As yet there is no legislation permit-
 ting and protecting collective bargaining in Tonga. Labor laws and regulations are
 uniformly enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small export
 enhancement zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 one] vnt. nl, 4",
 
 
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Child labor is not used in the
 wage economy although there is as yet no legislation prohibiting it.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Although Tonga still does not have a minimum
 wage law, the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and -Industry has for some years set
 minimum daily wages for such sectors of the economy as manufactu   and tour-
 ism. Existing minimum wages are not adequate to provide a worker and family with
 a decent standard of living. Workers are protected to a degree, however, by the ease
 with which they can return to their villages and live without a cash income if wages
 offered are inadequate. The Tongan culral tradition of extended family support
 provides an additional economic safety net.
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. Labor laws and regu-
 lations are enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry. A panel
 chaired by the Minister is empowered to set minimum wage guidelines but haa not
 done so.
 Industrial accidents are rare. as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 in Tonga on industrial safety standards.
