 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over an
 area of 360,000 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All
 but a handful of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are
 Polynesian. Tonga is a constitutional monarchy, with
 political life dominated by the King and a few nobles. In
 1900 Tonga entered into a protectorate association with Great
 Britain. In 1970 it became fully independent again and joined
 the Commonwealth. Tonga's economy is based almost exclusively
 on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical crops. An
 increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products
 not available locally has led to a substantial balance of
 trade deficit. This has largely been offset thus far by
 remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and,
 to a lesser degree, tourism. There were no significant human
 rights issues in Tonga in 1987.
 RESPECT FOR hU4AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no politically motivated killings by the Government
 or opposition forces.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, nor was there any evidence of
 people being abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely
 detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment is prohibited by law, and there were no reported
 instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The right to judicial determination of the legality of arrest
 is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice.
 There is no preventive detention and no exile, internal or
 external. Forced labor is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and
 honored in practice. No one may be summoned before any court
 without first having received a written indictment clearly
 stating the offense with which he is charged. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to
 defendants. The judiciary is independent of government
 interference, and there are no special courts for political or
 security offenses. Tonga has no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 By law no one may enter or search the home of another, or
 remove any item of property unless in possession of a warrant
 
 
 823
 TONGA
 issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary intrusion by the
 State or political organizations into a person's private life.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is assured by the Constitution.
 Tonga's radio station and the country's largest circulation
 newspaper are government owned. Other components of the media
 are privately owned. There were no known instances of abuse
 of freedom of speech and press.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are provided for by law.
 There are no significant restrictions. Tonga passed a trade
 union act in 1964, but to date no union has been formed.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize without
 impediment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom
 and abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There
 are no displaced persons in Tonga.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate
 rolitical life in Tonga. They assert authority largely
 through their control of substantial landholdings. The
 Constitution allows the monarch broad powers, many of which do
 not require the endorsement of the legislative branch. The
 King appoints and presides over the Privy Council, which makes
 major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the
 Privy Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects
 the prime ministers and other cabinet ministers, who hold
 office at his pleasure. Tonga's unicameral legislature, the
 Legislative Assembly, consists of 7 nobles elected by their
 peers (33 noble titles are recognized by the Constitution),
 and 7 people's representatives elected by all literate,
 tax-paying males and all literate females. Those above 21
 years of age are eligible to vote. The King appoints a
 speaker from among the nobles' representatives. Government
 ministers and pobles' representatives generally vote as a
 bloc. People's representatives sometimes vote against the
 Government. Elections are held every 3 years. There are no
 political parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights
 violations by the Government. There are no local
 nongovernmental organizations which concern themselves with
 human rights. Tonga is not represented at the United Nations,
 
 
 824
 TONGA
 and the Government has not taken an active interest in
 international affairs, including international human rights
 matters.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. While the
 strong Polynesian cultural tradition has not encouraged the
 rise of women to positions of leadership, women have become
 merabers of the legislature and served in responsible positions
 in several ministries, and they are increasingly finding work
 in skilled and semiskilled occupations. The existence of a
 hereditary class of nobles is generally accepted because of a,
 long tradition dating back over 1,000 years and because
 obligations and responsibilities are reciprocal. Although the
 nobles may be able to extract favors from people living on
 their estates, they must likewise extend favors to their
 people. However, increasing educational opportunities for
 young commoners and a concomitant increase in their political
 awareness have-stimulated some dissent against the nobility
 system.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. A
 panel chaired by the Minister of Labor, Commerce, and Industry
 has been empowered to set minimum wage guidelines but had
 failed to do so as of November 4, 1987. Although Tonga still
 does not have a minimum wage law, it has for some years set
 minimum daily wages for such sectors of the economy as
 manufacturing and tourism. Worker rights legislation covering
 such matters as safety standards, conditions of employment,
 and child labor is pendifig in the Legislative Assembly.
 Legislation for the provision of social security benefits to
 the work force has been under consideration by the Government
 since 1983.
 
 
 825
