 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over an
 area of 360,000 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All
 but a handful of the approximately 108,000 inhabitants are
 Polynesian. Tonga is a constitutional monarchy, with
 political life dominated by the King, the nobility, and a few
 prominent commoners. In 1900 it became a protectorate of
 Great Britain. In 1970 it became fully independent again and
 a member of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is responsive to and controlled by the
 Minister of Police, a senior member of the nobility.
 Tonga's economy is based almost exclusively on the cultivation
 of tropical and semitropical crops. An increasing demand for
 imported manufactured goods and products unavailable locally
 has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has largely been
 offset by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas
 aid, and, to a lesser degree, tourism.
 Despite its autocratic nature, the Government respects and
 defends basic human rights. There were no significant human
 rights issues reported during the year.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No such killings occurred.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people
 being abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such
 treatment are forbidden by the Constitution, and there were no
 reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The right to judicial determination of the legality of arrest
 is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice.
 There is no preventive detention and no exile, internal or
 external.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system is organized on the British model. The senior
 resident judge is appointed from overseas, usually from Great
 Britain. The right to a fair public trial is provided for by
 law and honored in practice. No one-may be summoned before
 any court without first having received a written indictment
 clearly stating the offense with which that person is
 charged. Defendants are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have
 free access to defendants. The judiciary is free of government
 
 
 1003
 TONGA
 interference, and there are no special courts for political or
 security offenses. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 By. law no one may enter or search the home of another, or
 remove any item of property, unless in possession of a warrant
 issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary intrusion by
 the State or political organizations into a person's private
 life..
 Section 2.. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 'a. Freedom. of Speech. and Press
 Freedom-of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution. The one radio station and the country's largest
 circulation newspaper are government owned. Other components
 of the media are privately owned. There were no known
 instances of censorship. The Minister of Police has inveighed
 ,and threatened action against the independent media in one or
 two case , but no action has ever been taken.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are provided for by
 law. There are no significant restrictions.
 -For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom-of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize without
 impediment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom
 and abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There
 are no displaced persons in Tonga.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or
 the system of government. The King and a small group of
 hereditary nobles dominate political life in Tonga. They
 assert authority largely through their control of substantial
 landholdings. The Constitution allows the monarch broad
 powers, many.of which do not require the endorsement of the
 legislative branch. The King appoints and presides over the
 Privy Cduncil, which makes major policy decisions. (When the
 King is not presiding, the Privy Council is called the
 Cabinet). The King also selects the prime minister and other
 cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure. Tonga's
 unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of
 9 cabinet ministers, 9 nobles elected by their peers (33 noble
 titles are recognized by the Constitution), and 9 people's
 representatives elected by all literate, tax-paying males and
 all literate females. Those above 21 years of age are
 eligible to vote. The King appoints a speaker from among the
 
 
 1004
 nobles' representatives. Government ministers and nobles'
 representatives generally vote as a bloc. People's
 representatives sometimes vote against the Government.
 Elections are held every 3 years. There are no political
 parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reports of human rights violations. There
 are no local nongovernmental organizations which concern
 themselves with human rights. Tonga is not represented at the
 United Nations. The Government has not taken an active
 interest in international human rights matters.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. However,
 members of the hereditary nobility have substantial advantages
 in Tongan society. These include control over most of the
 land and a generally privileged status. Nonetheless, it is
 possible for commoners to rise to cabinet positions in
 government and to accumulate great wealth and status in the
 private sector.
 While the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has not
 encouraged the rise of women to positions of leadership, some
 have become members of the legislature and served in
 responsible positions in skilled and semiskilled occupations.
 No statistics are available on the employment of women in
 professional occupations or on women's wages compared to men.
 Little information is available on the incidence of domestic
 violence in Tonga. The authorities generally do not take an
 active role in such cases. Wife beating is generally settled
 in traditional ways between the families and village chiefs;
 abused wives sometimes return to their families if mediation
 fails.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to form unions. Tonga passed a trade
 union act in 1964, but to date no unions have been formed.
 Tonga is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Since no unions have been formed in Tonga, collective
 bargaining is not a widespread practice, but it does occur
 informally. Labor laws and regulations are uniformly enforced
 in all sectors of the economy, including in export enhancement
 zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No information is available on current Tongan child labor
 legislation. In practice, child labor is not used in Tonga.
 
 
 1005
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. A'
 panel chaiged::by the Minister of Labor, Commerce, and Industry
 has.-bpenoempowered to set minimum'wbge guidelines but by
 year's end had not done so. Although Tonga still does not
 have a minimum wage law, it has for some'years set minimum
 daily wages fok sUch sectors of the economy as manufacturing
 aid toursrh. Workers are protected to a degree by the ease
 with which they cap retuinto their villages and live without
 a pashincfte if wages offered are inadequate. Worker rights
 legislation covering'sufh matters as safety standards,
 conditions of employment, and child labor is pending in the
 Legislative Asppmbly.. Industrial accidents are rare as few
 indjistyies exist that would-exjose'iorkers to significant
 alnge;. Legislbti6n tor the provision of social sepurity
 benefils Eo tbh work frcehas been under consideration by the
 Government since 19'83.
 
 
 1006
