 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 small islands scattered over a wide area of
 the South Pacific. Most of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which political life is dominated by the King,
 the nobility, and a few prominent commoners. It is fully independent and a member
 of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 police force. The 350-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 The economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has been offset largely
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and to a lesser degree
 tourism. Remittances from Tongans overseas continued to diminish due in part to
 recessionary economic conditions and in part to a weakening of emigrant ties to
 Tonga.
 The principal human rights abuses remain severe restrictions on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government and discrimination against women. The Constitu-
 tion, dating from 1875, has been increasingly challenged by commoners, whom it
 disadvantages.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial KRidng.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punshment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other
 such treatment, and there were no reports of such practices. Prison conditions are
 basic, especially as regards food and sanitation, but in accordance with local living
 standards. Church representatives and family members are permitted to visit pris-
 oners. As there are no local human rights groups, the question of visits by human
 rights monitors has not arisen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for the right
 to judicial determination of the legality of arrest, and this is observed in practice.
 There is no exile, internal or external. There is no preventive detention, although
 there are no statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be held prior to
 being charged. The law does not limit access by counsel and family members to de-
 tained persons.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary, whose top judges are expatriates,
 is independent of the King and the executive branch. The Court of Appeals, as the
 appellate court of last resort, is the highest court. The King's Privy Council presides
 
 
 731
 over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobility and estate boundaries. The
 nhas the right to commute a death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In
 addition, Tongas ourt .system  onsists of the Supreme Court (which has original
 jurisdiction over all major cases), the police magistrates' courts, a general court, a
 court martial for the Tongan Defense Services, a court tribunal for the police force,
 and a court of review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial, and the Government honors
 it in practice. A court may not summon anyone without providing the person a writ-
 ten indictment stating the offenses it charges the person committed. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitr     rference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 and in practice no one may enter or search the home of another or remove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. Neither the
 State nor political organizations intrude arbitrarily into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Tonga has five newspapers (one of which is government owned) and
 one national magazine. The Government owns the only radio station. While there
 is generally little editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition opinion
 appears regularly alongside government statements and letters. A privately owned
 newspaper, Kele'a, openly criticizes the Government without government inter-
 ference. A Catholic monthly, Taumu'a Lelei, also speaks out freely. The Minister of
 Police has on occasion threatened action against the independent media, but no ac-
 tion has ever been taken. Specific infringements-are usually tied to a particular
 event, such as the November 1992 Prdemocracy Convention when live reporting
 was banned and media attendance inhibited. There were no reports of any restric-
 tions, and no indication that the January 1, 1994 legislation which greatly increased
 the penalties available through the Defamation Act had led to any abuse.
 Prodemocracy leader 'Akilisi Pohiva has been a frequent target of defamation law-
 suits for reports in his independent publication. re also has initiated his own law-
 suits against others. Court decisions in these cases have gone both for and against
 Pohiva, based on the merits of the case.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for peaceful
 assemblytand avssociation. There ae  Deno significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and abroad.
 The law laces no restrictions on repatriation.
 Tonga has not had any asylum seekers or refugees and accordingly the Govern-
 ment has not perceived any need to formulate a policy regarding them.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate political life in
 Tonga. They assert authority largely through their control of substantial land-
 holdings and their predominant role in the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution
 allows the monarch broad powers, many of which do not require the endorsement
 of the legislative branch. The King appoimts and presides over the Privy Council,
 which makes major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the Privy
 Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects the Prime Minister and other
 Cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure.
 Tonga's unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of 12 Cabinet
 ministers, 9 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 people's representatives. All literate
 Tongans, 21 years of age or older, are eligible to vote. The King appoints the Speak-
 er from among the representatives of the nobles. Government ministers generally
 vote with the nobles' representatives as a bloc. People's representatives sometimes
 vote against the Government. Elections are held every 3 years, most recently in Feb-
 ruary 1993. As a result of those elections, the Prodemocracy Movement extended its
 influence with the election of strong supporters to six of the nine people's represent-
 ative seats.
 Throughout the 1990's, people inside and outside the government establishment
 have called for democratic change. The Prodemocracy Movement, formally estab-
 lished in 1993, is dedicated to educating the people about their democratic rights.
 Following its election victory in February 1993, the movement turned to drafting
 
 
 732
 proposals for revision of the 1875 Constitution, most notably proposals for popular
 election of all 30 members of the Assembly and election of the House Speaker from
 among Assembly members.
 In August 1994, the Prodemocracy Movement made history when five of its lead-
 ers founded Tonga's first political party, 'The People's Party." The party rallied
 around the goals of the Prodemocracy Movement, maintaining that the monarchy
 is an inalienable part of the national identity, but arguing that the Government
 must become more relevant to today's world. The party pledged to seek greater
 power sharing by the King and greater accountability on the part of the Govern-
 ment. Official reaction to the party has been one of disdain, with no effort to repress
 it or interfere in its functioning. Rather, due solely to internal disagreements over
 personalities and tactics, the Peoples' Party was in decline by midyear, no longer
 holding party caucuses in Parliament, or full quorum meetings to discuss party
 business or constitutional revisions. Individual members continued to pursue
 Prodemocracy goals and to prepare for the early 1996 Parliamentary elections.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations that concern themselves with human rights, no such organizations exist.
 No outside organizations are known to have made requests to investigate alleged
 human rights violations. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. However, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages in Tongan society. These include control over most of the land and a gen-
 erally privileged status. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to cabinet
 positions in government and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private
 sector.
 Women.-Domestic violence is infrequent. Incidents of wife beating that do occur
 are generally dealt with in traditional ways between the families and village elders;
 abused wives sometimes return to their families if mediation fails.
 In Tonga's male-dominated society, women generally occupy a subordinate role.
 While the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has discouraged the rise of women
 to positions of leadership, a few have nonetheless become members of the legislature
 and have served in responsible positions in various occupations. However these
 women needed connections with the nobility or extraordinary luck, and they face se-
 vere limits on their upward mobility in this tradition-bound society. Some village
 women are breaking the mold of passive, docile followers by leading village-based
 development projects. The Government has sought to direct the efforts of women's
 nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) by establishing a women's unit within the
 Prime Minister's office. However, women's groups view this as an attempt to co-opt
 them and their programs. They criticize the Government's emphasis on organiza-
 tion, process, andcontrol, with few programs of substance. The NGO's and the wom-
 en's unit disagree on the need for and potential composition of a government-spon-
 sored National Council of Women.
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State. Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not
 become a source of societal concern.
 People With Disabilities.-No mandated provisions for accessibility for the dis-
 abled exist. There were no knownl complaints of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services. Education of children with special needs
 has been a longstanding priority of Tonga's Queen.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 The lack of unions makes the question of the ability of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national bodies moot; however, such a right is neither protected, prohibited, nor lim-
 ited by the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely].-Since no unions have been
 flrmed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small export en-
 hancement zones.
 
 
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Child labor is not used in the
 wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting it. Education has been
 compulsory in Tonga since 1882. Although it is sometimes criticized as being of poor
 quality, education is provided for all children through Form 6 (high school). Compli-
 ance rates are good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tonga does not have a minimum wage law.
 Labor laws and regulations, enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and In-
 dustry, limit the workweek to 40 hours. The Ministry of Labor enforces laws and
 regulations reasonably well in the wage sector of the economy, particularly on the
 main island of Tongatapu. Enforcement in agriculture and on the outer islands is
 limited by isolation.
 Industrial accidents are rare as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 on industrial safety standards.
