 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over a
 large area of the South Pacific. Almost all of the
 approximately 108,000 inhabitants-are Polynesian. Tonga is a
 constitutional monarchy, in which political life is dominated
 by the King, the nobility, and a few prominent commoners.
 Formerly a British protectorate, Tonga became fully independent
 in 1970 and joined the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense
 Services (TDS) and a police force. The 300-man TDS force is
 responsible to and controlled by the Minister of Defense. The
 Commissioner of Police supervises a 300-man police force.
 Tonga'  economy is based primarily on the cultivation of
 tropical and semitropical crops. An increasing demand for
 imported manufactured goods and products unavailable locally
 has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has largely been
 offset by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas
 aid, and, to a lesser degree, tourism.
 The principal areas of human rights problems are restrictions
 on the right of citizens to change their government and
 discrimination against women. The Constitution, which dates
 back to 1875, has come under increasing challenge from
 commoners, who are disadvantaged by it.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No such killings occurred.'
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people being
 abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such
 treatment are forbidden by the Constitution, and there were no
 reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The right to judicial determination of the legality of arrest
 is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice.
 There is no preventive detention and no exile, internal or
 external.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In 1990 Tonga took a significant step in reorganizing its
 judiciary system by creating the Court'of Appeal. This court
 is both separate from the political system and, as the new
 appellate court of last resort, the highest court in the land.
 Previously, this role was played by the King's Privy Council
 Court of Appeal. The latter now presides only over cases
 relating to disputes over titles of nobility and estate
 boundaries. The King still retains the right to commute a
 
 
 1014
 TONGA
 death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In addition,
 Tonga's court system consists of the Supreme Court (which has
 original jurisdiction over all major cases), the Police
 Magistrate's Courts, a General Court, a Court Martial for the
 Tongan Defense Services, a Court Tribunal for the police force,
 and a Court of Review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and
 honored in practice. No one may be summoned before any court
 without first having received a written indictment clearly
 stating the offense with which that person is charged.
 Defendants are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free
 access to defendants. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 By law no one may enter or search the home of another, or
 remove any item of property unless in possession of a warrant
 issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary intrusion by the
 State or political organizations into a person's private life.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution. Tonga has five newspapers (one of which is
 government owned) and one national magazine. The only radio
 station is government owned. While there is generally little
 editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition
 opinion appears regularly alongside government statements and
 letters. In 1985 a member of the Legislative Assembly, Akilisa
 Pohiva, lost his job as a senior education officer for using
 his fortnightly radio program to criticize the distribution of
 wealth in Tonga. In 1988 the courts reinstated him and awarded
 him damages for wrongful dismissal. He has since created his
 own newspaper Kele'a (The Conch), which openly criticizes the
 Government. The Government has not interfered with it. The
 Catholic monthly Taumu'a Lelei also speaks out freely. The
 Minister of Police has threatened action against the media in
 one or two cases, but no action has ever been taken. One
 serious infringement on press freedom occurred when Radio Tonga
 was ordered not to broadcast or report on the proceedings of a
 1991 Special Session of Parliament called to consider the issue
 of sales of naturalization certificates and passports.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are provided for by law. On
 March 8, a group of between 1,000 and 1,500 Tongans marched to
 the Royal Palace to protest the Parliament's retroactive
 legislation legalizing the sale of Tongan passports.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom
 and abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There
 are no displaced persons in Tonga.
 
 
 1015
 TONGA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the
 system of government. The King and a small group of'hereditary
 nobles dominate political life in Tonga. They assert authority
 largely through their control of substantial landholdings. The
 Constitution allows the monarch broad powers, many of which do
 not require the endorsement of the legislative branch. The
 King appoints and presides over the Privy Council, which makes
 major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the
 Privy Council is called the Cabinet). The King also selects
 the Prime Minister and other cabinet ministers, who hold office
 at his pleasure. Tonga's unicameral legislature, the
 Legislitive Assembly, consists of 12 cabinet ministers, 9
 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 People's Representatives
 elected by all literate, tax-paying males and all literate
 females. Those above 21 years of age are eligible to vote.
 The speaker is appointed by the King from among the Nobles'
 Representatives. Government ministers generally vote with the
 Nobles' Representatives as a bloc. People's Representatives
 sometimes vote against the Government. Elections are held
 every 3 years. There are no political parties. In 1989
 frustration over their minority status in the House led six
 People's Representatives to walk out.
 In 1991 there were continued calls for more democratic change
 both by people inside and outside the government establishment.
 Teisina Fuko, a commoner member of the Legislative Assemby,
 called for the resignation of the Prime Minister, Prince
 Fatafehi Tu'ipelehake. The latter resigned on grounds of ill
 health in mid-1991 and was replaced by Baron Vaea of Houma. Of
 even greater significance was the climax to the passport
 issue. In 1984 the Tongan Government began selling Tongan
 citizenship passports to foreigners who did not meet the
 naturalization qualifications outlined in the Constitution.
 The ensuing lawsuits by People's Representative Pohiva led to a
 special session of the Parliament in February which amended the
 Constitution to render the sales legal. In the following
 month, a group of between 1,000 and 1,500 Tongans marched to
 the Royal Palace to protest the retroactive legislation. Under
 the Constitution, the people do have a right to petition the
 King directly. The People's Representatives asked for an
 audience with the King to present petitions regarding the new
 amendments and calling for the removal of the official deemed
 to have the greatest responsibility in the affair, Police
 Minister Akau'ola. They were refused and instead told to
 present their petitions to the King's acting secretary.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local
 nongovernmental organizations that concern themselves with
 human rights, such organizations do not exist. No outside
 organizations have made requests to investigate human rights
 violations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race or religion. However, members of
 the hereditary nobility have substantial advantages in Tongan
 
 
 1016
 
 TONGA
 society. These include control over most of the land and a
 generally privileged status. Nonetheless, it is possible for
 commoners to rise to cabinet positions in government and to
 accumulate great wealth and status in the private sector.
 In Tonga's male-dominated society women generally occupy a
 subordinate role. While the strong Polynesian cultural
 tradition has discouraged the rise of women to positions of
 leadership, some have become members of the legislature and
 served in responsible positions in various occupations.
 Little information is available on the incidence of domestic
 violence in Tonga. The authorities generally do not take an
 active role in such cases. Wife beating is generally dealt
 with in traditional ways between the families and village
 chiefs; abused wives sometimes return to their families if
 mediation fails.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to form unions under the 1964 Trade
 Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Since no unions have been formed, collective bargaining is not
 a widespread practice, but a kind of collective bargaining does
 occur informally. As yet, there is no legislation permitting
 and protecting collective bargaining in Tonga. Labor laws and
 regulations are uniformly enforced in all sectors of the
 economy, including in export enhancement zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor is not used in Tonga although there is as yet no
 legislation prohibiting it.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours.
 Labor laws and regulations are enforced by the Ministry of
 Labor, Commerce, and Industry. A panel chaired by the Minister
 is empowered to set minimum wage guidelines but has not done
 so. Although Tonga still does not have a minimum wage law, it
 has for some years set minimum daily wages for such sectors of
 the economy as manufacturing and tourism. Existing minimum
 wages are not adequate to provide a worker and family with a
 decent standard of living. Workers are protected to a degree,
 however, by the ease with which they can return to their
 villages and live without a cash income if wages offered are
 inadequate. The Tongan cultural tradition of extended family
 support provides an additional economic safety net. Industrial
 accidents are rare as few industries exist that would expose
 workers to significant danger.
 
 
 1017
