 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over an area of 360,000
 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All but a handful of the approximately
 104,000 inhabitants are Polynesian. Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which
 political life is dominated by the King, the nobility, and a few prominent com-
 moners. Formerly a British protected state, Tonga is fully independent and a mem-
 ber of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 police force. The 350-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 Tonga's economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has largely been offset
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and, to a lesser degree,
 tourism. Continuing world recessionary conditions in 1993 resulted in an abnor-
 mally low level of remittances.
 The principal human rights abuses remain severe restrictions on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government and discrimination against women. The Constitu-
 tion, dating from 1875, has been increasingly challenged by commoners who are dis-
 advantaged by it, most dramatically by the November 1992 Prodemocracy Conven-
 tion held in the capital and the results of the February elections.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No such killings occurred.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no disappearances and no evidence of people being
 abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishmet.-
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such treatment are forbid-
 den by the Constitution, and there were no reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The right to judicial determination of the
 legality of arrest is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice. There
 is no exile, internal or external, and no preventive detention, although there are no
 statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be held prior to being charged.
 There are no statutory limits to access by counsel and family members to such a
 detained person.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent of the King and the
 executive branch. The Court of Appeal, as the appellate court of last resort, is the
 highest court. Two cases have involved Pro-Democracy leader Akilisi Pohiva who
 was charged with publishing secret government documents (a not guilty verdict was
 returned) and later charged with defamation resulting in a guilty verdict and a fine
 of one Tongan dollar-less than a U.S. dollar. The King's Privy Council presides
 over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobility and estate boundaries. The
 King has the right to commute a death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In
 addition, Tonga's court system consists of the Supreme Court (which has original
 jurisdiction over all major cases), the police magistrate's courts, a general court, a
 court martial for the Tongan Defense Services, a court tribunal for the police force,
 and a court of review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The right to a fair public trial is provided for by law and honored in practice. No
 one may be summoned before any court without first having received a written in-
 dictment clearly stating the offense with which that person is charged. Defendants
 are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 and practice no one may enter or search the home of another or remove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. There is no
 arbitrary intrusion by the state or political organizations into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution. Tonga has five newspapers (one of which is government owned)
 and one national magazine. The only radio station is government owned. While
 there is generally little editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition
 opinion appears regularly alongside government statements and letters. A privately
 owned newspaper, ele'a, openly criticizes the Government without government in-
 terference. The Catholic monthly, Taumu'a Lelei, also speaks out freely. The Min-
 ister of Police has threatened action against the independent media in one or two
 cases, but no action has ever been taken. Serious infringement has occurred, usually
 tied to a specific event such as the November 1992 Pro-Democracy Convention. No
 such actions were taken in 1993. The February 1993 election campaign took place
 with no restrictions on freedom of speech or press. All participants took full advan-
 tage of their rights and access to the media.
 b. Freedom o7 Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Peaceful assembly and associa-
 tion are provided for by law. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and
 abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There are no displaced persons in
 Tonga.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate political life in
 Tonga. They assert authority largely through their control of substantial land hold-
 ings and their predominant role in the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution al-
 lows the monarch brad powers, many of which do not require the endorsement of
 the legislative branch. The King appoints and presides over the Privy Council,
 
 
 751
 which makes major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the Privy
 Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects the Prime Minister and other
 Cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure.
 Tonga's unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of 12 Cabinet
 ministers, 9 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 people's representatives. All literate
 Tongans, 21 years of ae or older, are eligible to vote. The Speaker is appointed by
 the King from among the representatives of the nobles. Government ministers gen-
 erally vote with the nobles' representatives as a bloc. People's representatives some-
 times vote against the Government. There are no political parties. Elections are held
 every 3 years, most recently in February 1993. As a result of those elections, the
 Pro-Democracy Movement extended its influence with the election of strong support-
 ers to six of the nine people's representative seats.
 Since 1991 there have been continued calls for more democratic change both by
 people inside and outside of the government establishment. The Pro-Democracy
 Movement, which originated in 1986, was formally established in 1992 but does not
 consider itself to be a political party. This organization maintains that the monarchy
 is an inalienable part of the Tonga identity, but it believes that the Government
 must become much more relevant to today's world and that this can be achieved
 only through greater power sharing by the King and greater accountability on the
 part of the Government (one of its earliest efforts was to inspect the financial
 records of the legislature).
 The February 1993 elections were seen by many as a referendum for change, with
 those favoring reform the clear winners. Following its election victory, the
 Prodemocracy Movement has turned to educational efforts outside the capital and
 to drafting proposals for revisions to the 1875 Constitution, most notably for popular
 election of all 30 members of the Assembly and election of the House Speaker from
 among Assembly members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations that concern themselves with human rights, no such organizations exist
 in Tonga. No outside organizations have made requests to investigate human rights
 violations. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. However, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages in Tongan society. These include control over most of the land and a gen-
 erally privileged status. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to Cabinet
 positions in government and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private
 sector.
 Women.-In Tonga's male dominated society, women generally occupy a subordi-
 nate role. While the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has discouraged the rise
 of women to positions of leadership, some have become members of the legislature
 and served in responsible positions in various occupations.
 Domestic violence is infrequent. As a result, the country does not have a women's
 crisis center. Incidents of wife beating that do occur are generally dealt with in tra-
 ditional ways between the families and village elders; abused wives sometimes re-
 turn to their families if mediation fails.
 Children.-Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not become a source of soci-
 etal concern. The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State.
 People with Disabilities.-No mandated provisions for accessibility for the disabled
 erxist. There were no known complaints of discrimination in employment, education,
 or provision of other state services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are uniformly enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small ex-
 port enhancement zones.
 
 
 752
 C. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Child labor is not used in the
 wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting it.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tonga does not have a minimum wage law.
 However, the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry has for some years set
 minimum daily wages for such sectors of the economy as manufacturing and tour-
 ism. The minimum wage applies to so few people that it is not generally known.
 (Minimum wage figures are not readily available.) Existing minimum wages are not
 adequate to provide a worker and his family with a decent standard of living. Work-
 ers are protected to a degree, however, by the ease with which they can return to
 their villages and ive without a cash income if wages offered are inadeqiate. The
 Tongan                                                       n additional eco-
 nonc safety net.
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. Labor laws and regu-
 lations are enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry. Labor laws
 and regulations are enforced reasonably well in the wage sector of the economy, par-
 ticularly on the main island of Tongatapu. Enforcement in agriculture and on the
 outer islands is limited by isolation.
 Industrial accidents are rare as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 in Tonga on industrial safety standards.
 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 9,500 people occupying a land surface area of 26 square kilo-
 meters on 9 atolls in the central South Pacific is one of the world's smallest inde-
 pendent nations. The population is primarily Polynesian. Tuvalu became independ-
 ent from the United Kingdom on October 1, 1978, and it is a member of the Com-
 monwealth of Nations. Its Constitution provides for a Westminster-style parliamen-
 tary democracy. Tuvalu's Head of State is the British Queen, represented by the
 Governor-General who must be a Tuvaluan citizen.
 A 32-member police constabulary, the only security apparatus, is responsible to
 and effectively controlled by civilian authority.
 The economy, primarily subsistence based, relies mainly on coconuts, taro, and
 fishing. Tuvalu depends heavily on foreign aid, mainly from Australia, New Zea-
 land, apan, and Tawan. In the early 1980's with the assistance of the United
 Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand, the Government established the Tuvalu
 Trust Fund to meet its recurrent and capital expenditures. Remittances from
 Tuvaluans working abroad, the sale of commemorative and thematic postage stamps
 and of fishing licenses to foreign vessels, provide additional sources of foreign ex-
 change. Tuvalu's isolation and meager natural resources severely limit prospects for
 economic self-sufficiency.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights. Social
 behavior, as determined by custom and tradition, however, is considered as impor-
 tant as the law and is ensured by the village elders. Land is also key to much of
 the structure of Tuvaluan society. There were no reports of specific human rights
 abuses in 1993. However in the traditional culture of the islands, women occupy
 a subordinate role, with limits on their job opportunities, although recently there
 has been substantial effort to accord women equality in employment and decision-
 making.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrojudicial Killing.-There were no politically motivated
 killing
 b. Disappearance.-There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people
 being abducted for political reasons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degradi  Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment a    forbidden by the Constitution,
 and there were no reported instances of such practices. Local hereditary elders exer-
 cise considerable traditional authority-including the seldom invoked right to inflict
 corporal punishment for infringing customary rules-which can be at odds with the
 national law.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Constitutional safeguards against arbi-
 trary arrest and detention are observed in practice. There is no exile.
 
 
 753
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system consists of the higher courts,
 namely, the Privy Council, the Court of Appeal, and the High Court; and the lower
 courts, i.e., those of the senior and resident magistrates, the island courts, and the
 land courts. The Chief Justice, who is also Chief Justice of the neighboring island
 nation of Nauru, sits on the High Court about once a year.
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed in practice. The
 Constitution provides that accused persons must be informed of the nature of the
 offenses with which they are charged and be provided the time and facilities re-
 quired to prepare a defense. An independent people's lawyer is ensured by statute.
 The services of this public defender are available to all Tuvaluans free of charge.
 The right to confront witnesses, present evidence, and appeal convictions is en-
 shrined in law. Procedural safeguards are based on English common law. The judici-
 ary is independent and free of governmental interference. Tuvalu has no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The pri-
 vacy of the home is protected in law and respected by the Government. There is
 no arbitrary intrusion by the State or political organizations into the private life of
 the individual.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution and observed in practice. Tuvalu has a radio station under govern-
 ment control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, and there are no significant restrictions in
 practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion prevails in Tuvalu. The separation
 of church and state is respected.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroad. There are no
 restrictions on repatriation. Tuvalu has no refugees or displaced persons.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely elect their government. Tuvalu's 12-member unicameral Par-
 liament is elected directly by the people. A speaker elected by Members of Par-
 liament (M.P.'s) presides over Parliament. Parliament's normal term is 4 years. The
 minimum voting age is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret ballot from among
 the M.P.'s, and up to four other ministers, appointed and removed from office by
 the Governor General with the advice of the Prime Minister. There are no formal
 political parties in Tuvalu. The Prime Minister may be removed from office by a
 parliamentary vote of no confidence.
 Tuvalu has a 12-member Parliament. The September 1993 election resulted in a
 parliamentary impasse as no member secured the seven votes needed to be elected
 as Prime Minister. Governor-General Lauti appointed out-going Prime Minister
 Bikenibeu Paeniu as caretaker Prime Minister until a new election was held No-
 vember 24. When the Parliament met on December 10, Kamuta Latasi, supported
 by his wife and fellow M.P., Naama Maheu Latasi, abandoned former Prime Min-
 ister Paeniu's team in exchange for the Prime Ministership. Naama Latasi, a former
 Minister of Health in the Paeniu government, and the only female among Tuvalu's
 12 parliamentarians, was given no cabinet post in the new Government. Each of the
 islands is administered by six-person councils, also elected by universal suffrage to
 4-year terms.
 Over the past 2 years, Tuvalu has been debating if it should become a republic,
 primarily as an economy measure. Former Prime Minister Paeniu called for a na-
 tional referendum, and a consultative process began in mid-1992. Each island com-
 munity is deliberating the issue in its respective council. Once all results have been
 reported to Parliament, the Government will announce its decision.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights violations by the Gov-
 ernment and no known requests for investigations. While no known barriers block
 their establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations that concern
 themselves with human rights. Tuvalu is not a member of the United Nations.
 
 
 754
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, creed,
 sex, or national origin. Women increasingly hold positions in the health and edu-
 cation sectors. This trend was partly due to the efforts of Prime Minister Paeniu,
 who was known to favor greater opportunities for women. Paeniu named women
 among his senior advisors, included them in his Cabinet, and encouraged increased
 participation by women in valuable overseas training opportunities. Violence against
 women is rare in Tuvalu. If wife beating occurs, it is infrequent and has not become
 a source of societal concern.
 Children.-There are no reports of child abuse. If it does occur, it is rare. The
 Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare, and provides com-
 mensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the total resources
 available to the State.
 People with Disabilities.-Although there are no mandated accessibility provisions
 for the disabled, there are no known reports of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers are free to organize unions and choose their
 own labor representatives, but most of the population lacks permanent employment
 and is engaged in subsistence activity. The right to strike is provided for by law,
 but no strike has ever been recorded.
 In the public sector, the country's civil servants, teachers, and nurses--who, taken
 together, total less than 1,000 employees--are grouped into associations which do
 not presently have the status of unions. The only registered trade union, the Tuvalu
 Seamen's Union, has about 600 members, who work on foreign merchant vessels.
 The Seamen's Union is a member of the International Transportation Workers' Fed-
 eration.
 In 1993 the South Pacific and Oceanic Council of Trade Unions held a seminar
 in Tuvalu to promote trade unionism. The attendees issued calls for the establish-
 ment of a national committee to strengthen the union movement, the setting up of
 a credit union facility, and a continuing progam of union education.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coilectively.-The Industrial Relations Code
 (1978) provides for conciliation, artitration, and settlement procedures in cases of
 labor disputes. Although there are provisions for collective bargaining, in practice
 in the private sector wages are set by employers. The Minister of Labor, Works, and
 Communications may establish an Incomes Commission to determine appropriate
 levels of pay. For both the private and public sectors, the legal procedures for resolv-
 ing labor disputes noted above are seldom used; instead, the two sides normally en-
 gage in nonconfrontational deliberations in the local multipurpose meeting hall.
 Tuvalu is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition o Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 74 of the Tuvalu Employ-
 ment Ordinance (1978) prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and there have een
 no reports of either being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Section 60 of the Employment Act
 prohibits children under the age of 14 from working. Education is compulsory for
 children from 6 through 13 years of age. The Employment Act also prohibits chil-
 dren under 15 years of age from industrial employment or work on any ship and
 stipulates that children under the age of 18 years are not allowed to enter into for-
 mal contracts including work contracts. Children are rarely employed outside the
 traditional economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The modest minimum wage, set administra-
 tively by the Government, is sufficient to allow a worker and family in the wage
 economy to maintain a decent standard of living. The present minimum wage in the
 public (government) sector is $0.40 per hour ($AO.55) per hour. This rate applies for
 men and women, for young and old. In most cases, the private sector adopts the
 same minimum wage rate.
 The Labor Office may specify the days and hours of work for workers in various
 industries. The workday is legally set at 8 hours. The majority of workers are out-
 side of the wage economy. Rudimentary health and safety standards are provided
 for by law. They require employers to provide an adequate portable water supply,
 basic sanitary arrangements, and medical care. Specific provisions of the law pro-
 vide for the protection of female workers. The Ministry of Labor, Works and Com-
 munications is responsible for the enforcement of the rudimentary safety and health
 reoulations. With the limited resources of its economy, Tuvalu can provide only a
 minimum of enforcement.
 
 
 755
