 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 islands scattered over an
 area of 360,000 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All
 but a handful of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are
 Polynesian. Tonga is a constitutional monarchy, with
 political life dominated by the King, the nobility, and a few
 prominent commoners. In 1900 Tonga became a protectorate of
 Great Britain. In 1970 it became fully independent again and
 joined the British Commonwealth.
 The security apparatus is integrated into the structure of
 government and does not.exercise an undue or malign influence
 on human rights policy. The Minister of Police, a senior
 member of the nobility, has influence in keeping with his
 traditional position.
 Tonga's economy is based almost exclusively on the cultivation
 of tropical and semitropical crops. An increasing demand for
 imported manufactured goods and products unavailable locally
 has led to a substantial balance of trade deficit. This has
 largely been offset by remittances from Tongans employed
 abroad, overseas aid, and, to a lesser degree, tourism.
 Despite its autocratic nature, the Government of Tonga
 respects and defends basic human rights. There were no
 significant human rights issues.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people being
 abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such
 treatment are forbidden by the Constitution, and there were no
 reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The right to judicial determination of the legality of arrest
 is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in practice.
 There is no preventive detention and no exile, internal or
 external.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system is organized on the British model. The
 senior resident judge is appointed from overseas, usually from
 Great Britain. The right to a fair public trial is provided
 for by law and honored in practice. No one may be summoned
 before any court without first having received a written
 
 
 949
 TONGA
 indictment clearly stating the offense with which he is
 charged. Defendants are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have
 free access to defendants. The judiciary is free of government
 interference, and there are no special courts for political or
 security offenses. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 By law no one may enter or search the home of another, or
 remove any item of property unless in possession of a warrant
 issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary intrusion by
 the State or political organizations into a person's private
 life.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution. The one radio station and the country's largest
 circulation newspaper are government owned. Other components
 of the media are privately owned. There were no known
 instances of censorship. The Minister of Police has inveighed
 against and threatened action against the independent media in
 one or two cases, but no action has ever been taken.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are provided for by law.
 There are no significant restrictions.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize without
 impediment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom
 and abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There
 are no displaced persons in Tonga.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or
 the system of government. The King and a small group of
 hereditary nobles dominate political life in Tonga. They
 assert authority largely through their control of substantial
 landholdings. The Constitution allows the monarch broad
 powers, many of which do not require the endorsement of the
 legislative branch. The King appoints and presides over the
 Privy Council, which makes major policy decisions. (When the
 King is not presiding, the Privy Council is called the
 Cabinet). The King also selects the prime ministers and other
 cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure. Tonga's
 unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of
 7 nobles elected by their peers (33 noble titles are
 recognized by the Constitution), and 7 people's representatives
 
 
 950
 TONGA
 elected by all literate, tax-paying males and all literate
 females. Those above 21 years of age are eligible to vote.
 The King appoints a speaker from among the nobles'
 representatives. Government ministers and nobles'
 representatives generally vote as a bloc. People's
 representatives sometimes vote against the Government.
 Elections are held every 3 years. There are no political
 parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reports of human rights violations. There
 are no local nongovernmental organizations which concern
 themselves with human rights. Tonga is not represented at the
 United Nations. The Government has not taken an active
 interest in international affairs, including international
 human rights matters.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, and sex. While the
 strong Polynesian cultural tradition has not encouraged the
 rise of women to positions of leadership, women have become
 members of the legislature and served in responsible positions
 in skilled and semiskilled occupations. No statistics are
 available on the employment of women in professional
 occupations or women's wages compared to men. Members of the
 hereditary nobility have substantial advantages in Tongan
 society. These include control over most of the land and a
 generally privileged status. It is possible, however, for
 commoners to rise to cabinet positions in government and to
 accumulate great wealth and status in the private sector.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to form unions. Tonga passed a trade
 union act in 1964, but to date no union has been formed.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Since no union has been formed in Tonga, collective bargaining
 is not a widespread practice. Informal employee groups do
 discuss conditions of work with employers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No information is available on current Tongan child labor
 legislation. In practice, child labor is not used in Tonga.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. A
 panel chaired by the Minister of Labor, Commerce, and Industry
 has been empowered to set minimum wage guidelines but had not
 done so as of September 1988. Although Tonga still does not
 
 
 951
 TONGA
 have a minimum wage law, it has for some years set minimum
 daily wages for such sectors of the economy as manufacturing
 and tourism. Workers are protected to a degree by the ease
 with which they can return to their villages and live without
 a cash income if wages offered are inadequate. Worker rights
 legislation covering such matters as safety standards,
 conditions of employment, and child labor is pending in the
 Legislative Assembly. Industrial accidents are uncommon, as
 few industries exist that expose workers to significant
 danger. Legislation for the provision of social security
 benefits to the work force has been under consideration by the
 Government since 1983. There have been no allegations of
 worker abuse.
 
 
 952
