 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 small islands scattered over a wide area of
 the South Pacific. Most of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which political life is dominated by the King,
 the nobility, and a few prominent commoners. It is a member of the Commonwealth
 of Nations. The judiciary is independent.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 police force. The 430-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 The economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has been offset largely
 by remittances from Tongans employed -abroad, overseas aid, and to a lesser degree
 tourism. Remittances via the formal banking system diminished, although informal
 transfers may bring overall remittances to their previous level.
 The principal human rights abuse remains severe restrictions on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government. A relatively small group of commoners vocally
 challenges the Constitution, arguing for a more representative and accountable gov-
 ernment. The Police Minister filed lawsuits against government critics to discourage
 dissent. Some women suffer from domestic violence, and discrimination within tradi-
 tional society limits the opportunities available to women.
 
 
 1081
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other
 such treatment, and there were no reports of such practices. Prison conditions are
 basic, especially as regards food and sanitation, but in accordance with local living
 standards. Church representatives and family members are permitted to visit pris-
 oners. No local nongovernmental organizations attempt human rights monitoring
 visits to prisons, and the permissibility of such visits has not arisen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution proscribes arbitrary ar-
 rest or detention and provides for the right to judicial determination of the legality
 of arrest; these are observed in practice. There is no preventive detention, although
 there are no statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be held prior to
 being charged. The law does not limit access by counsel and family members to de-
 tained persons. There is no forced exile, internal or external.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary, whose top judges have been expatri-
 ates, is independent of the King and the executive branch.
 The Court of Appeals, as the appellate court of last resort, is the highest court.
 The King's Privy Council presides over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobil-
 ity and estate boundaries. The King has the right to commute a death sentence in
 cases of murder or treason. In addition, the court system consists of the Supreme
 Court (which has original jurisdiction over all major cases), the police magistrates'
 courts, a general court, a court martial for the TDS, a court tribunal for the police
 force, and a court of review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial, and the Government honors
 it in practice. A court may not summon anyone without providing the person a writ-
 ten indictment stating the offenses the person is accused of committing. Defendants
 are entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants.
 There were no reports of political prisoners in 1998. However, some observers al-
 lege that Parliament's conviction and imprisonment of a parliamentarian and two
 journalists for contempt in September 1996 were politically motivated.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 and in practice, no one may enter or search the home of another or remove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. Neither the
 State nor political organizations intrude arbitrarily into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, at times the authorities infringed on these rights.
 Tonga has two weekly newspapers (one of which is government owned) and one
 privately owned national magazine. A Christian network owns the one television
 station, which has plans to expand from one to at least three channels. The Govern-
 ment owns one AM and one FM radio station. Three FM stations (one purely reli-
 gious) are privately run. While there is generaily little editorializing in the govern-
 ment-owned media, opposition opinion appears regularly alongside government
 statements and letters. A privately owned newspaper, Kele'a, openly criticizes the
 Government without interference. However, infringements on freedom of the press
 do occur. The Minister of Police, apparenty to inhibit dissent from government
 views, continued to file civil suits in Magistrates Court agalnst people who allegedly
 angered public servants. While such suits often are dismissed on appeal, they can
 be costly for the defendants. In July the Government refused entry to a New Zea-
 land journalist who wished to cover the King's birthday celebration, because his re-
 porting had displeased authorities in the past.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for peaceful
 assembly and association. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and abroad.
 The law places no restrictions on repatriation.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 
 
 1082
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and 33 hereditary nobles dominate political life. They assert author-
 ity largely through control of substantial landholdings and their dominant numbers
 in Parliament. While the Constitution allows the monarch broad powers, many of
 which do not require the legislative branch's endorsement, the King sometimes per-
 mits "the system" to work its will without his guidance. The King appoints the
 Prime Minister and appoints and presides over the Privy Council (called the Cabinet
 when the King is not presiding), which makes major policy decisions. Currently, the
 Cabinet is made up of nine ministers and two governors; it includes both nobles and
 commoners, who serve at the King's pleasure.
 The unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of the Cabinet,
 nine nobles elected by their peers, and nine people's representatives elected by the
 general population. The King appoints the Speaker from among the representatives
 of the nobles.
 Cabinet members and nobles usually vote as a bloc; however, recent votes related
 to impeachment charges against a commoner member of the Cabinet demonstrated
 that nobles and people's representatives do have the capacity to override the Cabi-
 net's wishes at times.
 In recent years, a number of people both inside and outside the establishment
 have called for democratic change, usually emphasizing the importance of more gov-
 ernment accountability. Very few challenge retention of the monarchy; the King is
 greatly respected. A prodemocracy movement continues to exist, although it cur-
 rently lacks formal structure due to differences of views among its leaders. All nine
 current people's representatives advocate various degrees of democratic reform. Pro-
 posals for constitutional revision tend to center on the popular election of all parlia-
 mentarians, with the parliamentarians then selecting their speaker.
 There are no female Members of Parliament, although there have been in the
 past.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Righis
 There are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental organiza-
 tions (NGO's) that concern themselves with human rights. Some local NGO's include
 among their interests human rights problems, although none currently undertakes
 investigations of alleged violations. No outside organizations are known to have
 made requests to investigate alleged human rights violations, but some publicly
 criticized the Governments refusal to grant a New Zealand journalist a visa in 1998
 (see Section 2.a.). Tonga is not a member of the United Nations; it does participate
 in some U.N. subsidiary organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. However, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages. These include control over most of the land and a generally privileged sta-
 tus. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to cabinet positions in govern-
 ment and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private sector.
 Women.-Domestic violence is seldom publicized, but it is a problem. Incidents of
 wife beating are generally dealt with in traditional ways within families or by vil-
 lage elders. Such abuse is seldom reported to the police. Abused wives sometimes
 return to their families if mediation fails.
 Tonga has a male-dominated society, and women generally occupy a subordinate
 role. For a woman to rise to a position Of leadership, she usually needs to have the
 support of the nobility or to possess exceptional talent. The King's mother reigned
 for many years, and a royal princess is one of Tonga's most prominent
 businesspersons. Some female commoners hold senior leadership positions in busi-
 ness.
 Some village women, with help from NGO's, are leading local development
 projects.
 The Government has a women's unit in the Prime Minister's office. Although
 some NGO's initially viewed this unit with suspicion, it appears to be functioning
 cooperatively with them. Still, many young, educated women regard the unit as inef-
 fective. A governmeht-sponsored National Council of Women is making positive con-
 tributions.
 
 
 1083
 
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State. Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not
 become a source of concern in a society where the extended family participates in'
 child rearing.
 People With Disabilities.-No mandated provisions for accessibility to buildings
 and services for the disabled exist. There were no known complaints of discrimina-
 tion in employment, education, or provision of other state services. The education
 of children with special needs has been a longstanding priority of the Queen.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 The lack of unions makes the question of the ability of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national bodies moot; however, such a right is neither protected, prohibited, nor lim-
 ited by the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small export en-
 hancement zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor in-
 cluding forced and bonded labor by children, and it is not practiced.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Child
 labor is not used in the wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting
 it. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and enforces this
 prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 Education has been compulsory since 1882. Although it is sometimes criticized as
 being of poor quality, education is provided for all children through Form 6 (high
 school). Compliance rates are good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law, although
 there are government guidelines, for wage levels. Labor laws and regulations, en-
 forced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry, limit the workweek to 40
 hours. The Ministry of Labor enforces laws and regulations reasonably well in the
 wage sector of the economy, particularly on the main island of Tongatapu. Enforce-
 ment in agriculture and on the outer islands is limited by isolation.
 Industrial accidents are rare, as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there little or no work has been done
 on industrial safety standards.
