 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 small islands scattered over a wide area of
 the South Pacific. Most of the approximately 105,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which political life is dominated by the King,
 the nobility, and a few prominent commoners. It is fully independent anda member
 of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 police force. The 350-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 The economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has been offset largely
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and to a lesser degree
 tourism. Remittances continued to diminish due in part to recessionary economic
 conditions in those overseas countries and in part to a weakening of emigrant ties
 to Tonga.
 The principal human rights abuses remain severe restrictions on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government and discrimination against women. The Constitu-
 tion, dating from 1875, has been increasingly challenged by commoners, whom it
 disadvantages.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other
 such treatment, and there were no reports of such practices. Prison conditions are
 basic especially as regards food and sanitation, but in accordance with local living
 standards, Church representatives and family members are permitted to visit pris-
 oners. As there are no local human rights groups, the question of visits by human
 rights monitors has not arisen.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution proscribes arbitrary ar-
 rest or detention, and provides for the right to judicial determination of the legality
 
 
 790
 of arrest; these are observed in practice. There is no preventive detention, although
 there are no statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be held prior to
 being charged. The law does not limit access by counsel and family members to de-
 tained persons. There is no exile, internal or external.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary, whose top judges are expatriates,
 is independent of the King and the executive branch. The Court of Appeals, as the
 appellate court of last resort, is the highest court. The King's Privy Council presides
 over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobility and estate boundaries. The
 King has the right to commute a death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In
 addition, the court system consists of the Supreme Court (which has original juris-
 diction over all major cases), the police magistrates' courts, a general court, a court
 martial for the TDS, a court tribunal for the police force, and a court of review for
 the Inland Revenue Department.
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial, and the Government honors
 it in practice. A court may not summon anyone without providing the person a writ-
 ten indictment stating the offenses it charges the person committed. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel, and lawyers have free access to defendants.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitra.y Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 and in practice, no one may enter or search the home of another or remove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. Neither the
 State nor political organizations intrude arbitrarily into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Tonga has five newspapers (one of which is government owned) and
 one national magazine. The Government owns the only radio station. While there
 is generally little editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition opinion
 appears regularly alongside government statements and letters. A privately owned
 newspaper, Kele'a, openly criticizes the Government without government inter-
 ference. A Catholic monthly, Taumu'a Lelei, also speaks out freely.
 However, infringements of freedom of the press do occur. The Minister of Police
 has on occasion threatened action against the independent media. Specific infringe-
 ments are usually tied to a particular event. An Australian journalist who had writ-
 ten critically (and, the Government alleged, not factually) about the Tongan royal
 family was barred from attending the July Pacific Island Media Association conven-
 tion. In September two journalists, one a Tongan-American, were arrested and sen-
 tenced to 30 days in prison by the Parliament for publishing a notice of impeach-
 ment submitted to Parliament against the Justice Minister for having traveled to
 the Atlanta Olympics. The Member of Parliament who submitted the notice of im-
 peachment also was jailed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for peaceful
 assembly and association. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and abroad.
 The law places no restrictions on repatriation.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate political life. They
 assert authority largely through their control of substantial landholdings and their
 predominant role in the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution allows the monarch
 broad powers, many of which do not require the endorsement of the legislative
 branch. The King a ppoints and presides over the Privy Council, which makes major
 policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the Privy Council is called the
 Cabinet.) The King also selects the Prime Minister and other Cabinet ministers,
 who hold office at his pleasure.
 The unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of 12 Cabinet min-
 isters, 9 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 people's representatives. All literate
 Tongans 21 years of age or older are eligible to vote. The Wing appoints the Speaker
 from among the representatives of the nobles. Government ministers generally vote
 
 
 with the nobles' representatives as a bloc. People's representatives sometimes vote
 against the Government.
 Throughout the 1990's, people inside and outside the government establishment
 have called for democratic change. The Prodemocracy Movement, formally estab-
 lished in 1993, is dedicated to educating the people about their democratic rights.
 Following its election victory in February 1993, the movement turned to drafting
 proposals for revision of the 1875 Constitution most notably proposals for popular
 election of all 30 members of the Assembly and election of Ye House Speaker from
 among Assembly members. As a result of January parliamentary elections, all of the
 nine people's representative seats are now held by legislators who advocate demo-
 cratic reform.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations that concern themselves with human rights, no such organizations exist.
 No outside organizations are known to have made requests to investigate alleged
 human rights violations. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. however, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 vantages. These include control over most of the land and a generally privileged sta-
 tus. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to cabinet positions in govern-
 ment and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private sector.
 Women.-Domestic violence is infrequent. Incidents of wife beating that do occur
 are generally dealt with in traditional ways between the families and village elders;
 abused wives sometimes return to their families if mediation fails.
 In this male-dominated society, women generally occupy a subordinate role. While
 the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has discouraged the rise of women to posi-
 tions of leadership, a few have nonetheless become members of the legislature and
 have served in responsible positions in various occupations. However, these women
 needed connections with the nobility or extraordinary luck, and they face severe lim-
 its on their upward mobility in this tradition-bound society. Some village women are
 breaking the mold of passive, docile followers by leading village-based development
 projects. The Government has sought to direct the efforts of women's nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's) by establishing a women's unit within the Prime Min-
 ister's office. However, women's groups view this as an attempt to co]ot them and
 their prgrams. They criticize the Government's emphasis on organization, process,
 and control, with few programs of substance. The  eGO's and the women's unit dis-
 age on the need for and potential composition of a government-sponsored National
 Counsil of W omen.
 Chimdren.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State. Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not
 become a source of societal concern.
 People With Disabilities.-No mandated prvisions for accessibility for the dis-
 abled exist. There were no known complaints of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services. Education of children with special needs
 has been a longstanding priority of the Queen.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 The lack of unions makes the question of the ability of unions to affiliate with inter-
 national bodies moot; however, such a right is neither protected, prohibited, nor lim-
 ited by the Government.
 b. T~'he Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small exprt en-
 hancement zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labori.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-,-Child labor is not used in the
 wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting it. Education has been
 compulsory since 1882. Although it is sometimes criticized as being of poor quality,
 
 
 792
 
 education is provided for all children through Form 6 (high school). Compliance
 rates are good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law. Labor laws
 and regulations, enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and Industry, limit
 the workweek to 40 hours. The Ministry of Labor enforces laws and regulations rea-
 sonably well in the wage sector of the economy, particularly on the main island of
 Tongatapu. Enforcement in agriculture and on the outer islands is limited by isola-
 tion.
 Industrial accidents are rare, as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 on industrial safety standards.
