 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga cqmprises 169 islands scattered over an
 area of 360,000 square kilometers of the South Pacific. All
 but a handful of the 104,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy, with political life
 dominated by the King and a few nobles. In 1900 Tonga entered
 into a protectorate association with Great Britain. In 1970
 it became fully-independent again and joined the Commonwealth.
 Tonga's economy is based almost exclusively on the cultivation
 of tropical and semi-tropical crops. An increasing demand for
 imported manufactured goods and products not available locally
 has led to a substantial balance of trade deficit. This has
 largely been offset thus far by remittances from Tongans
 employed abroad, overseas aid, and, to a lesser degree, by
 tourism. There were no significant human rights issues in
 Tonga in 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no politicaily motivated killings by the Government
 or opposition political forces.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, nor was there any evidence of
 people being abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely
 detained.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
 punishment is prohibited by law and there were no reported
 instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Habeas corpus is enshrined in the Constitution and observed in
 practice. There is no preventive detention and no exile,
 internal or external. Forced labor is prohibited by law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right of a fair public trial is guaranteed by law and
 honored in practice. No one may be summoned before any court
 without first having received a written indictment clearly
 stating the offense with which he is charged. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel, and counselors have free access to
 defendants. The judiciary is independent of government
 interference, and there are no special courts for political or
 security offenses. Tonga has no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 By law no one may enter or search the home of another, or
 remove any item of property unless in possession of a warrant
 issued by a magistrate. There is no arbitrary intrusion of
 the state or political organizations into the private life of
 the individual.
 
 
 831
 TONGA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is guaranteed by the
 Constitution. Tonga's radio station and the country's largest
 circulation newspaper are government owned. Other components
 of the media are privately owned. There were no known
 instances of abuse of freedom of speech and press.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assembly and association are provided for by law.
 There are no significant restrictions. Tonga passed a trade
 union act in 1964, but to date no union has been formed.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize without
 impediment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Tongan citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom
 and abroad. There are no restrictions on repatriation. There
 are no displaced persons in Tonga.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate
 political life in Tonga. They assert authority largely
 through their control of substantial land holdings. The
 Constitution allows the monarch broad powers, many of which do
 not require the endorsement of the legislative branch. The
 King appoints and presides over the Privy Council, which makes
 major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the
 Privy Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects
 the prime ministers and other cabinet ministers, who hold
 office at his pleasure. Tonga's unicameral legislature, the
 Legislative Assembly, consists of 7 nobles elected by their
 peers (33 noble titles are recognized by the Constitution),
 and 7 people's representatives elected by all literate,
 tax-paying males and all literate females over 21. The King
 appoints a speaker from among the nobles' representatives.
 Government ministers and nobles' representatives generally
 vote as a bloc. People's representatives sometimes vote
 against the Government. Elections are held every 3 years.
 There are no political parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights
 violations by the Government. There are no local
 nongovernmental organizations which concern themselves with
 human rights. Tonga is not represented at the United Nations;
 and the Government has not taken an active interest in
 international affairs, including international human rights
 matters.
 
 
 832
 TONGA
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all
 citizens regardless of race, religion, or sex. While the
 strong Polynesian cultural tradition has not encouraged the
 rise of women to positions of leadership, women have become
 members of the legislature and served in responsible positions
 in several ministries. The existence of a hereditary class of
 nobles is generally accepted because of a long tradition
 dating back over 1,000 years and because obligations and
 responsibilities are reciprocal. Although the nobles may be
 able to extract favors from people living on their estates,
 they must likewise extend favors to their people. However,
 increasing educational opportunities for young commoners and a
 concomitant increase in their political awareness has
 stimulated some dissent against the nobility system.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 By regulation the workweek in Tonga is limited to 40 hours. A
 panel chaired by the Minister of Labor, Commerce, and Industry
 has been empowered to set minimum wage guidelines but had
 failed to do so as of October 1, 1986. Worker rights
 legislation covering such matters as safety standards,
 conditions of employment, and child labor is pending in the
 Legislative Assembly. Legislation for the provision of social
 security benefits to the work force has been under
 consideration by the Government since 1983.
 
 
 833
