 TONGA
 The Kingdom of Tonga comprises 169 small islands scattered over a wide area of
 the South-Pacific. Mos  of the approximately 104,000 inhabitants are Polynesian.
 Tonga is a constitutional monarchy in which political life is dominated by the King;
 the nobility, and a few prominent commoners. Tonga is fully independent and a
 member of the Commonwealth of Nations.
 The security apparatus is composed of the Tonga Defense Services (TDS) and a
 plice force. The 350-man TDS force is responsible to and controlled by the Minister
 of Defense.
 Tonga's economy is based primarily on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical
 crops. An increasing demand for imported manufactured goods and products un-
 available locally has led to a substantial trade deficit. This has largely been offset
 by remittances from Tongans employed abroad, overseas aid, and, to a lesser degree,
 tourism. Remittances frmTongans overseas continued to diminish, due in part to
 recessionary economic conditions and in part to a weakening of emigrant ties to
 Ton a.
 The principal human rights abuses remain severe restrctins on the right of citi-
 zens to change their government and discrimination against women. The Constitu-
 tion, dating from 1875, has beinen creasingly challeged by commoners, whom it
 disadvantages.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b.DTnappearance.-yThere were no reports of disappearances and no evidence of
 people being abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other
 such treatment, and there were no reports of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides for the right
 to judicial determination of the legality of arrest, and this is observed in practice.
 There is no exile, internal or external. There is no preventive detention, although
 there are no statutory limits to the length of time a suspect may be heid prior to
 being charged. The law does not limit access by counsel and family members to de-
 tained persons.
 Se. Denial  ct Fair Public TriaL-The judiciary, whose top judges are expatriates,
 is independent of the King and the executive branch. The Court of Appeals, as the
 appellate court of last resort, is the highest court. The King's Privy Council presides
 over cases relating to disputes over titles of nobility and estate boundaries. The
 King has the right to commute a death sentence in cases of murder or treason. In
 addtion, Tonga a court system consists of the Supreme Court (which has original
 jurisdiction over all major cases), the police magistrate's courts, a general court, a
 court martial for the Tongan Defense Services, a court tribunal for the police force,
 and a court of review for the Inland Revenue Department.
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial, and the Government honors
 it in practice. A court may not summon anyone without providing the person a writ-
 ten indictment stating the offenses it charges the person committed. Defendants are
 entitled to counsel and lawyers have free access to defendants. There are no politi-
 cal prisoners.
 f. Arbitrarynterference with Privacy, Family, Home, or  ofppo ealsas law
 and~m pratice, no one may ener or search the home  i anotri or remnove any item
 of property unless in possession of a warrant issued by a magistrate. Neither the
 State nor political organizations intrude arbitrarily into a person's private life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Saech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press. Tongahas five newspapers (one of which is government owned) and two
 national magazines. The Government owns the only radio station. While there is
 
 
 generally little editorializing in the government-owned media, opposition opinion ap-
 pears regularly alongside government statements and letters. A privately owned
 newspaper, Kele'a, openly criticizes the Government without government inter-
 ference. A Catholic monthly, Taumu'a Lelei, also speaks out freely. The Minister of
 Police has on occasion threatened action against the independent media, but no ac-
 tion has ever been taken. Specific infringements are usually tied to a particular
 event, such as the November 1992 Prodemocracy Convention, when live reporting
 was banned and media attendance inhibited. There were no reports of any restric-
 tions in 1994. However, the King signed legislation on January 3 which greatly in-
 creased the penalties available through the Defamation Act. Prodemocracy leader
 'Akilisi Pohiva has been a frequent target of defamation lawsuits for reports in his
 independent publication. He also has initiated his own lawsuits against others.
 Court decisions in these cases have gone both for and against Pohiva, based on the
 merits of the case.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for peaceful
 assembly and association. There are no significant restrictions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and it
 is observed in practice. Missionaries may proselytize freely
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Gountr Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel anywhere within the Kingdom and abroad.
 he law places no restrictions on repatriation. There are no displaced persons in
 Tonga.
 Sect-on 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the ability to change their leaders or the system of govern-
 ment. The King and a small group of hereditary nobles dominate political life in
 Tonga. They assert authority largely through their control of substantial land hold-
 ings and their predominant role in the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution al-
 lows the monarch broad powers, many of which do not require the endorsement of
 the legislative branch. The King appoints and presides over the Privy Council,
 which makes major policy decisions. (When the King is not presiding, the Privy
 Council is called the Cabinet.) The King also selects the Prime Minister and other
 Cabinet ministers, who hold office at his pleasure.
 Tonga's unicameral legislature, the Legislative Assembly, consists of 12 Cabinet
 ministers, 9 nobles elected by their peers, and 9 people's representatives. All literate
 Tongans, 21 years of age or older, are eligible to vote. The King appoints the Speak-
 er from among the representatives of the nobles. Government ministers generally
 vote with the nobles' representatives as a bloc. People's representatives sometimes
 vote against the Government. Elections are held every 3 years, most recently in Feb-
 ruary 1993. As a result of those elections, the Prodemocracy Movement extended its
 influence with the election of strong supporters to six of the nine people's represent-
 ative seats.
 Throughout the 1990's people inside and outside the government establishment
 have called for democratic change. The Prodemocracy Movement, formally estab-
 lished in 1992, is dedicated to educating the people about their democratic rights.
 Following its election victory in February 1992, the movement turned to drafting
 proposals for revision of the 1875 Constitution, most notably proposals for popular
 election of all 30 members of the Assembly and election of the house speaker from
 among Assembly members.
 In August the Prodemocracy Movement made history when its leaders founded
 Tonga's first political party "The People's Party." The party continues the goals of
 the Prodenocracy Movement, maintaining that the Monarchy is an inalienable part
 of the national identity, but arguing that the Government must become more rel-
 evant to today's world. It seeks greater power sharing by the King and greater ac-
 countability on the part of the Government. Official reaction to the party has been
 one of disdain, with no effort to repress it or interfere in its functioning.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 While there are no known barriers to the formation of local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations that concern themselves with human rights, no such organizations exist
 in Tonga. No outside organizations are known to have made requests to investigate
 human rights violations. Tonga is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Social, cultural, and economic facilities are available to all citizens regardless of
 race or religion. However, members of the hereditary nobility have substantial ad-
 
 
 vantages in Tongan society. These include control over most of the land and a gen-
 erally privileged status. Nonetheless, it is possible for commoners to rise to Cabinet
 positions in government and to accumulate great wealth and status in the private
 sector.
 Women.-In Tonga's male-dominated society, women genery occupy a subordi-
 nate role. While the strong Polynesian cultural tradition has discouraged the rise
 of women to positions of leadership, a few have nonetheless become members of the
 legislature and have served in responsible positions in various occupations. How-
 ever, these women needed connections with the nobility or extraordinary luck, and
 they face severe limits on their upward mobility in this tradition-bound society.
 Some village women are breaking the mold of passive, docile followers by leading
 village-based development projects. The Government has sought to direct the efforts
 of nongovernmental women's organizations (NGO's) by establishing a women's unit
 within the Prime Minister's office. However, women s groups view this as an at-
 tempt to coopt them and their programs. They criticize the Government's emphasis
 on organization, process, and control, with few programs of substance. The NGO's
 and the women's unit disagree on the need for and potential composition of a gov-
 ernment-sponsored nationai council of women.
 Domestic violence is infrequent. As a result, the country does not have a women's
 crisis center. Incidents of wife beating that do occur are generally dealt with in tra-
 ditional ways between the families and village elders; abused wives sometimes re-
 turn to their families if mediation fails.
 Children.-Child abuse, if it occurs, is rare and has not become a source of soci-
 etal concern. The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State.
 People With Disabilities.-No mandated provisions for accessibility for the dis-
 abled exist. There were no known complaints of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services. Education of children with special needs
 has been a longstanding priority of Tonga's Queen.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to form unions under the
 1964 Trade Union Act, but to date no unions have been formed, presumably because
 of the small size of the wage economy and the lack of a perceived need for unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Since no unions have been
 formed, collective bargaining is not practiced. There is no legislation permitting and
 protecting collective bargaining or the right to organize. Labor laws and regulations
 are enforced in all sectors of the economy, including in the two small export en-
 hancement zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor,
 and it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Child labor is not used in the
 wage economy, although there is no legislation prohibiting it. Education has been
 compulsory in Tonga since 1882. Although it is sometimes criticized as being of poor
 quality, education is provided for all children through Form 6 (high school). Compli-
 ance rates are good.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tonga does not have a minimum wage law.
 Labor laws and regulations, enforced by the Ministry of Labor, Commerce, and In-
 dustry, limit the workweek to 40 hours. The Ministry Labor enforces laws and regu-
 lations reasonably well in the wage sector of the economy, particularly on the main
 island of Tongatapu. Enforcement in agriculture and on the outer islands is limited
 by isolation.
 Industrial accidents are rare, as few industries exist that would expose workers
 to significant danger. Due to these factors, there has been little or no work done
 in Tonga on industrial safety standards.
