 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which there have been free and fair general elections since inde-
 pendence from the United Kingdom in 1962. A bicameral Parliament and a Prime
 Minister govern the country. Parliament elects the President, whose office is largely
 ceremonial. A 12-membr elected House of Assembly handles local matters on the
 island of Tobago.
 The Ministry of National Security controls the police service and the defense force,
 which are responsive to civilian authority. An independent body, the Police Service
 Commission, makes all personnel decisions in the police service, and the Ministry
 has little direct influence over changes in senior positions.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on the petroleum and natural gas
 industries, but efforts are being made to diversify the ecnomy into services, manu-
 facturing, and tourism. The Government has historically owned many businesses
 wholly or partially; however, under a major divestment program a number of state-
 owned corporations have been privatized either partially or completely. The rate of
 real economic growth was about 3.1 percent, and annual per capita income was
 about $4,391.
 Citizens enjoy a wide range of civil liberties and individual rights. Nonetheless,
 increased violent crime and narcotics trafficking strained the justice system, which
 was severely bogged down by excessive delays. Human rights abuses also included
 overcrowded prisons and violence against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punis"hment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the imposition of cruel or unusual treatment or punish-
 ment, and there were no allegations of police brutality in 1996.
 Courts frequently order the flogging of prisoners, but this is not actually carried
 out in practice. The relevant statute requires that the punishment be carried out
 
 
 within 6 months of sentencing;, defendants appeal all flogging sentences, and courts
 do not hear the appeals before the 6-month deadline.
 Overcrowding is a serious problem in men's prisons, where shortages of guards
 and unsanitary conditions have led to serious social and health problems. Condi-
 tions are most serious in the older facilities: Port of Spain prison, for example, was
 designed for 250 inmates, but houses 977. Diseases such as chicken pox, tuber-
 culosis, AIDS, and other viruses spread easily, and prisoners generally must pur-
 chase their own medication. A new maximum security facility was supposed to open
 but had not been completed at year's end. Facilities for, and treatment of, women
 prisoners appear to be better, with a strong and successful orientation toward reha-
 bilitation.
 The Government admits independent human rights monitors into prisons, accord-
 ing to the Ministry of National Security.
 Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary de-
 tention, imprisonment, or exile of any person. A police officer may arrest a person
 either based on a warrant issued or authorized by a magistrate or without a war-
 rant when the officer witnesses commission of the alleged offense. For less serious
 offenses, the authorities typically bring the accused before a magistrate within 24
 hours; for indictable offenses, the accused must appear within 48 hours. At that
 time the magistrate reads the charge and determines whether ball is appropriate.
 Magistrates may deny bail to violent or repeat offenders. If for some reason the ac-
 cused does not come before the magistrate, the case comes up on the magistrate's
 docket every 8 to 10 days until a hearing date is set. The courts notify persons of
 their right to an attorney and allow them access to an attorney once they are in
 custody and prior to any interrogation. The authorities do not always comply with
 these standards, however.
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public safety, public order, or national defense, and
 the Minister must state the grounds for the detention. A detainee under this provi-
 sion has access to counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-member
 tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The Minister
 must provide the tribunal with the grounds for the detention within 7 days of the
 detainee's request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. There have been no reports that the au-
 thorities abused this procedure.
 As noted, exile is forbidden by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent in practice and is not
 influenced by the executive or legislative branches or the military.
 The court system consists of high courts, a system of magistrate's courts, and a
 national court of appeal. The high courts handle all civil cases and most serious"
 offenses, such as capital crimes. All criminal cases are first sent to a magistrate's
 court, but for serious offenses, the magistrate only hears the case to record whether
 the defendant pleads guilty or innocent. Appeals may be made to the national court
 of appeal and then to the Privy Council in London.
 The Constitution provides the right to a fair public trial for persons charged with
 criminal offenses. It also provides for presumption of innocence, reasonable bail, fair
 and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, and an interpreter
 for non-English speakers. The authorities generally respected these rights in prac-
 tice. All criminal defendants have the right to an attorney. In practice, the courts
 sometimes appoint attorneys for those persons charged with indictable offenses (se-
 rious crimes) if they cannot retain one on their own behalf. The law requires a per-
 son accused of murder to have an attorney. An indigent person may refuse to accept
 an assigned attorney for cause and obtain a replacement. In spite of these provi-
 sions, however, there were several allegations by prisoners charged with narcotics
 trafficking offenses that the authorities did not provide them with attorneys even
 after they specifically requested counsel.
 Despite serious efforts to improve the judiciary, severe inefficiency remains in
 many areas. Several criminal cases were dismissed due to judicial or police ineffi-
 ciency. On October 11, the courts acquitted a defendant charged with murdering a
 police officer in March 1982; the authorities had held him in custody for over 14
 years. Over 20,000 criminal cases introduced since 1986 await trial.
 The limited availability of transport to take defendants from prisons to courts is
 a serious problem contributing to the delay in trials. Despite efforts to provide more
 transportation, prisoners continue to miss court dates because of a lack of vehicles,
 and there have een charges by inmates that transport operators demand bribes in
 order to transport prisoners.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 
 
 569
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction. Police must obtain search
 warrants to enter private property.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and
 of the press, including academic freedom.
 The three major daily newspapers freely and often criticize the Government in
 editorials. Widely read weekly tabloids tend to be extremely critical of the Govern-
 ment. All newspapers are privately owned. The two local television newscasts, one
 of which appears on a state-owned station, are sometimes critical of the Government
 but generally do not editorialize.
 In April a reporter with the Trinidad Guardian newspaper said that plainclothes
 police grabbed him after he photographed the arrest of a robbery suspect. The re-
 porter said that a police officer forced him to open the camera, took out the fim,
 and exposed it. He reported the matter to the San Fernando police, but the authori-
 ties took no action.
 A Board of Film Censors is authorized to ban films it considers to be against pub-
 lic order and decency or contrary to the public interest. This includes films which
 it believes may be controversial in matters of religion, seditious propaganda, or race.
 In practice, films are rarely prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of freedom of assembly and association, and the Government respects
 these rights in practice. Registration or other governmental permission to form pri-
 vate associations is not required. The police routinely grant the required advance
 permits for street marches, demonstrations, or other outdoor public meetings.
 Political activity by trade associations or professional bodies is not restricted, and
 these organizations affiliate freely with recognized international bodies in their
 fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. Residents are free to emigrate, return, and travel within
 or outside the country, as well as to change residence and workplace.
 There is no provision for persons to claim or be classified as refugees or asylum
 seekers; any such cases are handled on a case-by-case basis by the Ministry of Na-
 tional Security's Immigration Division. The issue of the provision of first asylum did
 not arise. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens choose their government by secret ballot in free and fair multiparty elec-
 tions held at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago
 House of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to
 vote to citizens as well as to legal residents with citizenship in other Commonwealth
 countries who are at least 18 years of age.
 In November 1995 general elections, the former opposition United National Con-
 gress (UNC) and the ruling People's National Movement (PNM) each won 17 seats
 in Parliament. The National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) won two seats and
 joined with the UNC in forming a new government. Basdeo Panday became the
 country's first Prime Minister of East Indian descent. The PNM is primarily but not
 exclusively Afro-Trinidadian; the UNC is primarily but not exclusively Indo-
 Trinidadian.
 There are no specific laws that restrict the participation of women or minorities
 in government or the political parties. Women hold many positions in the Govern-
 ment and political party leadership. Four out of 36 elected members of the House
 of Representatives and 9 out of 31 appointed Senators are female, with 3 serving
 as ministers. Prime Minister Panday appointed a woman as Attorney General. She
 was the first female Attorney General, and she has since moved to the position of
 Minister of Legal Affairs.
 
 
 570
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several small nongovernmental human rights groups operate freely without gov-
 ernment restriction or interference. An independent Ombudsman receives com-
 plaints relating to governmental administrative issues and investigates complaints
 of human rights abuse. The Ombudsman can make recommendations but does not
 have authority to force government offices to take action.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Government respects in practice the constitutional provisions of fundamental
 human rights and freedoms to all without discrimination based on race, origin,
 color, religion, or sex.
 Women.-Physical abuse of women continued to be an extensive problem; murder
 rape, and other crimes against women are frequently reported. There are several
 shelters for battered women, and a rape crisis center offers counseling for rape vic-
 tims and perpetrators on a voluntary basis; as of September 30, 154 people had vol-
 untarily requested counseling, and 54 incidents of rape had been reported. Law en-
 forcement officials and the courts are generally not sensitive to family violence prob-
 lems.
 Many women hold positions in business, the professions, and government, but
 men tend to hold the most senior positions. There is no law or regulation requiring
 equal pay for equal work.
 'he Division of Women's Affairs in the Ministry of Community Development,
 Women's Affairs, and Culture is charged with protecting women's rights in all as-
 pects of government and legislation. Several active women's rights groups also exist.
 Children.-The Government's ability to protect children's welfare is limited by a
 lack of funds and expanding social needs. Some parts of the public school system
 seriously fail to meet the needs of the school age population due to overcrowding,
 substandard physical facilities, and occasional classroom violence by gangs. There
 is no societal pattern of abuse directed at children. The Domestic Violence Act pro-
 vides protection for children abused at home. Abused children are usually placed
 with relatives if they are removed from the home. If there is no relative who can
 take them, there are several government institutions and nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) which accept children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no legislation that specifically enumerates or
 protects the rights of disabled persons nor mandates the provision of access to build-
 ings or services, althoug NGO's lobbied Parliament to pass such legislation. Lack
 of access to transportation, buildings, and sidewalks is a major obstacle for the dis-
 abled. Only two vans in the country are equipped with hydraulic lift devices for ac-
 cess by disabled persons. One such van broke down in 1995 and was not repaired;
 the other broke down in 1996. The Government provides some public assistance and
 partial funding to a variety of NGO's which, in turn, provide direct services to dis-
 abled members or clients.
 Indigenous People.-Members of a very small group in the population identify
 themselves as descendants of the original Amerindian population of the island. They
 maintain social ties with each other and other aboriginal groups and are not subject
 to discrimination.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Various ethnic and religious groups live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 at times racial tensions appear between Afro-Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians.
 Each group comprises about 40 percent of the population. The private sector is
 dominated by Indo-Trinidadians and people of European, Middle Eastern, or Asian
 descent. Indo-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians tend
 to find employment in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and mili-
 tary. Some Indo-Trinidadians assert that they are excluded from equal representa-
 tion in the civil service due to racial discrimination. Since Indo-Trinidadians con-
 stitute the majority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are in the majority in
 urban areas, competition between town and country for public goods and services
 often takes on racial overtones.
 In October there were reports that several popular recreational clubs were refus-
 ing entry to Afro-Trinidadians and dark skinned Indo-Trinidadians. The reports cre-
 ated a great outcry in the local press against racism, and the Government pledged
 to implement a law banning racial discrimination in entry policies for private clubs.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1972 Industrial Relations Act provides that all
 workers, including those in state-owned enterprises, may form or join unions of
 
 
 571
 their own choosing without prior authorization. Union membership has declined,
 with an estimated 20 to 28 percent of the work force organized in 14 active unions.
 Most unions are independent of the Government or political party control, although
 the Sugar Workers' Union is historically allied with the UNC. The Prime Minister
 was formerly president of the Sugar Workers' Union.
 The law prohibits antiunion activities before a union is legally registered, and the
 Ministry of Labor enforces this provision when it receives a complaint. A union may
 also bring a request for enforcement to the Industrial Court. All employees except
 those in "essential services," such as government employees and police, have the
 right to strike.
 In August junior doctors at Port of Spain and San Fernando general hospitals
 began a series of sick-outs and work-to-rule actions to protest poor working condi-
 tions and insufficient pay. During these actions, several wards were frequently out
 of service at Port of Spain general hospital, including the intensive care ward. In
 late October, some of the junior doctors stopped their work-to-rule policy and began
 settlement negotiations with the Ministry of Health and the regional health author-
 ity. In September public school teachers began a series of work-to-rule actions and
 sick-outs. The Trinidad and Tobago Unified Teachers Association called for salary
 increases and improved working conditions.
 The Labor Relations Act prohibits retribution against strikers and provides for
 grievance procedures if needed. A special section of the Industrial Court handles
 mandatory arbitration cases. Arbitration agreements are enforceable and appealable
 only to the Industrial Court.
 Unions freely join federations and affiliate with international bodies. There are
 no restrictions on international travel or contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Act
 establishes the right of workers to collective bargaining. The Ministry of Labor con-
 ciliation service maintains statistical information regarding the number of workers
 covered by collective bargaining agreements and the number of antiunion com-
 plaints filed.
 The Industrial Court may order employers found guilty of antiunion activities to
 reinstate workers and pay compensation, or it can impose other penalties including
 imprisonment. When necessary, the conciliation service also determines which
 unions should have senior status.
 There are several newly organized export processing zones (EPZ's). The same
 labor laws apply in the EPZ's as in the country at large.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory laborThe law does not explicitly prohibit
 forced or compulsory labor, but there were no reports that it was practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum legal age for work-
 ers is 12 years. Children from 12 to 14 years of age may only work in family busi-
 nesses. Children under the age of 18 may legally work only during daylight hours,
 with the exception of 16- to 18-year-olds, who may work at night in sugar factories.
 The probation service in the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services
 is responsible for enforcing child labor provisions, but enforcement is lax. There is
 no organized exploitation of child labor, but children are often seen begging or work-
 ing as street vendors. Some are used by criminals as guards and couriers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage. The Gov-
 ernment has set minimum wages for 53 job categories in 5 nonunionized occupa-
 tional groupings. The minimum pay ranges from $26 (TT$130.45) per week to $57
 (TT$285) per week. These rates were to be adjusted for cost-of-living increases at
 regular intervals, but Parliament has never considered an adjustment since passing
 the laws. The Ministry of Labor enforces the minimum wage regulations. A mini-
 mum wage is not sufficient to support a worker and family, but most workers earn
 more than the minimum.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours. There are no restrictions on overtime work.
 Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agreements.
 For those sectors covered, the minimum wage laws also stipulate holiday pay, 2
 weeks' vacation, and 14 days' sick leave per year.
 The Factories and Ordinance Bill of 1948 sets requirements for health and safety
 standards in certain industries and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce
 compliance. The Industrial Relations Act protects workers who file complaints with
 the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions. Should it
 be determined upon inspection that hazardous conditions exist in the workplace, the
 worker is absolved in refusing to comply with an order that would have placed him
 or her in danger.
 
 
 572
