 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations,
 is a parliamentary democracy. Political and civil rights are
 provided for by the Constitution and are generally respected
 in practice. Free and fair general elections have been held
 at regular intervals since independence from Great Britain in
 1962. The country is governed by a bicameral Parliament and a
 Prime Minister from the lower house.
 The Trinidad and Tobago Police Force is, generally, a capable
 and professional force, as is the Trinidad and Tobago Defense
 Force. Both of them are.under the control of and responsive
 to civilian authorities. However, some abuses of authority
 and corruption continued in 1990, and court cases were brought
 against individual police officers for use of excessive
 force. In some cases, police officers and soldiers used
 excessive force following the mid-year coup attempt crisis to
 apprehend looters, locate additional rebels, and enforce a
 curfew.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on petroleum
 production and refining, but efforts continue to diversify the
 economy into agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism. Many
 major industries are either wholly or partially owned by the
 Government. There is a strong tradition of private enterprise
 and ownership of property, however, and the Government is
 endeavoring to sell several state enterprises, in whole or in
 part. The standard of living remains relatively high.
 On July 27, an armed band of radical Muslims, the Tamaat Al
 Muslimeen (JAM), attempted to overthrow the Government by
 taking Cabinet members and parliamentarians hostage in the
 parliament building. The JAM also occupied the facilities of
 the country's only television station, taking staff members
 hostage, and burned down police headquarters in Port of
 Spain. These events precipitated looting in Port of Spain's
 central business district and at several other locations in
 the country. The coup attempt ended on August 1 when the
 Muslim rebels released their hostages and were taken into
 custody. At least 20 persons were killed, including one
 Member of Parliament, during the crisis. A nationwide state
 of emergency, declared by the acting President on July 28, was
 extended twice until December 9. State of emergency
 regulations derogate from a number of constitutional rights
 and protections, but these powers in general have not been
 exercised arbitrarily. Under the Constitution, state of
 emergency legislation or regulations may be enacted for
 limited renewable periods of 90 days each, and courts may
 determine that state of emergency provisions are not
 "reasonably justifiable" for the purpose of dealing with the
 emergency.
 Trinidad and Tobago citizens have and exercise a wide range of
 freedoms and individual rights. Principal human rights
 concerns include instances of excessive use of force by police
 and violence against women; the Government has moved
 energetically to combat both.
 
 
 782
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Eight people were killed on July 27, 1990, when the JAM
 initiated a coup attempt. A Member of Parliament died a few
 days later undergoing surgery for a bullet wound inflicted by
 the JAM. Three members of the JAM were killed by security
 forces in an effort to bring the incident to a close.
 Approximately 25 to 30 persons were killed by police and
 military forces following the July 27 coup attempt, including
 a number of alleged looters, curfew breakers, and at least two
 bystanders. Surviving JAM members were taken into custody on
 August 1 and subsequently charged with treason and murder.
 Coup leader Yasin Abu Bakr's stepson, Njisane Omowale, was
 killed on August 1 by police officers who claimed he was among
 a group in a house that fired on police. However, Omowale was
 found without a weapon, and relatives say that he was gunned
 down after he was found hiding in a closet. At year's end the
 police claimed to be continuing their investigation of the
 circumstances of the case, but a coroner's inquest had not
 been initiated.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in any case of
 death by unnatural causes in which a coroner finds the
 circumstances warrant it. Internal police investigations of
 police shootings or killings are not mandatory, and such
 investigations are-usually not initiated. In 1990, prior to
 the July 27 coup attempt, there were seven instances of
 persons being shot by police officers who claimed they were
 acting in the line of duty. In one well-publicized instance,
 protested by a Member of Parliament, -an individual wanted on
 murder charges was shot to death allegedly. trying to escape
 arrest, but onlookers said the victim was unarmed. A police
 investigation followed, the results of which have not been
 made public. A coroner's inquest hearing had been scheduled
 to begin four times since July and postponed each time. It is
 now scheduled to begin on January 21, 1991. A 1989 case,
 involving a 14-year-old girl killed by police, had no date set
 for an inquest as of the end of 1990. An inquest into the
 1988 beating death of a prisoner by prison guards (after he
 had killed a guard) resulted in a finding that there were
 grounds for suspecting that an indictable offense had
 occurred. The coroner referred the case to the Commissioner
 of Police for further investigation to identify the
 perpetrator.
 Criticizing "trigger-happy" police officers, a High Court
 Judge in May called for an investigation into the shooting and
 wounding of two men by police in a 1983 incident.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment, and any evidence
 obtained by such means is inadmissible in courts. Torture is
 not practiced. During 1990 there continued to be credible
 allegations and charges in the courts that some police
 
 
 788
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 officers had mistreated persons under arrest, including
 several arrested JAM members as they were being transported to
 jail facilities after their surrender. The law permits
 victims of such treatment to sue for civil damages and to file
 criminal charges against the individual police officer
 involved. At least 10 civil suits or criminal cases were
 brought against police officers in 1990. The courts often
 find in favor of the complainant, and police officers found
 guilty of misconduct are subject to disciplinary action.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution specifies that a suspect has the right to be
 "informed promptly" of the reason for arrest or detention. In
 practice police usually charge a suspect within 48 hours, but
 there have been cases in which charges have not been brought
 for 4 or 5 days. Arrests without warrant are permitted when a
 person is apprehended committing an offense or when reasonable
 suspicion exists that an offense has been or is about to be
 committed.
 Persons arrested have the right to a judicial determination of
 the legality of the detention. Detainees generally are
 allowed access to a lawyer if one is requested, and to family
 members, but police sometimes deny ,access if they believe it
 would impede an investigation. An appeals court decision in
 July confirmed that persons detained for interrogation must be
 informed by police of their right to an attorney. The police
 have violated one or more of these procedures in several
 cases; the courts have found for the complainant in some
 cases. Under state of emergency regulations, a Magistrate or
 senior police officer may authorize detention for up to 7 days
 for inquiries without charges if they are satisfied that the
 necessary inquiries cannot be made within 24 hours. A number
 of people were detained in this manner following the coup
 attempt. A Muslim member of the armed forces was detained for
 over 30 days by military authorities for not reporting for
 duty during the coup attempt and for possible connections with
 the JAM. The soldier was eventually released but may have to
 face court-martial proceedings.
 Preventive detention may be authorized by the Minister
 responsible for national security in order to prevent actions
 prejudicial to public safety, public order, or the defense of
 Trinidad and Tobago. The Minister must state the grounds for
 the detention. A detainee under this provision has access to
 counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-member
 tribunal established by the Chief Justice, chaired by an
 attorney. The Minister must provide to the-Tribunal the
 grounds for the detention within 7 days of the detainee's
 request for review, which must be held "as soon as reasonably
 practicable" following receipt of the grounds. The Minister
 may at his discretion revoke detention orders on the basis of
 the Tribunal's recommendations. There were 31 persons ordered
 detained under these provisions; not all were apprehended.
 All detainees were released upon or before the December 9
 ending of the state of emergency, excluding the few who had
 been formally charged with crimes. The wife of Yasin Abu Bakr
 was arrested on August 1 and charged on August 9 with shooting
 at police officers and with firearms offenses. Until December
 9, she was also under a separate detention order. She was
 granted bail on December 12 to await trial.
 The Government introduced antidrug legislation in 1989 that
 involved provisions for forfeiture of assets of traffickers.
 
 
 784
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Several of the bill's search and seizure provisions prompted
 concerns among lawyers, the media, and legislators that civil
 liberties would be infringed. The Government has sought to
 allay these concerns by amending the bill, which at year's end
 was in the hands of a Senate committee for further review.
 The practice of exile is illegal and does not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution specifies that accused persons receive a fair
 and public trial by an independent judiciary; appeals may be
 made to the Court of Appeals and eventually to the Privy
 Council in London. Under common law practice, defendants
 enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right to confront
 witnesses and present evidence. These rights are respected in
 practice.
 All accused persons have the right to an attorney. Legal
 assistance is available from attorneys registered with the
 Legal Aid and Advisory Authority (LAAA) of the Ministry of
 Social Development and Family Services for persons who
 demonstrate that they cannot afford an attorney. Judges may
 also appoint attorneys in the courtroom to represent
 individuals without counsel. The attorneys may then file
 claims for their services with LAAA. During 1990 some
 attorneys were planning to refuse such requests because LAAA
 has not been able to pay attorneys for a number of cases.
 An accused may be freed on bail pending trial unless charged
 with murder or treason, or if detained under state of
 emergency regulations. The presiding Magistrate may suspend
 bail after consultation with the prosecution and defense.
 Despite continuing efforts by government officials, the
 judiciary, and the bar association, a large backlog of cases
 remains awaiting trial or appeal, and there are significant
 delays in bringing cases to trial and in processing appeals.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition
 generally respected in practice. Warrants are required for
 searches, except under state of emergency regulations. A
 number of warrantless searches were carried out following the
 coup attempt to locate looted goods, unlawful weapons and
 ammunition, or JAM sympathizers. The state of emergency
 regulations promulgated in mid-1990 permitted the Government
 to seize, detain, or dispose of property which was in a
 dangerous state, injurious to health, or required for
 investigations and trial.
 Before the coup attempt, the JAM protested in court the
 occupation of a portion of its premises by police and military
 personnel who claimed that they wanted to prevent further
 construction of a JAM school building. A mysterious fire
 burned down JAM residence quarters on August 3 while the
 residence was under military guard. Security forces razed all
 the buildings at JAM headquarters in Port of Spain on
 September 17, except a mosque and an attached annex. On
 December 6 the JAM filed a motion asking the High Court to
 
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 order that JAM members be allowed to reenter their former
 premises and to rule that the destruction of the buildings had
 been illegal.
 There are no laws authorizing wiretapping, and it is doubtful
 that evidence obtained by wiretapping could be used in court.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of expression, and this
 right is protected in practice by the country's independent
 judiciary, a democratic and pluralistic political system, and
 independent and privately owned print media. Academic freedom
 is respected and is protected by law.
 The import or circulation of publications may be prohibited
 under the Sedition Act if they are deemed to have a seditious
 intention. The law has been rarely invoked in recent years.
 A Board of Film Censors is authorized to ban films it
 considers to be against public order and decency or
 undesirable in the public interest. This includes films which
 may be controversial in matters of religion, contain seditious
 propaganda, or be considered racist.-
 Foreign exchange scarcities have reduced allocations to
 newspapers for the import of newsprint. A newspaper generally
 critical of the Government, which won a court case in 1989
 against the Government for having unconstitutionally reduced
 its newsprint foreign exchange allocation, continued to claim
 that it is receiving discriminatory treatment with respect to
 foreign exchange allocations.
 Trinidad and Tobago Television (TTT), the sole television
 station in the country, is government owned. Its coverage is
 generally unbiased, although'the opposition has claimed in the
 past that programming on government-sponsored activities,
 identified as NAR (the ruling National Alliance for
 Reconstruction) initiatives, gives the NAR an unfair political
 advantage. Opposition politicians also claimed, following the
 July 27-August 1 coup attempt, that some of the content of TTT
 newscasts consisted of partisan propaganda. In July the
 Government decided to award licenses for 12 new privately
 owned television stations.
 One of Trinidad and Tobago's two radio stations is government
 owned and the other is privately owned. Both are currently
 operating without licenses but are scheduled to receive them
 under a new national telecommunications policy adopted by the
 Cabinet in mid-1990. The Government in July also decided to
 award licenses for nine new, privately owned radio stations.
 Political opponents of the Government have in the past argued
 that the presence of ruling party supporters on the executive
 boards of the government-owned radio station leads to the same
 political bias in broadcasting policy as they. claim exists at
 TTT.
 State of emergency regulations in effect during 1990 permitted
 restrictions on publications and other communications, and on
 statements prejudicial to public safety and order, but these
 restrictions were not enforced.
 
 
 786
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in
 practice. Registration of private organizations is not
 required. Permits are required in advance for street marches,
 and these are normally granted both to critics and supporters
 of the Government. State of emergency regulations permitted
 restrictions on freedom of association and public assembly.
 In practice, this led political and labor organizations to
 refrain from scheduling public outdoor meetings and marches.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state
 religion and no religious test for public office. There are
 large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims in the
 population, and these and other religious groups are allowed
 to maintain association with organizations and persons in
 other countries and to undertake religious travel. Religious
 groups are free to establish places of worship and to engage
 in religious training, education, and publishing.
 Missionaries are permitted to enter the country and
 proselytize. Conversion from one religion to another is not
 hindered. Licensing of religious organizations is not
 required.
 Units of the police and the Defense Force in April occupied a
 portion of the land on which the JAM had built a number of
 buildings not authorized by municipal authorities. The Police
 Commissioner stated at the time that the police and Defense
 Force units were deployed to prevent further unauthorized
 construction of a school by a group that endangered national
 security. On July 24, 3 days before the coup attempt, the JAM
 lost on a constitutional motion before the High Court to
 remove the security forces; the group was advised to seek
 civil remedies. State of emergency regulations exempt
 religious services from restrictions on public meetings. In
 the aftermath of the JAM coup attempt, there was some police
 harassment and a lack of respect toward Muslim buildings and
 practices during searches for JAM sympathizers, ammunition,
 and looted goods. The Prime Minister declared that religious
 freedom would remain unhindered in Trinidad and Tobago.
 Although a senior police official had earlier denied that
 there had been any harassment of Muslims, the Acting Minister
 of Justice and National Security instructed police and
 military to carry out operations with due respect for dignity
 and rights.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no arbitrary restrictions on emigration or travel
 either within or outside the country, nor on the changing of
 residence or workplace. Under state of emergency regulations,
 a curfew was imposed that was gradually reduced as the
 security situation eased. Numerous curfew violators were
 charged. Restrictions on the movements of people within the
 country were authorized under state of emergency regulations
 but were not-widely exercised.
 
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Section 3 Respect.for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by
 secret ballot in free and fair multiparty, multicandidate
 elections held, as required by the Constitution, at intervals
 not to exceed 5 years. Elections for municipal and county
 officials are held every 3 years and elections for the
 12-member Tobago House of Assembly every 4 years. The
 Constitution allows citizens, as well as legal residents with
 citizenship in other Commonwealth countries, who are at least
 18 years of age, to vote, and there are no restrictions on the
 participation of women in political activities.
 The country is governed by a bicameral Parliament: an elected
 36-member House of Representatives whose members represent
 single-member voting constituencies and a 31-member Senate
 whose members are appointed by the President, 16 on the advice
 of the governing party, 6 on the advice of the opposition, and
 9 at the President's discretion. The Prime Minister, who is
 the Head of Government, is the member of the House of
 Representatives who commands the support of the majority of
 the House. The President, elected by Parliament, is the Head
 of State.
 Opposition parties have contested every general election since
 party elections were begun in 1956, except in 1971 when the
 opposition chose not to participate. Several opposition
 parties combined in 1985 to form the National Alliance for
 Reconstruction (NAR), which, in the December 15, 1986,
 elections, won 33 of 36 elected parliamentary seats. The
 People's National Movement, which now forms part of the
 opposition, had until then governed since 1956. During 1988
 the NAR expelled some of its prominent leaders, who in 1989
 formed a third major party, the United National Congress,
 which has now become the official opposition party.
 Municipal and county elections, scheduled to take place in
 September 1990, were postponed for security considerations
 following the JAM coup attempt.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 International human rights organizations are free to visit and
 to discuss human rights with governmental and nongovernmental
 representatives. In addition to the judiciary, which acts on
 legal cases involving alleged human rights violations, there
 is an Ombudsman, an officer of Parliament, who is empowered to
 investigate complaints of violations of law or policy and to
 report the findings to Parliament. There is also a
 nongovernmental Bureau of Human Rights, established by a local
 attorney, that focuses on areas of interest and concern to
 him. In 1990 this attorney also founded Caribbean Elections
 Watch to promote free and fair elections in the Caribbean. In
 1989 the Caribbean Institute for the Promotion of Human Rights
 relocated its headquarters to Port of Spain from St. Vincent.
 This regional organization is composed of respected Caribbean
 human rights activists who seek to collect information and
 report on Caribbean human rights matters.
 
 
 788
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no evidence of systematic official discrimination
 based on race, sex, language, or social status in Trinidad and
 Tobago. All persons are fully protected under provisions of
 the Constitution. Trinidad and Tobago includes various ethnic
 and religious groups that in general live together peacefully
 and respect each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 following the mid-year coup attempt, members of the Muslim
 community (comprising 6 percent of the population), including
 JAM family members, protested police and military harassment.
 The Government also ordered JAM members and their immediate
 relatives employed in the public sector not to report to work
 following the coup attempt. There was no loss of pay, leave,
 or benefits as a result of this suspension; the Government was
 concerned for the safety of these and other public servants.
 There is occasional racial tension between Afro-Trinidadians
 and Indo-Trinidadians, who each comprise approximately 40
 percent of the population.   Many East Indians, predominantly
 Hindu, vehemently protested government plans to establish a
 Youth National Service program, fearing that the religious and
 cultural values of their children would be damaged in national
 service camps. The private sector is dominated by
 Indo-Trinidadians and Caucasians; Indo-Trinidadians also
 dominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians are employed in
 disproportionately large numbers in some segments of
 government services, particularly in the police and military,
 and government Cabinets have been predominantly composed of
 Afro-Trinidadians. Competition for public goods and services
 sometimes takes on racial overtones. Some politicians and
 others have argued for the establishment of an equal
 opportunities commission, but the Government has not taken any
 action to implement that proposal.
 Discrimination on the basis of sex is illegal. Many women
 hold positions in the Government, civil service, political
 party leadership, business, and the professions. Women's
 groups speak out publicly on all aspects of public life.
 Women make up approximately 36 percent of the paid labor
 force, and collective bargaining agreements cannot be
 registered with the Industrial Court if they exhibit wage
 disparities between men and women. There are, however,
 reports of discrimination in hiring against women over age 50.
 While reliable statistics are lacking, as many as one in three
 women may suffer physical abuse from their spouses or other
 family members. The Government is concerned about this
 problem, as well as child abuse. In 1987 a Cabinet-appointed
 committee studied abuse patterns in Trinidad and Tobago and
 put its recommendations for governmental and private action
 before the Cabinet in 1988. The recommendations included the
 adoption of an act to create a consistent network of services
 for abused children and battered wives, provisions for better
 reporting and research, and the establishment of a family
 court to handle domestic disputes. Initial steps toward
 implementation of the plan began in 1990 with the appointment
 of a Director of Family Services to develop integrated
 regional social work teams. The Government issued for public
 comment and is preparing for introduction in Parliament a
 domestic violence bill which would provide for restraining
 orders to be placed on abusive family members, with criminal
 penalties for violating them. The police created a counseling
 unit in the spring of 1990 to deal with domestic violence
 
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 cases. There are several privately operated shelters for
 battered women, some of which receive a minimal amount of
 governmental assistance.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is respected in law and practice. An
 estimated 24 percent of the work force is organized into 45
 labor unions. The unions are independent of government or
 political party control, and they freely represent their
 members' interests. The law forbids any one union from
 representing more than one essential public service because of
 concern that one such union going on strike could cripple the
 country's infrastructure. The majority of the unions are
 grouped into two labor confederations. The Trinidad and
 Tobago Labor Congress (TTLCY, the largest of the two, is
 affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions, while the Council of Progressive Trade Unions.(CPTU)
 is affiliated with the Communist-controlled World Federation
 of Trade Unions.
 Workers are permitted, upon expiration of a conciliation
 period, to strike, and employers are permitted to lock workers
 out. After a strike or lockout has gone on for 3 months,
 either of the parties involved can request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, which is
 part of the independent judiciary, for a binding decision.
 Strikes and lockouts are not permitted in essential public
 services, and the Minister of Labor may apply for an
 injunction to halt any labor action he finds contrary to the
 national interest. Workers in essential services with labor
 grievances may call on the conciliation services of the
 Ministry of Labor or may take their cases directly to the
 Industrial Court. They may also file civil suits againdt the
 Government.
 There was moderate strike activity, or threatened strike
 activity, in 1990 as a result of the Government's stringent
 fiscal policies. In January, almost 200 water and sewerage
 wokers were laid off for economic and disciplinary reasons but
 were rehired after the Minister of Labor intervened. In the
 spring, the steelworkers went on strike for higher wages and
 to protest hazardous working conditions. The company began
 implementing safety measures as required by government
 inspectors, while negotiations and unrest continued into the
 fall until details of the wage package were settled. In June
 nurses around the country staged 2 months of marches and other
 job actions to protest low wages and shortages of medical
 supplies. At the end of July, the Public Services Union
 reached an interim agreement for reclassification of nursing
 salaries. In October wage negotiations between communication
 workers and the partially state-owned telephone company began
 again in an environment of increasing hostility and industrial
 sabotage. In December, the Government restored the 10 percent
 it had withheld from public servants' salaries for 2 years and
 paid their cost of living raises for 1989.
 The Committee .of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) has for several years concluded that
 various aspects of the country's labor legislation, including
 those related to strikes, binding arbitration, and freedom of
 association, in relation to public services, are inconsistent
 with ILO Conventions 87 and 98.
 
 
 790
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The constitutional right of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively is well exercised. Collective bargaining is the
 predominant method by which wage levels are established in
 most industries. Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by
 law, and trade union property, as other private property, is
 protected under law. The Ministry of Labor acts as an
 impartial conciliator in collective bargaining impasses.
 There are a few complaints each year to the Ministry of Labor
 about private antiunion activities, usually involving the
 suspension or dismissal of an employee who alleges the action
 was taken at least in part because of union activity. The
 Ministry of Labor is generally able to resolve the cases
 brought to it.
 The Parliament in 1988 enacted legislation to regulate the
 establishment of free trade zones, which in 1990 were in the
 process of being formed. It is anticipated that wages and
 terms of employment in the free trade zones may be less
 favorable than the prevailing minimum standard. However, the
 legislation provides for internationally accepted worker
 rights, including the right to organize and bargain
 collectively.
 In the weeks during and immediately following the attempted
 coup, labor unions asked employers to pay full salaries even
 though employees were unable to work full time because of the
 restrictive curfew imposed. Many employers cooperated.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Trinidad and Tobago. Although
 there is no domestic legislation on this matter, Trinidad and
 Tobago is a party to the relevant ILO conventions. Under the
 state of emergency regulations, the Government was permitted
 to require persons to do work or render other services, but
 this provision was not utilized.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Legislation prohibits the employment of children under the age
 of 12, and children aged 12 to 14 are permitted to work only
 in family businesses. Children may begin apprenticeships at
 age 15 and regular employment at age 17. These restrictions
 are generally respected in practice. The Probation Service
 within the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services
 is the entity responsible for compliance. Education is
 compulsory until the age of 12.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Most wages are covered under collective bargaining agreements
 and provide a decent living for workers and their families.
 There is no nationwide minimum wage rate. However, in the
 fall of 1990 the Ministry of Labor issued for public comment
 draft legislation for minimum wages in three occupations
 considered difficult to organize into unions: shop
 assistants, domestic servants, and catering industry
 employees. The last government wage order, which also
 included gas station attendants, expired in 1984. Some
 employers have been paying lower than the previous minimum
 wage. Minimum wage workers usually have secondary sources of
 support, often from their families. Others drive taxis, sew,
 or sell in street markets. The standard workweek in Trinidad
 
 
 791
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 and Tobago is 40 hours, as established through collective
 bargaining. Additional hours are considered overtime at a
 negotiated rate. Daily rest periods and paid annual.leave
 form part of most employment agreements. There are no legal
 restrictions on overtime work.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill, which sets requirements for health
 and safety standards in certain industries and provides for
 inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. The Government
 enforces compliance with health and safety regulations,
 although such enforcement is sporadic due to a shortage of
 Labor Ministry inspectors. Trade union representatives also
 monitor pompliance. A new Occupational Safety Bill was
 prepared'in 1986 and is scheduled to be introduced in
 Parliament during its 1990-91 session. Workers who file
 complaints with the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or
 hazardous working conditions are protected under the
 Industrial Relations Act of 1972. Government inspectors
 investigate such complaints.
 
 
