 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which political and civil rights are provided for by the Constitu-
 tion and generally respected in practice. Free and fair general elections have been
 held at regular intervals since independence from the United Kingdom in 1962. The
 country is governed by a bicameral Parliament and a Prime Minister who is the
 leader of the majority party in the lower house. The President, whose office is large-
 ly ceremonial, is elected by Parliament. Local matters on the island of Tobago are
 handled by a 12-member elected House of Assembly.
 According to the US. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military ex-
 penditures for 1989 were $59 million. There are no plans to reduce these expendi-
 tures in the near future. The police force and the defense force are under the control
 of and generally responsive to civilian authority. However, credible allegations of po-
 lice brutality and corruption, including involvement in the illegal narcotics trade,
 continued in 1992. The legal system provides measures for redress for the complain-
 ants in such cases.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on the hydrocarbon sector, but
 efforts continue to diversify the economy into agriculture, manufacturing, and tour-
 ism. The Government either wholly or partially owns many major industries. There
 is a strong tradition of private enterprise and ownership of property, however, and
 the Government is committed to partial divestiture of most state enterprises.
 Trinidad and Tobago citizens have and exercise a wide range of freedoms and in-
 dividual rights, but there continued to be incidents of extrejudicial killings, the use
 of excessive force, and other abuses by the police, and allegations of favoritism as
 well as prolonged delays in the administration of justice.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports during 1992
 of killings for political motives by the Government or other political organizations.
 
 
 496
 However, there were credible allegations of extrajudicial killings and other abuses
 of authority by the police.
 In the first 9 months of 1992 there were at least 17 police shootings, 9 of which
 resulted in deaths. The death of Sheldon Henry in July prom ted the Minister of
 National Security to demand an immediate investigation into charges that a police
 officer had shot Henry dead at close range as the young man, kneeling, pleaded for
 his life. Police contended Henry was firing at them, ana pthologist's examination
 concluded there was some merit to this claim; companions of the deceased who al.
 legedly witnessed the killing disputed the police version and claimed police threat-
 ened them at Henry's funeral. By year's end the police Internal Investigations Unit
 had not issued a report.
 In the 1991 killing of David Agard, the police officer who allegedly shot Agard is
 to stand trial on the lesser charge of manslaughter, rather than murder, at year's
 end the officer was free on bail. Agard's mother filed a civil suit against the Attor-
 ney General and the accused officer for damages for the loss of her son; the action
 is pending. In late September, 10-year-old David Juggernauth was severely beaten
 by police and died in prison several days later. The Police Commissioner's office at-
 tributed the death to "natural causes."
 One highly publicized case concerned the 1987 shooting death of Police Constable
 Bernadette James during a training exercise in which only blank ammunition was
 to have been used. The victim's mother has alleged that her daughter witnessed a
 shadowy transaction involving two government ministers and a high-ranking police
 officer the day before the training exercise. After an inquest that lasted nearly 5
 years, in Setember the Chief Magistrate referred the case back to the Internal In-
 vestigationsUnit of the Police Service. The magistrate observed there were grounds
 to suspect that someone was guilty of an indictable offense, but the evidence given
 by police officers was too convoluted and inconsistent to determine who should be
 held accountable.
 The coroner's verdict in the 1990 death of Njisane Omowale, whose stepfather led
 the failed coup in July of that year, was quashed by a High Court judge in October.
 The jue ru ed that in arriving at the verdict, which found no one responsible for
 the death, medical evidence and eyewitness testimony had been overlooked. The
 judge ordered a new inquest.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in a case of death by unnatural causes
 only when a coroner inds the circumstances warrant it; otherwise it is not manda-
 tory. In practce inquests are seldom pursued. Despite the existence of an Internal
 Investigations Unit, there are no mandatory investigations of police shootings or
 killings.
 Citing numerous instances in which investigations have been dismissed for lack
 of evidence or because of conflicting evidence tat prevented further pursuit of pre-
 liminary inque, a Chief Magistrate, a Member of Parliament, a leading attorney,
 and one of  nidad's two daily newspaprs called for the establishment of an inde-
 pendent tribunal to investigate police shootings and other allegations of brutality
 and misconduct. A team from Scotland Yard was brought in to investigate allega-
 tions of a drug cartel operating within the Trinidad and Tobago Police Service. The
 team concluded its investigation in December, having found no evidence of a drug
 cartel but rampant instances of corruption and other abuses of power.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 in 1992. Allegations that Doodnath Dwarika disappeared after being detained by po-
 lice in November 1990 were not further investigated by the police service, which
 claimed to have no record of the case.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids such treatment, and, under law, any evidence obtained by
 such means is inadmissible in court.
 However, during 1992 there continued to be credible allegations and charges in
 court that some police officers had physically abused detainees, and there was at
 least one report about a man who died in police custody due to injuries received at
 their hands. The law permits victims of such treatment to sue for civil damages and
 to file criminal charges against the police officer(s) involved; such suits are occasion-
 ally initiated. The courts sometimes frind in favor of the complainant, in which case
 damages can be collected. Police officers found guilty of misconduct are subject to
 disciplinary action. There were credible reports, however, that citizens who lodged
 complaints against police officers or otherwise impugned the service were subjected
 to reprisals or the threat of reprisals.
 A highly publicized case of alleged police brutality occurred in June: 19-year-old
 Kenton Sylvester claimed he was severely beaten by police in the aftermath of a
 carjacking incident in which Sylvester himself was taken hostage. His injuries in-
 cluded numerous broken bones, torn muscles, a punctured lung, a ruptured liver,
 
 
 497
 and massive internal bleeding. When Sylvester was admitted to the hospital, police
 stated his injuries were the result of an auto accident. In September, as Sylvester
 was preparing to sue the Attorney General and police officers for damages, he was
 brought up on manslaughter charges related to an earlier incident of which he had
 been prevously all but cleared. Neither case had been heard by year's end.
 In another suit ried against the Attorney General, 12-year-old Fimber Miguel
 claimed that inNovember 1991 he was brought in by police for interrogation regard-
 ing the whereabouts of a family member. Miguel alleged that, at the station, he was
 placed ina cage," beaten withapiece of wood, and held for2 nights In the charg
 room where he alept on chairs; he also claimed the police tried to force him to admit
 to a robbery which he did not commit. The case is scheduled to be heard in 1993.
 Trinidad and Tobago courts sentence convicted felons to corporal punishment as
 well as prison sentences in approximately 50 cases a year. Men convicted of rape,
 assault .witha deadly weapon, or aggravated robbery are subject to floggings admn-
 istered in prvate by prison officials. The law states that floggings must be adminis-
 tered within 9 months of sentencing  dt a  t be conducted while an appe  is
 pending; sine appeals are rutinely d  t rarely heard within 9 months of initial
 sentencing, in practice flogging seldom if ever occur.
 Overcrowding in prisons continued to be a problem, with, in some ases, 11 to 13
 men in a 9- by 6-foot cell. Several prisoners died of acquired immunodeficiency syn-
 drome (AIDS), while others suffered from contagious skin diseases. Construction
 was begun on a new maximum security facility to alleviate the overcrowding situa-
 tion. Al though the law does not currently provide for the option of sentencing con-
 victed persons to mandatory community service, one such sentence was served The
 arrangement worked so well that the High Court justice who presided over the case
 called for legislation to enable similar sentencing in special cases, e.g., minor first
 offenses for which the gity party expressed genuine remorse.
 Td. Arbirary Arrest, Detention, or e   i c-The Constitution specifies that a suspect
 has the right to be informed promptly of the reason for arrest or detention, which
 in practice has normally meant within 48 hours. Court orders may be obtained b,
 the police to hold a person longer than normal in order to gather additional evi-
 dence. However, there continued to be credible reports that persons had been d-
 tained incemmuicado in excess of the acepted period prior to the filing of any
 charges, without the police having obtained a court order, Arrests without a warrant
 are permitted when a person is apprehended committing an offense or when reason-
 able suspicion exists that an offense has been or is about to be committed. A 1991
 court ruling held that police must allow a person in police custody to contact an at-
 torney as early as possile, and in any event before any interrogation takes place.
 Detainees generally are allowed access to a lawyer, if one is requested, and to
 family members, but police sometimes deny access if they believe it would impede
 an investigation. There continued to be chares in the courts and the press that po-
 lice violated one or more of these procedures n specific cases. Persons arrested have
 the right to a judicial determination of the legality of the detention, and courts have
 found for complainants in some cases of illegal detention; a no table case in 1992 was
 that of the Jama gt al-Muslim e  see   d below).
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public a ety, public order, or the defense of Trinidad
 and Tobago, and must state t     un th  ous e detention. A detainee under this
 provie ion has access to counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-
 member tribunal es tablished by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The
 Minister mustprovide to the tribunal the grounds for the detention within 7 days
 of the detainees request for review, which sall be held eas soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. The Minister may at his discretion revoke
 detention orders on the basis of the tribunal's recommendations. The preventive de-
 tention option is not abused in Trinidad and Toba o
 In a landmark ruling in June, Justice Clebert Brooks declared valid the amnesty
 document which had secured the safe release of hostages and brought an end to the
 July 1990 coup attempt launched by the Jamoat al-Muslimeen. A subsequent ruling
 ordered the immediate release of the 114 detainees and found them entitled to dam-
 ages for illegal detention in addition to recovery of court costs. To the extent
 sible, the State is appealing the decisions; the appeal is scheduled to be heard May
 4, 1993.
 Exile is forbidden by law and not p racticed.
 e. Denial   Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution specifies that persons accused
 of crimes receive a fair and public trial. The judiciary is independent and not subject
 to outside interference. Appeals may be made to the Court of Appeas and eventu-
 ally to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. Criminal defendants
 
 
 498
 enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right to confront witnesses and present
 evidence. These rights are generally respected in practice.
 All criminal defendants have the right to an attorney. Legal assistance is avail-
 able from attorneys reistered with the Legal Aid and Advisory Authority (LAAA)
 of the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services for those who proove
 that they cannot afford representation. Judges may also appoint attorneys in the
 courtroom to represent defendants without counsel.
 Criminal defendants may be freed on bail pending trial, unless charged with mur-
 der or treason or detained under state of emergency regulations. The presiding mag-
 istrate may suspend bail after consultation with the prosecution and defense. De-
 spite continuing attention by government officials, the judiciary, and the Bar Asso-
 ciation to the backlog of cases awaiting trial or appeal, there remain significant
 delays in bringing cases to trial and in processing appeals.
 During the irat half of 1992, a total of 112 detainees filed constitutional motions
 against the Attorney General and the Commissioner of Police alleging that their
 rights were being contravened "due to prolonged detention while they awaited trial
 or sentencing; the suits sought the immediate release of the prisoners, claiming
 their onstitutional right to liberty had been violated. Due to the number filed, the
 motions were consolidated into a single suit. The Government asserted that the judi-
 ciary was hindered by limited resources. The case was repeatedly postponed and not
 heard by the end of the ear.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary  nterference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition generally respected in prac-
 tice. By law, judicially issued warrants are required for searches, except under state
 of emergency regulations; in practice, this procedure is not strictly adhered to. The
 state-owned telephone company has the ability to monitor telephone calls, and in-
 formed observers believe that the police use this facility for domestic intelligence
 purposes. There are no laws authorizing such monitoring, however, so evidence ob-
 tained in this manner may not be used in court.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of epres-
 sion, andthis right is protected in practie by the independent judiciary, a demo-
 cratic and pluralstic political system, and independent and privately owned media.
 The import or circulation of publications may be prohibited under the Sedition
 Act, but the lawh as rarely been invoked in recent years. A board of film censors
 is authorized to ban films it considers to be against public order and decency or con-
 trary to the public interest. This includes films which may be controversial in mat-
 ters of religion, seditious propaganda, or race.
 The three television stations, as part of their licensing agreements, are required
 to broadcast informational programming produced and provided by the Government.
 The go:-ernment-owned station has, over the years, been accused by the opposition
 of favoring the ruling party. There are currently seven radio stations operating in
 Trinidad and Tobago, one of which is government owned. A total of 23 new licenses
 were granted in 1991, including 11 for radio, 6 for television (3 national, 3 local),
 and 6 for cable television. The licensing committee was disbanded in 1992, and no
 new applications were entertained.
 Some journalists have complained privately that the interlocking directorates of
 local corporations result in self-censorship by publishers. The two major daily news-
 papers are sometimes critical of the Government in their editorials. Their news cov-
 erage appears to re rt accurately criticism by opposition parties, trade unions, and
 private citizens. Other widely read tabloids are extremely critical of the Govern-
 ment.
 Academic freedom is respected and protected by law.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These freedoms are protected
 by law and respected in practice. Registration of private organizations is not re-
 quired. Permits are required in advance for street marches, demonstrations, or other
 public outdoor meetings and are routinely granted.
 c. Freedom of Religin.-The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state religion and no religious
 test for public office. There are large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims in
 the population, and these and other religious groups are allowed to maintain asso-
 ciation with organizations and persons in other countries and to perform religious
 travel. Religious groups are generally free to establish places of worship and to en-
 gage in religious training, education, and publishing. Missionaries are permitted to
 enter the country and proselytize, although the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-
 Day Saints has not been issued permits for individual missionaries since early 1992,
 
 
 499
 and its missionaries alreadyr in Trinidad did not have their missionary permits ex-
 tended. The organization did not receive any explanation from the Government as
 to why its applications for missionary permits and extensions were denied; the
 Prime Minister asserted that the Mormon Church had not been singled out for dis-
 criminatory treatment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Residents of Trinidad and Tobago are generally free to emigrate and to
 travel within or outside the country, as well as to change residence and workplace.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by secret ballot in
 free and fair multiparty, multicandidate elections held, as required by the Constitu-
 tion, at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago House
 of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to vote to
 citizens as well as to legal residents with citizenship in other Commonwealth coun-
 tries, who are at least 18 years of age; there are no restrictions on the participation
 of women in political activities. Women hold many positions in the Government and
 political party leadership.
 The Government is formed by the party holding the majority of seats in the lower
 house of Parliament. The Parliament consists of two houses: an elected House of
 Representatives whose 38 members represent individual voting constituencies, and
 a 31-member Senate appointed by the President, 16 on the advice of the Prime Min-
 ister, 6 on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition, and 9 at the President's dis-
 cretion. The Prime Minister is Head of Government; the President, elected by Par-
 liament, is Head of State, a largely ceremonial position.
 Prior to December 1986, each election had been won by the People's National
 Movement (PNM); in December 1991, the PNM was voted back into office after a
 5-year hiatus. The opposition United National Congress won 13 of the 36 parliamen-
 tary seats, the highest proportion it has ever held. Iocal government elections were
 held in September, and elections to the Tobago House of Assembly in December.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There is an Ombudsman who is an officer of Parliament empowered to investigate
 plaints of violations of human rights law or policy and to report the findings to
 Parliament. In addition, there are several nongovernmental organizations. Carib-
 bean Elections Watch, founded in 1990, promotes free and fair elections in the Car-
 ibbean. The Caribbean Institute for Human Rights, headquartered in Trinidad, is
 a regional organization composed of human rights monitors who collect information
 throughout the region and report on Caribbean human rights matters.
 International human rights organizations are free to visit and discuss human
 rights with governmental and nongovernmental representatives.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 There is no evidence of systematic official discrimination based on race, sex, lan-
 gua e, or social status in Trinidad and Tobago. All persons are fully protected under
 provisins of the Constitution.
 Trinidad and Tobago includes various ethnic and religious groups that live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 racial tensions continued between Afro-Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians, each of
 which comprises over 40 percent of the population. The private sector is dominated
 by Ind-Trinidadians and people of European and Middle Eastern descent. Indo-
 Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians are employed in
 disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and military. Since Indo-
 Trinidadians are the majority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are the majority
 in urban areas, competition between town and country for public goods and services
 often takes on racial overtones. Some Indo-Trinidadian opposition politicians have
 complained that Afro-Trinidadians receive a disproportionate share of government
 benefits. The PNM Government established, under the aegis of the University of the
 West Indies, a Center for Ethnic Studies to investigate employment practices in the
 public and private sectors as well as the placement of schoolchildren based on re-
 sults of the common entrance exam.
 Discrimination based on sex is illegal. Many women hold positions in business
 and the professions, as well as in Government and political parties. Women's groups
 speak out publicly on all aspects of public life. Women make up approximately 36
 percent of the paid labor force, and collective bargaining agreements cannot be reg-
 istered with the industrial court if they exhibit wage disparities between men and
 women. Nonetheless, despite equal protection provided tobth sexes under the law,
 
 
 500
 a Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) study released in 1992 revealed a
 higher mortality rate among girls under the age of 6 than among boys of the same
 age. According to the study, the leading cause of death among girls is nutritional
 deficiency while among boys it is accidents, leading to the conclusion that in house-
 holds with scarce resources, parents favor boys over girls when it comes to food dis-
 tribution.
 Physical abuse of women and children by family members appears to be extensive,
 although there are no reliable statistics. Parliament passed a domestic violence bill
 in August 1991 to address these issues; the bill provided for the filing of restraining
 orders against abusive family members, a court hearing within 7 days of filing, an
 criminal penalties for violation of restraining orders. Additional legislation may be
 required to ensure that adequate mechanisms are in place to enforce the bill. There
 are several privately operated shelters for battered women which receive a minimal
 amount of governmental assistance.
 AlthoughHinduism is the second largest religion in Trinidad and Tobago, there
 are no sixth-form Hindu secondary schools (students graduating from sixth-form
 proceed to university); there are 18 Christian and 2 Muslim sixth-form facilities. Ac.
 cording to a rominent Hindu leader, the performance of Hindu students in general
 lags belind tat of Christians and Muslims, a discrepancy for which he claimed the
 Government bears primary responsibility for its failure to provide adequate facilities
 and opportunities for the Hindu population.
 Members of the Muslim community also charged religious discrimination in non-
 Muslim government secondary schools which prohibit young women from wearing
 the jeelab (head covering) or chador (head covering and shawl) in the classroom.
 School administrators responded that all students are required to wear identical
 uniforms and that preferential treatment contradicted school policy.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is respected in law and prac-
 tice. There are 32 active labor unions in Trinidad and Tobago, with a total member-
 ship comprising approximately 32 percent of the work force. The unions are inde-
 pendent of government -or political party control, and they freely represent their
 members' interests. Union members are free to publicize their views and determine
 their own programs and policies, including their international affiliations.
 Workers are permitted, upon expiration of a conciliation period, to strike, and em-
 ployers are permitted to lock workers out. After a strike or lockout has been in
 progress for 3 months, either of the parties involved may request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, which is part of the independent
 judiciary, for a binding decision. Strikes and lockouts are not permitted in essential
 public services (as defined in the Industrial Relations Act), and the Minister of
 r may apply for an injunction to halt any labor action he finds contrary to the
 national interest; in practice, this has never happened. Workers in essential services
 with labor grievances may call on the conciliation services of the Ministry of Labor
 or may take their cases directly to the Industrial Court. However, such cases are
 not generally processed more quickly than those in the private sector. Workers in
 essential services may also file civil suits against the Government.
 With the return to power of the People's National Movement (PNM) in December
 1991, the labor movement was cautiously optimistic that longstanding disputes
 might be resolved. While the PNM's first budget offered little cause for hope, unions
 were amenable to settlements which would confer increased social benefits rather
 than large pay increases. Oilfield workers threatened crippling strikes which were
 averted when the Government and the union made significant concessions. Elec-
 trical and communications workers pressed their demands, precipitating widespread
 interruptions of service and numerous acts of sabotage attributed to union activists.
 Accommodation was reached on the verge of nationwide strikes, as the electrical
 workers' dispute was arbitrated by the Minister of Labor, and the communications
 workers' dispute was partially assuaged by a long-awaited Industrial Court ruling
 in the union a favor.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The constitutional right of
 workers to organize and bargain collectively is well established and freely practiced.
 In fact, collective bargaining is the predominant method by which wage levels are
 established in most industries. Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by law. The
 Minister of Labor acts as an impartial conciliator in collective bargaining impasses.
 There are a few complaints each year to the Ministry of Labor about private
 antiunion activities, usually involving the suspension or dismissal of an employee
 who alleges the action was taken at least in part because of union activity. The Min-
 istry of Labor is generally able to resolve those cases brought to it.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 Legislation for the establishment of free trade zones, enacted by Parliament in
 1988, was implemented in 1992. All Trinidad and Tobago laws, inclusive of those
 affecting working conditions and the right of workers to organize and bargain collec-
 tively, are applicable in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Force or Compulsory Labor.-Although there is no domestic law
 prohibiting forced or compulsory labor, it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Legislation prohibits the employ-
 ment of children under the age of 12 years, and children aged 12 to 14 years are
 permitted to work only in family businesses. Children may begin apprenticeships at
 age 15 and regular employment at age 17. The Probation Service within the Mn-
 istry of Social Development and FamilySerices is the entity responsible for compli-
 ance. Education is compulsory until the age of 12 years. Enforcement of these re-
 strictions appears lax. School-age children are often seen vending on the streets and
 at the beach. In practice, if parents do not have the funds to buy books and uni-
 forms, their children do not attend school.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation enacted in November 1991 signifi-
 cantly broadened the categories of workers covered by minimum wage standards.
 Enforcement of the minimum wage law is entrusted to the labor inspectorate. The
 legislation also provides for 3 months' maternity leave for household and shop as-
 sistants, as well as overtime pay, holiday pay, 2 weeks' vacation leave, and 14 days
 sick leave per year. Wage levels in sectors not covered in the law are set under col-
 lective bargaining agreements and provide a decent living for workers and their
 families. The most poorly paid workers, including those working in minimum wage
 jobs, usually have secondary sources of support, often from their families.
 The standard workweek in Trinidad and Tobago is 40 hours; the minimum ware
 law sets a 40-hour workweek for workers who fall within its jurisdiction, while col-
 lective bargaining agreements set the standards in other industrial and service se-
 tors. Additional hours are considered overtime and are remunerated at a negotiated
 rate. Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agree-
 ments. There are no legal restrictions on overtime work.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948 Factories and Ordinance
 Bill, which sets requirements for health and safety standards in certain industries
 and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. The Government en-
 forces compliance with health and safety regulations, although such enforcement is
 sporadic due to a shortage of inspectors. Trade union representatives also monitor
 compliance. Workers who file complaints with the Ministry of Labor regarding ille-
 gal or hazardous working conditions are protected under the Industrial Relations
 Act of 1972 to the extent that should it be determined upon inspection that condi-
 tions exist in the workplace which present hazards to life or limb, the worker is ab-
 solved in refusing to comply with an order which would have placed him or her in
 harm's way. Beyond that, it is the right of management "to manage, and to manage
 effectively. Government inspectors investigate complaints of hazardous working
 conditions.
