 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago is a two-island state with an estimated
 population of 1.2 million, of whom approximately 43 percent
 are of African and 40 percent of East Indian descent. The
 country is a republic with a parliamentary style of
 government. In general elections in December 1986, the
 National Alliance for Reconstruction defeated the People's
 National Movement which had governed the country since its
 independence from Great Britain in 1956. Elections are free
 and fair and must be conducted at regular intervals.
 The Trinidad and Tobago police service is, as a whole, a
 capable and professional force. There are, however, recurring
 charges in the courts and in the press alleging improprieties
 on the part of individual police officers. The legal system
 provides effective measures for legal redress for the
 complainant in such cases. Trinidad and Tobago's judicial
 system is independent and based upon that of the British, with
 the Privy Council in London serving as the highest court of
 appeal.
 Trinidad and Tobago has a mixed economy based upon petroleum
 production and refining and agriculture. Many major
 industries are either wholly or partially owned by the
 Government, but. there is a strong tradition of private
 enterprise and private ownership of property.
 The country's economy has suffered with the recent worldwide
 fall in oil prices, but Trinidad and Tobago continues to have
 a high standard of living and the fourth highest per capita
 income in the Western Hemisphere. Political and civil rights
 are protected by the country's Constitution and respected in
 practice. Labor unions have the freedom to organize, bargain
 collectively, and strike. There is complete freedom of
 religion in Trinidad and.Tobago, which has large populations
 of Christians, Hindus, and Moslems.
 Trinidad and Tobago's human rights record remained good in
 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment and, according to the
 law, any evidence obtained by such means is inadmissible in
 court. Torture is not practiced in Trinidad and Tobago.
 There' are, however, recurring allegations in the press and
 charges in the courts that individual police officers have
 physically mistreated persons under arrest. The law permits
 victims of such treatment to sue for damages in civil court
 and to file criminal charges against the individual officer
 responsible. The courts often find in favor of the
 
 
 640
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 complainant, and police officers found guilty of such behavior
 are subject to disciplinary action. There is no evidence that
 police brutality is systematic or condoned by the Government.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in any case in
 which a person has died while in police custody. In 1985 the
 murder of a member of a local mosque while in police custody
 aroused much public concern. The man was arrested for
 loitering, and then allegedly stabbed to death by an unknown
 assailant during a struggle with the arresting officer. A
 coroner's inquest, convened to investigate the murder, was
 unable to identify the killer; the case was passed back to the
 police for further investigation, with no results announced by
 the end of the year. A citizens' committee investigated the
 killing and charged that the police were responsible.
 In March a group of people demonstrating against the visit of
 an English cricket team, which included players who had played
 in South Africa, allegedly was attacked by police. The
 demonstrators were behind police-erected barriers when the
 baton-wielding police charged them. Several demonstrators
 were injured, and 16 people, including 3 journalists who were
 covering the event, were arrested for demonstrating without a
 permit,   Many organizations, including the press and trade
 unions, protested that excessive force had been used by the
 police. The Minister of National Security ordered the
 Commissioner of Police to determine who was responsible. The
 results of this investigation have not yet been released.
 Trinidad and Tobago's prisons are overcrowded and poorly
 staffed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although the law specifies that a suspect must be charged "as
 soon as possible" after arrest, in practice charges usually
 are made within 48 hours. The police can, however, obtain a
 court order to hold a person longer to gather more evidence.
 Preventive detention is not allowed under the law. Arrested
 persons are allowed access to a lawyer of their choice and
 have the right to a judicial determination of the legality of
 their detention. Family members may visit detainees. There
 are recurring charges in the courts that the police have
 violated one or more of these procedures in individual cases,
 and the courts, which vigilantly monitor police practices in
 this area, often find for the complainant.
 There is no forced labor in Trinidad and Tobago. Although
 Trinidad and Tobago has no laws regarding forced labor, it has
 adopted the International Labor Organization's convention on
 the subject.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees accused persons a fair and public
 trial by the independent judiciary, from which appeals may be
 made to an appellate court and eventually to the Privy Council
 in London. Defendants have the right to an attorney, although
 not at public expense. With the exception of murder cases,
 all accused persons may be freed on bail pending trial. The
 presiding magistrate may suspend bail after consultation with
 the prosecution and defense.
 The judiciary reportedly is overworked, understaffed, and
 underfunded. Over 11,000 court actions were filed in the
 
 
 641
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 civil courts during the 1985-86 court term, and the large
 backlog has led to long delays in bringing cases to trial.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution and laws prohibit such arbitrary interference,
 and these prohibitions generally are respected.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of expression, and this
 right is protected in practice by the country's independent
 judiciary, by its pluralistic political system, and by the
 independent and privately-owned print media.
 Trindad and Tobago Television (TTT), which operates the only
 television station in the country, is government owned. Its
 coverage is generally unbiased, although disputes have arisen
 in the past over its political broadcasting policy. TTT
 allocates broadcast time to the ruling and opposition parties
 in proportion to the share of votes received in the previous
 general election. In 1984 a prominent member of the
 opposition challenged this policy in court, claiming that TTT
 had violated his constitutional right of freedom of speech.
 The court found in the complainant's favor, but TTT appealed,
 and in 1985 the decision was overturned. TTT has maintained
 its policy on political broadcasts pending further court
 hearings. The Government is also allotted a specific amount
 of broadcast time for nonpolitical, informational programing.
 The opposition has alleged that government ministers misuse
 this tim'e for political broadcasts. The Government has failed
 to act on a longstanding application by
 a group of businessmen to start a second television station.
 Trinidad and Tobago has two radio stations, one government
 owned and one privately owned. Both currently are operating
 without licenses while the Government develops a
 telecommunications policy that establishes the conditions
 under which all broadcasting media will operate in the future.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in
 practice. Permits are required in advance for marches,
 demonstrations, or other public meetings. These are normally
 granted, including to critics of the Government.
 The Constitution protects the right of workers to organize and
 bargain collectively, and this right is freely exercised.
 Approximately 27 percent of the workforce are organized into
 more than 25 major labor unions and numerous smaller ones.
 The unions are independent of government or party control and
 effectively represent their members.* Most unions are grouped
 into two labor congresses, one of them associated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the other
 with the World Federation of Trade Unions. Workers are
 permitted to strike, and employers to engage in lockouts.
 
 
 642
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 The Ministry of Labour acts as an impartial mediator in
 collective bargaining impasses. If mediation by the Ministry
 fails and the parties agree, the dispute may be certified as
 unresolved and referred to the Industrial Court, part of the
 independent judiciary, for a binding decision.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and respected in practice. There is no state
 religion and no religious test for public office. There are
 large, organized groups of Christians, Hindus, and Moslems.
 These and other religious groups are allowed to maintain
 associations with organizations and individuals in other
 countries. Religious groups are free to travel, establish
 places of worship, and publish religious material.
 Missionaries are freely permitted and allowed to proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel either within or outside
 the country.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Trinidad and Tobago's people choose their government in free
 general elections held, as required by the Constitution, at
 intervals not to exceed 5 years. Trinidad and Tobago is
 governed by a bicameral Parliament; its 36-member House of
 Representatives is elected, and a 31-member Senate whose
 members are appointed by the President--16 on the advice of
 the governing party, 6 on the advice of the opposition, and 9
 at the President's discretion. The head of government is the
 Prime Minister, who is the leader of the majority party in the
 House. The head of state is the President, who is elected by
 Parliament. Numerous opposition parties have contested every
 general election since independence in 1956, except that of
 1971 when the opposition chose not to participate. Several
 opposition parties combined to form the National Alliance for
 Reconstruction (NAR) in 1985. The NAR won 33 of 36 seats in
 the House in the December 1986 elections.
 In 1986 the independent Elections and Boundaries Commission
 (EBC), headed by a former Chief Justice, completed a
 comprehensive updating of the country's voter registration
 lists and realigned a number of parliamentary constituencies.
 The various political parties consider the EBC report to be
 fair and unbiased. The Constitution allows Commonwealth
 citizens who are legal residents and at least 18 years of age
 to vote.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Trinidad and Tobago has not been the subject of international
 human rights investigations to date. An Amnesty International
 representative responsible for the Caribbean region regularly
 visits the country and meets with government officials. Apart
 from the judiciary, which acts on legal cases involving
 alleged human rights violations, the Government has an
 ombudsman who can investigate alleged violations of citizens
 rights and report the findings to Parliament.
 
 
 643
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Members of all major racial and religious groups hold senior
 positions in the new Government as they also did in the
 previous government. There is no official discrimination in
 Trinidad and Tobago, which is a multiracial society. Women
 enjoy equality under the law. Many hold positions in the
 Government, civil service, political parties, business, and
 the professions. Women currently serve in Parliament and as
 government ministers. Women's groups publicly speak out and
 are heard on all aspects of women's rights.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The law prohibits the employment-of children under the age of
 12. Children aged 12 to 18 can only work in family
 businesses, with the exception of children aged 16 to 18 who
 may also be employed by certain industries which the President
 has specifically exempted from the law. These restrictions
 are respected in practice. There is no minimum wage rate.
 However, minimum wages have been set by the Minister of Labour
 for three occupations which are considered difficult to
 organize into unions: gas station attendants, shop clerks,
 and domestic servants.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill, which sets requirements for health
 and safety standards in certain industries. Because of
 changes in Trinidad and Tobago's industry since 1948, the
 Government has proposed a new Occupational Health and Safety
 Bill to replace the Factories Ordinance Bill. The legislation
 is expected to come before Parliament once the Government has
 considered certain proposed alterations. A Severance and
 Retrenchment Bill, which became law in 1986, provides improved
 severance benefits for laid off workers.
 
 
 644
