 TRINTDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which there have been free and fair general elections since inde-
 pendence from the United Kingdom in 1962. A bicameral Parliament and a Prime
 r govern the country. Parliament elects the President, whose office is largely
 ceremonial. A 12-member elected House of Assembly handles local matters on the
 island of Tobago.
 The Ministry of National Security controls the police service and the defense force,
 which are responsive to civilian authority. An independent body, the Police Service
 Commission, makes all personnel decisions in the police service, and the Ministry
 has little direct influence over changes in senior positions. Some members of the po-
 lice service allegedly committed human rights abuses.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on the petroleum and natural gas
 industries, but efforts are being made to diversify the economy into services, manu-
 factring, and tourism. The Government has historically owned many businesses
 wholly or partially; however, under a major divestment program a number of state-
 owned corporations have been privatized either partially or completely.
 Citizens enjoy a wide range of civil liberties and individual rights. Nonetheless,
 human rights abuses included overcrowded prisons, violence against women, and al-
 legations of beatings and extrajudicial killings by the police. Increased violent crime
 and narcotics trafficking strained the justice system, which was severely bogged
 down by excessive delays. However, the Government has taken steps to improve ju-
 dicial performance, including the introduction of court sessions at night.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On August 30, unidentified masked
 gunmen shot and killed a low-level member of the Jamaat al Muslimeen, who par-
 ticipated in a 1990 coup attempt, in an ambush. A key Jamaat leader, who was
 riding in the same car with the murder victim, escaped uninjured. Persistent ru-
 mors pointed to possible involvement in the murder by the police service, although
 senior officials denied police complicity. There were other rumors alleging inter-
 necine rivalries in the Jamaat.
 Two other low-level Jamaat members, who also participated in the 1990 coup
 were murdered in June, the day after the murder of former Attorney General
 Selwyn Richardson (see below). While speculation pointed to a connection between
 the crimes, there have been no arrests nor any suspects identified.
 On June 20 unidentified assassins shot and killed Selwyn Richardson, a promi-
 nent attorney who served as Minister of Health, Minister of National Security, and
 Attorney General at various times between 1976 and 1991, in front of his home in
 Port of Spain. No arrests have been made, and motives for the crime are unclear.
 Richardson who retired in 1991, was injured during the 1990 coup attempt by the
 Jamaat al Muslimeen, when he and others were taken hostage in the Parliament
 building
 In July a prisoner died in police custody at a public hospital, allegedly due to tor-
 ture by police (see Section l.c.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the imposition of cruel or unusual treatment or punish-
 ment.
 In July a prisoner arrested for assault and robbery died in police custody at a
 public hospital. Police allegedly tortured the prisoner who was said to be healthy
 at the time of his arrest. Officials have not issued any reprimands to police officers
 involved in the incident.
 Courts frequently order the flogging of prisoners, but this is not actually carried
 out in practice. The relevant statute requires that the punishment be carried out
 within 6 months of sentencing;, defendants appeal all flogging sentences, and courts
 do not hear the appeals before the 6-month deadline.
 Overcrowding is a serious problem in men's prisons, where shortages of guards
 and unsanitary conditions have led to serious social and health problems. Condi-
 tions are most serious in the older facilities: Port of Spain Prison, for example, has
 a capacity of 250 inmates, but houses 983. Diseases such as chicken pox, tuber-
 culosis, AIDS, and other viruses spread easily, and prisoners generally must pur-
 chase their own medication. Construction problems have delayed completion of a
 large, modern detention facility until 1996. Facilities for, and treatment of, women
 
 
 531
 grisoners appear to be better, with a strong and successful orientation toward reha-
 ilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary de-
 tention, imprisonment, or exile of any person. A police officer may arrest a person
 either based on a warrant issued or authorized by a magistrate or without a war-
 rant when the officer witnesses commission of the alleged offense. In less serious
 offenses, the authorities typically bring the accused before a magistrate within 24
 hours; for indictable offenses, the accused must appear within 48 hours. At that
 time the magistrate reads the charge and determines the availability of bail. (A re-
 cently enacted bail bill authorizes magistrates to deny ball to violent and repeat of-
 fenders.) If for some reason the accused does not come before the magistrate, the
 case comes up on the magistrate's docket every 8 to 10 days until a hearing date
 is set. The courts notify persons of their right to an attorney and allow them access
 to an attorney once they are in custody and prior to any interrogation. The authori-
 ties do not always comply with these standards, however.
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actionsprejudicial to public safety, public order, or the defense of Trinidad
 and Tobag, and the Minister must state the grounds for the detention. A detainee
 under this prvision has access to counsel an  may  ave his detention reviewed by
 a three-member tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attor-
 ney. The Minister must provide the tribunal with the grounds for the detention
 within 7 days of the detainee's request for review, which shall be held "as soon as
 reasonably practicable" following receipt of the grounds. There have been no reports
 that the authorities abused this procedure.
 In order to thwart a plot to bring down the Government, which according to the
 Prime Minister was allegedly planned by opposition leader and Speaker of the
 House Occah Seapaul, the Government declared a limited state of emergency in Au-
 gust. Under the emergency decree, Seapaul was placed under house arrest for 4
 ays and the Minister of National Security carefully controlled visits to her resi-
 dence. This gave the Government time to pass legislation effectively removing her
 from office. Only Seapaul was affected by the decree. Seapaul contested her deten-
 tion, alleging she was a political prisoner. The Government has not pressed any
 criminal charges against her. A ruling on the legality of the state of emergency re-
 mains pending.
 As noted, exile is forbidden by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tra.-The judiciary is independent in practice and is not
 influenced by the executive or legislative branches or the military.
 The Constitution provides the right to a fair public trial for persons charged with
 criminal offenses. It also provides for presumption of innocence, reasonable bail, fair
 and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, and an interpreter
 for non-English speakers. The authorities generally respected these rights in prac-
 tice. Appeals may be made to the national court of appeals and then to the Privy
 Council in London. All criminal defendants have the right to an attorney. In prac-
 tice, the courts sometimes appoint attorneys for those persons charged with indict-
 able offenses (serious crimes) if they cannot retain one on their own behalf. The law
 requires a person accused of murder to have an attorney. An indigent person may
 refuse to accept an assigned attorney for cause and obtain a replacement. In spite
 of these provisions, however, there were several allegations by prisoners charged
 with narcotics trafficking offenses that the authorities did not provide them with at-
 torneys even after they specifically requested counsel.
 Despite serious efforts to improve, the judiciary, severe inefficiency remains in
 many areas. Several criminal cases were dismissed due to judicial or police ineffi-
 ciency. In one case, a magistrate dropped charges against a defendant charged with
 cocaine trafficking, who spent 2 months in jail, because the police officer who was
 to present evidence against him was on vacation and did not appear in court. In
 another case, a defendant charged with illegal firearms possession in 1989, who
 pleaded guilty when apprehended, had charges against him dropped after 6 years
 of waiting for trial because police prosecutors lost the case file. Over 20,000 criminal
 cases introduced since 1986 await trial.
 The limited availability of transport to take defendants from prisons to courts is
 a serious problem contributing to the delay in trials. In September the Government
 awarded a contract to a private security firm to transport prisoners, and it has also
 purchased additional police vehicles to help reduce the growing backlog of criminal
 cases. To further deal with case backlogs, the Arima magistrate's court began night
 sessions on July 10. Arima, with jurisdiction over narcotics offenses committed at
 Piarco International Airport, is one of the busiest courts. The Government is replac-
 ing the current manual system of court reporting with computer assisted tran-
 scription.
 
 
 532
 
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction. Police must obtain search
 warrants to enter private property.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and
 of the press, including academic freedom.
 The three major daily newspapers freely and often criticize the Government in
 editorials. Widely read weekly tabloids tend to be extremely critical of the Govern-
 ment. All newspapers are privately owned. The two local television newscasts, one
 of which appears on a state-owned station, are sometimes critical of the Government
 but generally do not editorialize.
 A board of film censors is authorized to ban films it considers to be against public
 order and decency or contrary to the public interest. This includes films which it
 believes may be controversial in matters of religion, seditious propaganda or race.
 In practice, films are rarely prohibited, but in April the board banned the theatrical
 release of one film, citing its glorification of violence and drug abuse.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of freedom of assembly and association, and the Government respects
 these rights in practice. Registration or other governmental permission to form pri-
 vate associations is not required. The police routinely grant the required advance
 permits for street marches, demonstrations, or other public outdoor meetings. Dur-
 ing the August state of emergency (see Section 1.d.), the Government banned public
 demonstrations; many entertainment events, although not officially prohibited, were
 cancelled.
 Political activity by trade associations or professional bodies is not restricted, and
 these organizations affiliate freely with recognized international bodies in their
 fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. Residents are free to emigrate, return, and travel within
 or outside the country, as well as to change residence and workplace. Although Trin-
 idad and Tobago is not a party to any U.N. convention or protocol on refugees, there
 were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 There is no provision for persons to claim or be classified as refugees or asylum
 seekers; any such cases are handled on a case by case basis by the Ministry of Na-
 tional Security's Immigration Division.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens choose their government by secret ballot in free and fair multiparty elec-
 tions held at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago
 House of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to
 vote to citizens as well as to legal residents with citizenship in other Commonwealth
 countries who are at least 18 years of age.
 General elections were held on November 6. The opposition United National Con-
 gress (UNC) and the ruling People's National Movement (PNM) won the same num-
 ber of seats (17) in Parliament. The National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) won
 two seats and joined with the UNC in forming a new government. Basdeo Panday
 became Trinidad's first Prime Minister of East Indian descent.
 The PNM is primarily but not exclusively Afro-Trinidadian; the UNC is primarily
 but not exclusively Indo-Trinidadian.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women or minorities from participating in
 government or the political parties, and women hold many positions in the Govern-
 ment and political party leadership. Four out of 36 elected members of the House
 of Representatives and 9 out of 31 appointed senators are female, with 3 serving
 as ministers. Prime Minister Panday appointed a woman as attorney general. She
 is the first female attorney general and the only Indo-Trinidadian woman in the
 Cabinet.
 
 
 533
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several small nongovernmental human rights groups operate freely without gov-
 ernment restriction or interference. A law established the office of the Ombudsman,
 which receives complaints relating to government administrative issues and inves-
 tigates complaints of human rights abuse. The Ombudsman can make recommenda-
 tions but does not have authority to force government offices to take action.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Government respects in practice the constitutional provisions of fundamental
 human rights and freedoms to all without discrimination based on race, origin,
 color, religion or sex.
 Women. -Physical abuse of women continued to be an extensive problem. At least
 nine women, and seven of their children, were killed by spouses. There are several
 shelters for battered women, and a rape crisis center offers counseling for rape vic-
 tims and perpetrators on a voluntary basis; 355 women voluntarily requested coun-
 seling. Law enforcement officials and the courts are generally not sensitive to family
 violence problems.
 Many women hold positions in business, the professions, and government, but
 men tend to hold the most senior positions. There is no law or regulation requiring
 equal pay for equal work.
 The Division of Women's Affairs in the Ministry of Community Development,
 Women's Affairs, and Culture is charged with protecting women's rights in all as-
 pects of government and legislation. Prior to the U.N. Conference on Women's
 Rights inBejing, the Ministry, which is led by a woman, organized several semi-
 nars on women a issues and publicized women's rights. Several active women's
 rights groups also exist.
 C ldren.--The Government's ability to protect childrn's welfare is limited by a
 lack of funding and expanding social needs. Some parts of the public school system
 seriously fail to meet the needs of the school age population due to overcrowding,
 substandard physical facilities, and occasional classroom violence from gangs. There
 is no pattern of social abuse directed at children. The Domestic Violence Act pro-
 vides protection for children abused at home. Abused children are usually placed
 with relatives if they are removed from the home. If there is no relative who can
 take them, there are several government institutions and nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) which accept children.
 People With Disabilities.--There is no legislation that specifically enumerates or
 protects the rights of disabled persons nor mandates the provision of access to build-
 ings or services, although NGO's lobbied Parliament to pass such legislation.
 Nonaccessibility of transportation, buildings, and sidewalks is a major obstacle to
 the disabled. Only one van in the country is equipped with a hydraulic lift; the other
 such van broke down during the year and was not repaired. The Government pro-
 vides some public assistance and partial funding to a variety of NGO's which, in
 turn, provide direct services to disabled members or clients.
 Indigenous People.-Members of a very small group in the population identify
 themselves as descendants of the original Amerindian population of the island. They
 maintain social ties with each other and other aboriginal groups and are not subject
 to discrimination.
 Religious Minorities.-In January a lower court ruled that a partially state-funded
 Catholic school must admit a female student wearing a Muslim hiNjab head covering,
 the student had missed the 1994 fall term because the school claimed that she vio-
 lated the dress code by wearing a hijab. The judge ruled that the school in question
 was public since it received public funds and found no evidence to support the
 school's claim that wearing the hijab led to indiscipline.
 Some segments of the Hindu community objected to the name of the highest na-
 tional civilian decoration, the Trinity cross, and have called for it to be changed to
 one less identified with Christianity. For this reason, a prominent Hindu religious
 leader refused the award in 1995.
 National /RaciallEthnic Minorities.-Various ethnic and religious groups live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 at times racial tensions appear between Afro-Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians.
 Each group omprises about 40 percent of the population. The private sector is
 dominatedhyInd-Triidadians and people of European, Middle Eastern, and Asian
 descent. Ind-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Triidadians tend
 to find employment in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and mili-
 tary. Some Indo-Trinidadians asser t t they are excluded from equal representa-
 tion in the civil service due to racial discrimination. Since Indo-Trinidadians con-
 
 
 534
 stitute the majority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are in the majority in
 urban areas, competition between town and country for public goods and services
 often takes on racial overtones.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all workers, including those
 in state-owned enterprises, may form or join unions of their own choosing without
 prior authorization. Union membership has declined with 14 unions active. An esti-
 mated 20 to 28 percent of the work force is unionized. Most unions are independent
 of the Government or political party control, although the Sugar Workers' Union is
 historically allied with the PNC, and the new Prime Minister was formerly presi-
 dent of the Sugar Workers' Union.
 The law prohibits antiunion activities before a union is legally registered, and the
 Ministry of Labor enforces this provision when it receives a complaint. A union may
 also bring a request for enforcement to the Industrial Court. All employees except
 those in "essential services," such as government employees and police, have the
 right to strike.
 A major strike against Petrotrin, the state-owned oil corporation, resulted in sev-
 eral incidents of violence and industrial sabotage. However the Government did not
 interfere in the strike. The strike was settled on September 18 with the workers
 receiving a 7-percent pay increase.
 Public service employees, who are owed approximately $430 million in back wages
 by the Government, carried out several relatively successful work slowdowns and
 threatened to shut down public services if the Government did not act on the issues
 of back pay, cost of living allowances, and merit increments. The new Government
 has promised to revisit the issue of back pay.
 The Labor Relations Act prohibits retribution against strikers and provides for
 grievance procedures if any is alleged. A special section of the Industrial Court han-
 dles manctatry arbitration cases. Arbitration agreements are enforceable and ap-
 pealable only to the Industrial Court.
 Unions freely join federations and affiliate with international bodies. There are
 no restrictions on international travel or contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Act
 of 1972 establishes the right of workers to collective bargaining. The Ministry of
 Labor conciliation service maintains statistical information regarding the number of
 workers covered by collective bargaining agreements and the number of antiunion
 complaints filed.
 The Industrial Court may order employers found guilty of antiunion activities to
 reinstate workers and pay compensation, or it can impose other penalties including
 prison. When necessary, the conciliation service also determines which unions
 should have senior status.
 There are several newly organized export processing zones (EPZ's). The same
 labor laws apply in the EPZ's as in the country at large.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not explicitly pro-
 hibit forced or compulsory labor, but there were no reports that it was practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum legal age for work-
 ers is 12 years. Children from 12 to 14 years of age may only work in family busi-
 nesses. Children under age 18 may legally work only during daylight, with the ex-
 ception of 16- to 18-year-olds, who may work nights in sugar factories. The proba-
 tion service in the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services is respon-
 sible for enforcing child labor provisions, but enforcement is lax. There is no orga-
 nized exploitation of child labor, but children are often seen vending and begging,
 and some are used by criminals as guards and couriers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage. The Gov-
 ernment has set minimum wages in 53 job categories in 5 nonunionized occupa-
 tional groupings. The minimum pay ranges from $26 (TT$130.45) per week to $57
 (TI"$285) per week. These rates were to be adjusted for cost-of-living increases at
 regular intervals, but Parliament has never considered an adjustment since passing
 the laws. The Ministry of Labor enforces the minimum wage regulations. A mini-
 mum wage is not sufficient to support a worker and family, but most workers earn
 more than the minimum.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours. There are no restrictions on overtime work.
 Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agreements.
 For those sectors covered, the minimum wage laws provide holiday pay, 2 weeks'
 vacation, and 14 days' sick leave per year.
 The Factories and Ordinance Bill of 1948 sets requirements for health and safety
 standards in certain industries and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce
 compliance. The Industrial Relations Act protects workers who file complaints with
 
 
 535
 the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions. Should it
 be determined upon inspection that conditions exist in the workplace which present
 hazards, the worker is absolved in refusing to comply with an order that would have
 placed him or her in danger.
