 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which there have been free and fair general elections since inde-
 pendence from the United, Kingdom in 1962. A bicameral parliament and a prime
 minister govern the country. Parliament elects a president, whose office is largely
 
 
 779
 ceremonial. A 12-member elected House of Assembly handles local matters on the
 island of Tobago. The judiciary is independent.
 The Ministry of National Security controls the police service and the defense force,
 which are responsive to civilian authority. An independent body, the Police Service
 Commission, makes all personnel decisions in the police service, and the Ministry
 has little direct influence over changes in senior positions.
 Oil and natural gas production and related downstream petrochemical industries
 form the basis of the market-based economy. The service sector is the largest em-
 ployer, although continued industrialization has created many jobs in the construc-
 tion industry. Agriculture, while contributing only 2 percent to gross domestic prod-
 uct, remains an important employer, both at the subsistence and commercial level.
 Although per capita income is over $4,200 annually, 13.4 percent unemployment
 contributes to a skewed income distribution, which has not improved in spite of eco-
 nomic growth of 3.8 percent. Government efforts to address this problem by further
 diversification into manufacturing and tourism have been only partially successful.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, and the law
 and judiciary provide effective means of dealing with individual instances of abuse.
 Nonetheless, poor prison conditions, long delays in trials, and violence against
 women remain problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions at the women's prison and two of the three men's prisons meet
 minimum international standards. However, conditions are worse in the Port of
 Spain prison, which was designed for 250 inmates, but houses about 1,200. Diseases
 such as chicken pox, tuberculosis, AIDS, and other viruses spread easily, and pris-
 oners generally must purchase their own medication. Overcrowding plagued the en-
 tire prison system, which placed 4,900 inmates in prisons built to accommodate no
 more than 1,800. A new maximum security prison, under construction since 1992,
 opened on September 1 with 200 inmates and, with an eventual capacity for 2,100,
 is expected to help alleviate the problem. Nonetheless, the prison was not expected
 to be fully functional until 1999.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest or detention, and the Government generally observes this prohibition.
 A police officer may arrest a person either based on a warrant issued or author-
 ized by a magistrate or without a warrant when the officer witnesses commission
 of the alleged offense. For less serious offenses, the authorities typically bring the
 accused before a magistrate within 24 hours; for indictable offenses, the accused
 must appear within 48 hours. At that time the magistrate reads the charge and de-
 termines whether bail is appropriate. Magistrates may deny bail to violent or repeat
 offenders. If for some reason the accused does not come before the magistrate, the
 case comes up on the magistrate's docket every 8 to 10 days until a hearing date
 is set. The courts notify persons of their right to an attorney and allow them access
 to an attorney once they are in custody and prior to any interrogation. 'However,
 the authorities do not always comply with these standards. Allegations of corruption
 among justices of the peace also raised concerns about compliance with these laws.
 The Government pledged to dismiss and prosecute any justice found to have violated
 these standards (see Section I.e.).
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public safety, public order, or national defense, and
 the Minister must state the grounds for the detention. A person detained under this
 provision has access to counsel and may have the detention reviewed by a three-
 member tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The
 Minister must provide the tribunal with the grounds for the detention within 7 days
 of the detainee's request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. There have been no reports that the au-
 thorities abused this procedure.
 The Constitution prohibits exile.
 
 
 780
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair judicial process.
 The court system consists of a court of appeal, a high court, and a magistrate's
 court. A criminal offense is first sent to a magistrate's court for a preliminary in-
 quiry to determine if it can be heard before a magistrate without a jury. If the mag-
 istrate determines that the offense is a serious one, it is referred to the High Court,
 where it is heard before a judge and jury. All civil matters are heard by the High
 Court. Appeals can be filed with the local court of appeal, and ultimately to the
 Privy Council in London. There was considerable support for abolishing appeals to
 the Privy Council.
 The Constitution provides the -right to a fair trial, and an independent judiciary
 vigorously enforces this right. All criminal defendants have the right to an attorney.
 In practice the courts sometimes appoint attorneys for those persons charged with
 indictable offenses (serious crimes) if they cannot retain one on their own behalf.
 The law requires a person accused of murder to have an attorney. An indigent per-
 son may refuse to accept an assigned attorney for cause and obtain a replacement.
 Despite serious efforts to improve the judiciary, severe inefficiency remains in
 many areas. Several criminal cases were dismissed due to judicial or police ineffi-
 ciency. In September a court dismissed an assault charge against a defendant who
 had to wait 19 years to be brought to trial. Despite significant progress, lengthy
 trial delays remain a serious problem. Spurred by a desire to implement the death
 penalty, and in order to comply with a ruling by the Privy Council, the Cabinet es-
 tablished time limits for the courts to dispose of capital appeals. To accomplish this
 goal, the Attorney General created a case management unit to track capital appeals.
 The Government also allocated additional resources to help the courts deal with the
 extra workload.
 In addition, the Government moved against corruption in the criminal justice sys-
 tem. At year's end, the authorities had charged at least 35 persons with various of-
 fenses after a presidential commission's investigation found collusion among justices
 of the peace, bailiffs, and police officers in the granting and fixing of bail. Those
 charged included 8 justices of the peace, 19 bailiffs, 3 attorneys, and 2 police offi-
 cers. The Government had obtained one conviction by year's end; a court found a
 justice of the peace guilty of accepting a bribe and sentenced him to 14 years' im-
 prisonment.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and
 of the press, including academic freedom.
 Prime Minister Basdeo Panday has accused the media of being politically biased
 against his government. In May the Prime Minister said that he would not sign the
 Declaration of Chapultepec, a regional pledge of press freedom, unless it included
 a clause against "lies, half-truths, and innuendoes." At a ruling party rally in No-
 vember, Prime Minister Panday criticized the media using some of his strongest lan-
 guage to date. An altercation between a government supporter at the rally (himself
 a journalist) and reporters covering the event was blamed by many in the media
 on the Prime Minister's rhetoric. The Prime Minister's comments and the incident
 at the rally received wide negative press coverage and led to a subsequent protest
 march by some members of the media and others in downtown Port of Spain.
 Both before and after this incident, the three major daily newspapers freely and
 often criticized the Government in editorials. Widely read weekly tabloids tend to
 be extremely critical of the Government. All newspapers are privately owned. The
 two local television newscasts, one of which appears on a state-owned station, are
 sometimes critical of the Government but generally do not editorialize.
 A Board of Film Censors is authorized to ban films it considers to be against pub-
 lic order and decency or contrary to the public interest. This includes films which
 it believes may be controversial in matters of religion, race, or that contain seditious
 propaganda. In practice films are rarely prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government respects this right in practice. The police
 routinely grant the required advance permits or street marches, demonstrations, or
 other outdoor public meetings. In August the Government amended the Summary
 
 
 781
 
 Offences Act to require that permits for public meetings and rallies be applied for
 48 hours in advance instead of 24 hours. The fine for violation of the act was raised
 from about $275 (TT$ 2,000) to $1,375 (TT$10,000). The amendment makes it an
 offense to hold a public meeting without a permit under the guise of conducting an
 exempted religious, educational, recreational, or sports function. This new offense is
 punishable by imprisonment for 2 years or a fine of about $1,375 (TT$10,000). In
 practice, the law has not unduly restricted public meetings, demonstrations, or ex-
 empted events.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. Registration or other governmental permission to form
 private associations is not required.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 There is no provision for persons to claim or be classified as refugees or asylum
 seekers; the Ministry of National Security's Immigration Division handles any such
 requests on a case-by-case basis. The issue of the provision of first asylum did not
 arise. There were no reports of forced return of persons to -a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage. Parliamentary elections are held
 at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago House of As-
 sembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to vote to citizens
 as well as to legal residents at least 18 years of age who hold citizenship in other
 Commonwealth countries.
 In the November 1995 general elections, the former opposition United National
 Congress (UNC) and the ruling People's National Movement (PNM) each won 17
 seats in Parliament. The National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) won two seats
 and joined with the UNC to form a new government. Basdeo Panday became the
 country's first Prime Minister of East Indian descent. The PNM is primarily but not
 exclusively Afro-Trinidadian; the UNC is primarily but not exclusively Indo-
 Trinidadian.
 There are no specific laws that restrict the participation of women or minorities
 in government or the political parties. Women hold many positions in the Govern-
 ment and political party leadership. Four of 36 elected members of the House of
 Representatives and 10 of 31 appointed Senators are women, with 2 women serving
 as ministers. Prime Minister Panday appointed the first woman to serve as Attorney
 General; she has since moved to the position of Minister of Legal Affairs.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are very cooperative and responsive to their views. An independent ombudsman re-
 ceives complaints relating to governmental administrative issues and investigates
 complaints of human rights abuse. The Ombudsman can make recommendations
 but does not have authority to force government offices to take action.
 The Government sought to curtail appeals by death row inmates to the Inter-
 American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) and the United Nations Human
 Rights Committee. In May it gave the IACHR the required 1-year notice of its intent
 to withdraw from the American Convention on Human Rights. Also in May it in-
 formed the U.N. committee of its intention to denounce the Optional Protocol to the
 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 3 months. However, it indi-
 cated its intent to reaccede immediately to the Optional Protocol with the reserva-
 tion that the U.N. committee would not have jurisdiction over death penalty cases.
 The Governmentfs moves were prompted by a Privy Council ruling that failure to
 execute a condemned prisoner within 5 years of sentence constitutes cruel and un-
 usual punishment in violation of the Constit-ution. To meet this 5-year deadline, the
 Government established time limits for appeals to courts and human rights bodies.
 Local appeals are now disposed of within an average of 16 months compared with
 the previous average of 7 years.
 
 
 782
 The Government asked the IACHR and the U.N. Committee each to agree to dis-
 pose of petitions within 8 months. According to the Government, both bodies re-
 sponded that they could not provide such assurances. The Government stated that
 the conflict between a binding Privy Council ruling and its obligations to the human
 rights organs had to be resolved in favor of the Constitution and the Privy Council.
 The Government has indicated that it would execute condemned prisoners who have
 exhausted all their appeals and have unresolved petitions pending more than 8
 months before one of the human rights bodies.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Government respects in practice the constitutional provisions for fundamental
 human rights and freedoms to all without discrimination based on race, origin,
 color, religion, or sex.
 Women.-Physical abuse of women continued to be an extensive problem. How-
 ever, there has been increased media coverage of domestic abuse cases and signs
 of a shift in public opinion, which held that such cases were a private matter. The
 Government has taken action to improve aid to victims. Murder, rape, and other
 crimes against women are frequently reported; 72 percent of adult female murder
 victims in 1998 were believed to have been killed by their husbands or lovers. Rape,
 spousal abuse, and spousal rape are criminal offenses. The 1991 Domestic Violence
 Act was intended to facilitate court-issued restraining orders to protect victims, and
 extended protection to common-law relationships, a frequent form of marital union.
 However, some observers say that the number of restraining orders issued has not
 increased at the rate expected since the enactment of the law. The establishment
 of a community police division improved police responsiveness to reports of domestic
 abuse, but some police officers are reputed to be unsympathetic or reluctant to pur-
 sue such cases, resulting in underreporting of crimes of violence against women.
 There were almost 3,000 reported cases of spousal abuse during the year, victims
 reported an average of 9 cases a day to police, with the actual incidence of such
 abuse considered to be much higher. Two government ministries, operating inde-
 pendently, direct the NGO's that run most of the country's social programs address-
 ing domestic violence, including five shelters for battered women, and a rape crisis
 center offers counseling for rape victims and perpetrators on a voluntary basis. A
 Government-sponsored hot line receives between 200 and 250 calls each month. The
 Government has introduced legislation to strengthen the Domestic Violence Act, but
 Parliament had not yet voted on it by year's end.
 The case of a woman convicted and sentenced to death for the 1991 murder of
 her husband, whom she claimed had abused her severely over a prolonged period,
 drew wide attention. Some women's groups asserted that the conviction represented
 a double standard that punishes wife-killers less severely than women who retaliate
 against abusive husbands. Her attorneys have appealed on the basis of new evi-
 dence that they assert shows she suffered from battered-wife syndrome at the time
 of the murder.
 Many women hold positions in business, the professions, and government, but
 men tend to hold the most senior positions. There is no law or regulation requiring
 equal pay for equal work.
 The Division of Gender Affairs in the Ministry of Culture and Gender Affairs is
 charged with protecting women's rights in all aspects of government and legislation.
 Several active women's rights groups also exist.
 Children.-The Government's ability to protect children's welfare is limited by a
 lack of funds and expanding social needs. Some parts of the public school system
 seriously fail to meet the needs of the school age population due to overcrowding,
 substandard physical facilities, and occasional classroom violence by gangs. There
 is no societal pattern of abuse directed at children. The Domestic Violence Act pro-
 vides protection for children abused at home. Abused children are usually placed
 with relatives if they are removed from the home. If there is no relative who can
 take them, there are several government institutions and nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) that accept children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no legislation that specifically enumerates or
 protects the rights of disabled persons nor mandates the provision of access to build-
 ings or services, although NGO's lobbied Parliament to pass such legislation. Lack
 of access to transportation, buildings, and sidewalks is a major obstacle for the dis-
 abled. The Government provides some public assistance and partial funding to a va-
 riety of NGO's which, in turn, provide direct services to disabled members or clients.
 Indigenous People.-Members of-a very small group in the population identify
 themselves as descendants of the original Amerindian population of the island. They
 
 
 783
 maintain social ties with each other and other aboriginal groups and are not subject
 to discrimination.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Various ethnic and religious groups live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 at times racial tensions appear between Afro-Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians.
 Each group cornprises about 40 percent of the population. The private sector is
 dominated by In o-Trinidadians and people of European, Middle Eastern, or Asian
 descent. Indo-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians tend
 to find employment in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and mili-
 tary. Some Indo-Trinidadians assert that they are excluded from equal representa-
 tion in the civil service due to racial discrimination. Since Indo-Trinidadians con-
 stitute the majority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are in the majority in
 urban areas, competition between town and country for public goods and services
 often takes on racial overtones.
 In October 1996, there were reports that several popular recreational clubs were
 refusing entry to Afro-Trinidadians and dark-skinned Indo-Trinidadians. The re-
 ports led to criticism of racism by the local press, and the Government pledged to
 implement a law banning racial discrimination in entry policies for private clubs.
 However, the Government has not yet taken such action.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1972 Industrial Relations Act provides that all
 workers, including those in state-owned enterprises, may form or join unions of
 their own choosing without prior authorization. Union membership has declined,
 with an estimated 20 to 28 percent of the work force organized in 14 active unions.
 Most unions are independent of the Government or political party control, although
 the Sugar Workers' Union is historically allied with the UNC. The Prime Minister
 was formerly president of the Sugar Workers' Union.
 The lawprohibits antiunion activities before a union is legally registered, and the
 Ministry of Labor enforces this provision when it receives a complaint. A union may
 also bring a request for enforcement to the Industrial Court. All employees except
 those in 'essential services," such as government employees and police, have the
 right to strike.
 The Labor Relations Act prohibits retribution against strikers and provides for
 grievance procedures if needed. A special section of the Industrial Court handles
 mandatory arbitration cases. Arbitration agreements are enforceable and can be ap-
 pealed only to the Industrial Court.
 Unions freely join federations and affiliate with international bodies. There are
 no restrictions on international travel or contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Act
 establishes the right of workers to collective bargaining. The Ministry of Labor's
 conciliation service maintains statistical information regarding the number of work-
 ers covered by collective bargaining agreements and the number of antiunion com-
 plaints filed.
 The Industrial Court may order employers who are found guilty of antiunion ac-
 tivities to reinstate workers and pay compensation, or it can impose other penalties
 including imprisonment. When necessary the conciliation service also determines
 which unions should have senior status.
 There are several newly organized export processing zones (EPZ's). The same
 labor laws apply in the EPZ's as in the country at large.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not explicitly pro-
 hibit forced or compulsory labor, but there were no reports that it was practiced.
 There were also no reports of forced or bonded labor by children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum legal age for workers is 12 years. Children from 12 to 14 years of age may
 only work in family businesses. Children under the age of 18 may legally work only
 during daylight hours, with the exception of 16- to 18-year-olds, who may work at
 "night in sugar factories. The probation service in the Ministry of Social Development
 and Family Services is responsible for enforcing child labor provisions, but enforce-
 ment is lax. The Government does not specifically prohibit forced and bonded labor
 by children, but such practices are not known to occur (see Section 6.c.). There is
 no organized exploitation of child labor, but children are often seen begging or work-
 ing as street vendors.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-In June the Government passed the Minimum
 Wages Act which established a minimum wage of about $1.10 (TT$7.00) per hour.
 A minimum wage is not sufficient to support a worker and family, but most workers
 earn more than the minimum. The Ministry of Labor enforces the minimum wage
 regulations.
 
 
 784
 The new Minimum Wages Act also established a 40-hour workweek, time and a
 half pay for the first 4 hours of overtime on a workday, double pay for the next 4
 hours, and triple pay thereafter. For Sundays, holidays, and off days the act also
 provides for doubld pay for the first 8 hours and triple pay thereafter. Daily rest
 periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agreements.
 The Factories and Ordinance Bill of 1948 sets requirements for health and safety
 standards in certain industries and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce
 compliance. The Industrial Relations Act protects workers who file complaints with
 the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions. If it is de-
 termined upon inspection that hazardous conditions exist in the workplace, the
 worker is absolved for refusing to comply with an order that would have placed him
 or her in danger.
