 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which there have been free and fair general elections since inde-
 pendence from the United Kingdom in 1962. A bicameral parliament and a prime
 minister govern the country. Parliament elects a president, whose office is largely
 
 
 657
 ceremonial. A 12-member elected House of Assembly handles local matters on the
 island of Tobago. The judiciary is independent.
 The Ministry of National Security controls the police service and the defense force,
 which are responsive to civilian authority. An independent body, the Police Service
 Commission, makes all personnel decisions in the police service, and the Ministry
 has little direct influence over changes in senior positions.
 Oil and natural gas production and related downstream petrochemical industries
 form the basis of the market-based economy. The service sector is the largest em-
 ployer, _although continued industrialization has created many jobs in the construc-
 tion industry. Agriculture, while contributing only 2 percent to gross domestic prod-
 uct, remains an important employer, both at the subsistence and commercial level.
 Although per capita income is over $4,200 annually, 16 percent unemployment con-
 tributes to a skewed income distribution, which has not improved in spite of eco-
 nomic growth of 3.1 percent. Government efforts to address this problem by further
 diversification in to manufacturing and tourism have been only partially successful.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, and the law
 and judiciary provide effective means of dealing with individual instances of abuse.
 Nonetheless, poor prison conditions, long delays in trials, and violence against
 women remain problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions at the women's prison and two of the three men's prisons meet
 minimum international standards. However, conditions are worse in the Port of
 Spain prison, which was designed for 250 inmates, but houses over 1,000. Diseases
 such as chicken pox, tuberculosis, AIDS, and other viruses spread easily, and pris-
 oners generally must purchase their own medication. A new maximum security fa-
 cility to replace this prison was supposed to open in 1996, but had not been com-
 pleted at the end of 1997.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest or detention, and the Government generally observes this prohibition.
 A police officer may arrest a person either based on a warrant issued or author-
 ized by a magistrate or without a warrant when the officer witnesses commission
 of the alleged offense. For less serious offenses, the authorities typically bring the
 accused before a magistrate within 24 hours; for indictable offenses, the accused
 must appear within 48 hours. At that time the magistrate reads the charge and de-
 termines whether bail is appropriate. Magistrates may deny bail to violent or repeat
 offenders. If for some reason the accused- does not come before the magistrate, the
 case comes up on the magistrate's docket every 8 to 10 days until a hearing date
 is set. The courts notify persons of their right to an attorney and allow them access
 to an attorney once they are in custody and prior to any interrogation. However,
 the authorities do not always comply with these standards. Allegations of corruption
 among justices of the peace also raised concerns about compliance with these laws.
 The Government pledged to dismiss and prosecute any justice found to have violated
 these standards.
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public safety, public order, or national defense, and
 the Minister must state the grounds for the detention. A person detained under this
 provision has access to counsel and may have the detention reviewed by a three-
 member tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The
 Minister must provide the tribunal with the grounds for the detention within 7 days
 of the detainee s request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. There have been no reports that the au-
 thorities abused this procedure.
 The Constitution prohibits exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides
 citizens with a fair judicial process.
 The court system consists of a court of appeal, a high court, and a magistrate's
 court. A criminal offense is first sent to a magistrate's court for a preliminary in-
 
 
 658
 quiry to determine if it can be heard before a magistrate without a jury. If the mag-
 istrate determines that the offense is a serious one, it is referred to the high court,
 where it is heard before a judge and jury. All civil matters are heard by the high
 court. Appeals can be filed with the local court of appeal, and ultimately to the
 Privy Council in London. There was considerable support for abolishing appeals to
 the Privy Council.
 The Constitution provides the right to a fair trial, and an independent judiciary
 vigorously enforces this right. All criminal defendants have the right to an attorney.
 In practice the courts sometimes appoint attorneys for those persons charged with
 indictable offenses (serious crimes) if they cannot retain one on their own behalf.
 The law requires a person accused of murder to have an attorney. An indigent per-
 son may refuse to accept an assigned attorney for cause and obtain a replacement.
 Despite serious efforts to improve the judiciary, severe inefficiency remains in
 many areas. Several criminal cases were dismissed due to judicial or police ineffi-
 ciency. In October 1996, the courts acquitted a defendant c arged with murdering
 a police officer in March 1982; the authorities had held him in custody for over 14
 years. Progress was made in reducing the judicial backlog, but the number of crimi-
 nal cases awaiting trial remained over 20,000.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect these prohibi-
 tions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of the
 press, and the Government respects this right in practice. An independent press and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure freedom of speech and
 of the press, including academic freedom.
 The three major daily newspapers freely and often criticize the Government in
 editorials. Widely read weekly tabloids tend to be extremely critical of the Govern-
 ment. All newspapers are privately owned. The two local television newscasts, one
 of which appears on a state-owned station, are sometimes critical of the Government
 but generally do not editorialize.
 A Board of Film Censors is authorized to ban films it considers to be against pub-
 lic order and decency or contrary to the public interest. This includes films which
 it believes may be controversial in matters of religion, seditious propaganda, or race.
 In practice films are rarely prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice. Registration or other
 governmental permission to form private associations is not required. The police
 rutinely rant the required advane permits for street marches, demonstrations, or
 other outdoor public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 There is no provision for persons to claim or be classified as refugees or asylum
 seekers; any such cases are handled on a case-by-case basis by the Ministry of Na-
 tional Security's Immigration Division. The issue of the provision of first asylum did
 not arise. There were no reports of forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage. Parliamentary elections are held
 at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago House of As-
 sembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to vote to citizens
 as wel as to legal residents at least 18 years of age who hold citizenship in other
 Commonwealth countries.
 In the November 1995 general elections, the former opposition United National
 Congress (UNC) and the ruling People's National Movement (PNM) each won 17
 seats in Parliament. The National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) won two seats
 and joined with the UNC to form a new government. Basdeo Panday became the
 country's first Prime Minister of East Indian descent. The PNM is primarily but not
 
 
 659
 exclusively Afro-Trinidadian; the INe is primarily but not exclusively Indo-
 Trinidadan
 There are no specific laws that restrict the participation of women or minorities
 in government or the political parties. Women hold many positions in the Govern-
 ment and political party leadership. Four of 36 elected members of the House of
 Representatives and8 of 31 appointed Senators are women, with 3 women serving
 as ministers. Prime Minister Panday appointed the first woman to serve as Attorney
 General; she has since moved to the position of Minister of Legal Affairs.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights grups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their indings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are very coo rative and responsive to their views. An independent ombudsman re-
 ceives complaints relating to governmental administrative issues and investigates
 complaints of human rights abuse. The Ombudsman can make recommendations
 but does not have authority to force government offices to take action.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Government respects in practice the constitutional provisions for fundamental
 human rights and freedoms to all without discrimination based on race, origin,
 color, religion, or sex.
 Women.-Physical abuse of women continued to be an extensive problem; murder,
 rape, and other crimes against women are frequently reported. There are several
 shelters for battered women, and a rape crisis center offers counseling for rape vic-
 tims and perpetrators on a voluntary basis. Rape, spousal abuse, anspus  rape
 are criminal offenses. However, some police officers are reputed to be unsympathetic
 or reluctant to pursue such cases, which results in low reporting of crimes of vio-
 lence against women. Inconsistent sentencing has exacerbated the public perception
 of a serious problem. Media focus on the 100 percent increase in reported raes gen-
 erated a great deal of public attention, and there is heightened governmenta aware-
 ness of escalating violent crimes against women. At year's end, the Government was
 preparing to implement legislation to strengthen the Domestic Violence Act.
 Many women hold positions in business, the professions, and government, but
 men tend to hold the most senior positions. There is no law or regulation requiring
 equal pay for equal work.
 The Division of Women's Affairs in the Ministry of Community Development,
 Women's Affairs, and Culture is charged with protecting women's rights in all as-
 pects of government and legislation. Several active women's rights groups also exist.
 Children.-The Government's ability to protect children's welfare is Timited by a
 lack of funds and expanding social needs. Some parts of the public school system
 seriously fail to meet the needs of the school age population due to overcrowding,
 substandard physical facilities, and occasional ciassroom violence by gangs. There
 is no societal pattern of abuse directed at children. The Domestic Violence Act pro-
 vides protection for children abused at home. Abused children are usually placed
 with relatives if they are removed from the home. If there is no relative who can
 take them, there are several government institutions and nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) that accept children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no legislation that specifically enumerates or
 protects the rights of disabled persons nor mandates the provision of access to build-
 ings or services, although NGO's lobbied Parliament to pass such legislation. Lack
 of access to transportation, buildings, and sidewalks is a major obstacle for the dis-
 abled. The Government provides some public assistance and partial funding to a va-
 riety of NGO's which, in turn, provide direct services to disabled members or clients.
 Indigenous People.-Members of a very small group in the population identify
 themselves as descendants of the original Amerindian population of the island. They
 maintain social ties with each other and other aboriginal groups and are not subject
 to discrimination.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Various ethnic and religious groups live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 at times racial tensions appear between Afro-Tin-a-dians and Indo-Trinidadians.
 Each group comprises about 40 percent of the population. Theprivate sector is
 dominated by ndo-Trinidadians and people of European, Middle Eastern, or Asian
 descent. Indo-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Triidadians tend
 to find employment in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and mili-
 tary. Some Indo-Trinidadians assert that they are excluded from equal representa-
 tion in the civil service due to racial discrimination. Since Indo-Trinidadians con-
 
 
 stitute the majority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are in the majority in
 urban areas, competition between town and country for public goods and services
 often takes on racial overtones.
 In October 1996, there were reports that several popular recreational clubs were
 refusing entry to Afro-Trinidadians and dark-skinned Indo-Trinidadians. The re-
 ports led to criticism of racism by the local press, and the Government pledged to
 implement a law banning racial discrimination in entry policies for private clubs.
 However, the Government had not taken such action by year's end.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The 1972 Industrial Relations Act provides that all
 workers, including those in state-owned enterprises, may form or join unions of
 their own choosing without prior authorization. Union membership has declined,
 with an estimated 20 to 28 percent of the work force organized in 14 active unions.
 Most unions are independent of the Government or political art control, although
 the Sugar Workers' Union is historically allied with the LIC. The Prime Minister
 was formerly president of the Sugar Workers' Union.
 The law prohibits antiunion activities before a union is legally registered, and the
 Ministry of Labor enforces this provision when it receives a complaint. A union may
 also bring a request for enforcement to the Industrial Court.  employees except
 those in "essential services," such as government employees and police, have the
 right to strike.
 ,junior doctors at Port of Spain and San Fernando general hospitals continued
 their series of sick-outs and work-to-rule actions begun in 1996 to protest poor work-
 ing conditions and insufficient pay. During these actions, several wards were fre-
 quently out of service at the Port of Spain general hospital, including the intensive
 care ward. Magistrates also launched a sick-out in October and November to protest
 poor working conditions and low pay.
 The Labor Relations Act prohibits retribution against strikers and provides for
 grievance procedures if needed. A special section of the Industrial Court handles
 mandatory arbitration cases. Arbitration agreements are enforceable and appealable
 only to the Industrial Court.
 Unions freely join federations and affiliate with international bodies. There are
 no restrictions on international travel or contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Act
 establishes the right of workers to collective bargaining. The Ministry of Labor's
 conciliation service maintains statistical information regarding the number of work-
 ers covered by collective bargaining agreements and the number of antiunion com-
 plaints filed.
 The Industrial Court may order employers who are found guilty of antiunion ac-
 tivities to reinstate workers and pay compensation, or it can impose other penalties
 including imprisonment. When necessary the conciliation service also determines
 which unions should have senior status.
 There are several newly organized export processing zones (EPZ's). The same
 labor laws apply in the EPZ's as in the country at large.
 c. Prohibiton of Forced or Compulsory Labor.- Te law does not explicitly pro-
 hibit forced or compulsory labor, but there were no reports that it was practiced.
 There were also no reports of forced or bonded labor by children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum legal age for workers is 12 years. Children from 12 to 14 years of age may
 only work in family businesses. Children under the age of 15 may legally work only
 during daylight hours, with the exception of 16- to 18-year-olds, who may work at
 nightmu sugar fatories. The probation servie in the Ministry of Social Development
 and Family Services is responsible for enforcing child labor provisions, but enforce-
 ment is lax. The Government does not specifically prohibit forced and bonded labor
 by children, but such practices are not known to occur (see Section 6.c.). There is
 no organized exploitation of child labor, but children are often seen begging or work-
 ing as street vendors. Some are used by criminals as guards and couriers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no national minimum wage. The Gov-
 ernment has set minimum wages for 53 job categories in 5 nonunionized occupa-
 tional groupings. The minimum pay ranges from $26 (TT$130.45) per week to $57
 (TT 285) per week. These rates were to be adjusted for cost-of-living increases at
 regular intervals, but Parliament has only adjusted the rates once (in 1991) since
 passing the law in 1986. The Ministry of Labor enforces the minimum wage regula-
 tions. A minimum wage is not sufficient to support a worker and family, but most
 workers earn more than the minimum.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours. There are no restrictions on overtime work.
 Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agreements.
 
 
 661
 
 For those sectors covered, the minimum wage laws also stipulate holiday pay, 2
 weeks' vacation, and 14 days' sick leave per year.
 The Factories and Ordinance Bill of 1948 sets requirements for health and safety
 standards in certain industries and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce
 com liance. The Industrial Relations Act protects workers who file complaints with
 the       ry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions. Should it
 be determined upon inspection that hazardous conditions exist in the workplace, the
 worker is absolved for refusing to comply with an order that would have placed him
 or her in danger.
