 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago is a republic with a parliamentary form of
 government. Free and fair elections have been held at regular
 intervals since independence from-Great Britain in 1962.
 Prior to December 1986, each election had been won by the
 People's National Movement (PNM). The election of the
 National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) Government on
 December 15, 1986 marked the first change of political power
 in 24 years of independence.
 The Trinidad and Tobago police force is, generally, a capable
 and professional force. However, reports of abuse of
 authority and corruption and the filing of court cases against
 individual police officers continued during 1989. The legal
 system'provides measures for redress for the complainant in
 such cases. Both the police and the Trinidad and Tobago
 Defence Force are under the control of and responsive to
 civilian authorities.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on petroleum
 production and refining, but efforts continue to diversify the
 economy into agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism. Many
 major industries are either wholly or partially owned by the
 Government. There is a strong tradition of private enterprise
 and ownership of property, however, and the Government is
 endeavoring to sell several state enterprises, in whole or in
 part. The economy has suffered with the worldwide fall in oil
 prices, but Trinidad and Tobago continues to have a high
 standard of living.
 Political and civil rights are provided for by the
 Constitution and are generally respected in practice. In the
 event of a presidentially declared public emergency,
 legislation may be enacted for limited periods that derogates
 from constitutional rights and protections unless determined
 by the Court "not to be reasonably justifiable" for the
 purpose of dealing with the emergency. There were no
 significant changes in Trinidad and Tobago's good human rights
 record in 1989.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated or other
 extrajudicial killings. In September 1989, several shots from
 a passing car were fired at a vehicle carrying the wife of
 President Noor Hassanali. The motivation behind the attack
 has not been determined.
 b. Disappearance
 There wer6 no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment, and any evidence
 obtained by such means is inadmissible in court. Torture is
 not practiced. During 1989 there continued to be credible
 allegations in the press and charges in the courts that
 individual police officers have mistreated persons under
 
 
 745
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 arrest. The law permits victims of such treatment to sue for
 civil damages and to file criminal charges against the
 individual police officer involved, and such suits are
 occasionally initiated. The courts often find in favor of the
 complainant, and police officers found guilty of misconduct
 are subject to disciplinary action. There is no evidence that
 police brutality or other misconduct is systematic or condoned
 by the Government.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in any case of
 death by unnatural causes in which a coroner finds the
 circumstances warrant it. In 1989 there were 11 instances of
 persons being shot by police officers who allegedly were
 acting in the line of duty. In one instance a 14-year-old
 girl was shot, which raised questions as to whether the use of
 lethal force by the police was justified. Inquests were
 initiated, with heavy media and public scrutiny at the time.
 Some of the inquests in these cases have been completed while
 some have been delayed by court backlogs. One inquest in
 progress at year's end involved the death of a convicted
 prisoner, who was allegedly beaten to death in 1988 by prison
 guards after killing a guard. Police officers rarely are
 indicted following an inquest. The verdict is generally that
 the officer acted in self-defense.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution specifies that a suspect has the right to be
 "informed promptly" of the reason for arrest or detention. In
 practice, police usually charge a suspect within 48 hours, but
 there have been cases in which charges have not been brought
 for 4 or 5 days. Court orders may be obtained by the police
 to hold an individual longer than normal to gather more
 evidence. Arrests without warrant are permitted when a person
 is apprehended committing an offense or when reasonable
 suspicion exists that an offense has been or is about to'be
 committed.
 The law does not allow preventive or incommunicado detention.
 Persons arrested have the right to a judicial determination of
 the legality of their detention. Detainees generally are
 allowed access to a lawyer if one is requested, and to family
 members, but police sometimes deny access if they believe it
 would impede an investigation. There continue to be recurring
 charges in the courts and press that the police have violated
 one or more of these procedures in several cases. The courts,
 .which monitor police practices in these matters, have found
 for the complainant in some but not all of the cases.
 The Government introduced antidrug trafficking legislation in
 1989 that included provisions for forfeiture of assets.
 . Several of the bill's search and seizure provisions prompted
 concerns among lawyers, the media, and legislators that ciVil
 liberties would be infringed. The Government has sought to
 allay these concerns by amending the bill, which has not yet
 been adopted by Parliament.
 The practice of exile is illegal and does not exist.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution specifies that accused persons receive a fair
 and public trial by an independent, judiciary; appeals may be
 
 
 746
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 made to the Court of Appeals and eventually to the Privy
 Council in London. Under common law practice, defendants
 enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right to confront
 witnesses and present evidence. 'These rights are respected in
 practice.
 All accused persons have the right to an attorney. Legal
 assistance is available from the Legal Advisory Board of the
 Ministry of Social Development and Family Services for persons
 who demonstrate that they cannot afford an attorney. An
 accused may be freed on bail pending trial unless charged with
 murder; the Presiding Magistrate may suspend bail after
 consultation with the prosecution and defense. Judicial
 officials have noted, however, that bail jumping is a common
 practibe. Draft legislation proposed in 1988 by the
 Government to restrict or deny bail for certain serious
 criminal offenses was withdrawn by the Government for further
 study after much criticism from the media and the legal
 profession. The bill has not been reintroduced. Despite
 continuing attention by government officials and the Bar
 Association to the large backlog of cases awaiting trial or
 appeal, there remain significant delays in bringing cases to
 trial and in processing appeals.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition
 generally respected in practice. Warrants are required for
 searches.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom 9f Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of expression, and this
 right is protected in practice by the country's independent
 judiciary, a democratic and pluralistic political system, and
 independent and privately owned print media. Academic freedom
 is respected and is protected by law.
 The import or circulation of publications may be prohibited
 under the Sedition Act if they are deemed to have a seditious
 intention. The law has been rarely invoked in recent years.
 A Board of Film Censors is authorized to ban films it
 considers to be against public order and decency or
 undesirable in the public interest. Within the past year, the
 Board's action came to public attention on one occasion when
 it banned "The Accused."  The Prime Minister, acting under
 the Cinematograph Act, banned the showing in Trinidad and
 Tobago of "The Last Temptation of Christ."
 Foreign exchange scarcities have reduced allocations to
 newspapers for the import of newsprint. One newspaper which
 is generally critical of the Government won a court case
 against the Government in 1989 after charging that the
 Government had unconstitutionally reduced the newspaper's
 foreign exchange allocation for the purchase of newsprint.
 The newspaper continues to claim that it is receiving
 discriminatory treatment with respect to foreign exchange
 allocations.
 Trinidad and Tobago Television (TTT), the sole television
 
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 station in the country, is government owned. Its coverage is
 generally unbiased, although the opposition has claimed that
 informational programming on government-sponsored activities,
 identified as NAR (the ruling National Alliance for
 Reconstruction) initiatives, gives the NAR an unfair political
 advantage. In recent years, the Government has received a few
 applications for the licensing of one or more privately owned
 television stations. No action has been taken on these
 applications to date.
 One of Trinidad and Tobago's two radio stations is government
 owned, and the other is privately owned. Both are currently
 operating without licenses while the Government develops a
 telecommunications pulicy which will cover all broadcast media.
 A government draft telecommunications white paper circulated
 for public comment was criticized by media officials because
 of certain sections which pertained to government regulation.
 Those sections were thereafter deleted by the Government.
 Political opponents of the Government have argued that the
 presence of ruling party supporters on the executive boards of
 the government-owned radio station leads to the same political
 bias in broadcasting policy as they claim exists in TTT.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in
 practice. Registration of private organizations is not
 required. Permits are required in advance for street marches,
 demonstrations, or other public meetings, and these are
 normally granted, both to critics and supporters of the
 Government.
 For a discussion of freedom of assooiation as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state
 religion and no religious test for public office. There are
 large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims in the
 population, and these and other religious groups are allowed
 to maintain association with organizations and persons in
 other countries and to perform religious travel. Religious
 groups are free to establish places of worship and to engage
 in religious training, education, and publishing.
 Missionaries are permitted to enter the country and
 proselytize. Conversion from one religion to another is not
 hindered. Licensing of religious organizations is not
 required. (N.B. Parliamentary approval is not a requirement
 for incorporation of religious organizations as previously
 reported.)
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no arbitrary restrictions on emigration or travel
 either within or outside the country, nor on the changing of
 residence or workplace.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago-choose their government by
 secret ballot in free and fair multiparty, multicandidate
 
 
 748
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 elections held, as required by the Constitution, at intervals
 not to pxceed 5 years. Elections for municipal and county
 officials are held every 3 years and elections for the
 12-member Tobago House of Assembly every 4 years. The
 Constitution allows citizens, as well as legal residents with
 citizenship in other Commonwealth countries, who are at least
 18 years of age, to vote, and there are no restrictions on the
 participation of women in political activities.
 The country is governed by a bicameral Parliament: an elected
 36-member House of Representatives whose members represent
 single-member voting constituencies and a 31-member Senate
 whose members are appointed by the President, 16 on the advice
 of the governing party, 6 on the advice of the opposition, and
 9 at the President's discretion. The Prime Minister, who is
 the Head of Government, is the member of the House of
 Representatives who commands the support of the majority of
 the House. The President, elected by Parliament, is the Head
 of State.
 Opposition parties have contested every general election since
 party elections were begun in 1956, except in 1971 when the
 opposition chose not to participate. Several opposition
 parties combined in 1985 to form the NAR which, in the
 December 15, 1986, elections, won ,33 of 36 elected
 Parliamentary seats. The PNM, which now forms part of the
 opposition, had until then governed since 1956. During 1988
 the NAR expelled some of its prominent leaders, who in 1989
 formed a third major party, the United National Congress
 (UNC).
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 An Amnesty International representative familiar with the area
 regularly visits the country on routine business, and the
 Government cooperates with these visits. Besides.the
 judiciary, which acts on legal cases involving alleged human
 rights violations, there is an Ombudsman, an officer of the
 Parliament, who is empowered to investigate complaints of
 violations of law or policy and to report the findings to
 Parliament. There is also a nongovernmental Bureau of Human
 Rights, which was established by a local attorney and focuses
 on areas of interest and concern to him. Trinidad and Tobago
 is a party to the United Nations, international covenants on
 human rights.
 In 1989, the Caribbean Institute for the Promotion of Human
 Rights relocated its headquarters to Port of Spain from St.
 Vincent. This regional organization is composed of respected
 Caribbean human rights activists who seek to collect
 information and report on Caribbean human rights matters.
 Section 5. Disbrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no evidence of systematic official discrimination
 based on race, sex, religion, language, or social status in
 Trinidad and Tobago. All persons are fully protected under
 provisions of the Constitution. Trinidad and Tobago includes
 various ethnic and religious groups that live together
 peacefuly, generally respecting each other's beliefs and
 practices. Nevertheless, relations between Afro-Trinidadians
 and Indo-Trinidadians  who each comprise approximately 40
 
 
 749 ,
 
 percent of the population, are complex and at times tense.
 The private sector, which has long been dominated by
 Caucasians and Indo-Trinidadians, continues to be the bulwark
 of employment for these ethnic groups; at the same time,
 Afro-Trinidadians are employed in disproportionate numbers in
 some segments of government services, particularly in the
 police and military. Government cabinets have been
 predominantly composed of Afro-Trinidadians.
 Women enjoy equality under the law. Many hold positions in
 the Government, civil service, political party leadership,
 business, and the professiohs. Women's groups speak out
 publicly and are heard on all aspects of public life. Women
 make up approximately 34 percent of the paid labor force, and
 collective bargaining agreements cannot be registered with the
 Industrial Court if they exhibit wage disparities between men
 and women.
 Although there has been no definitive collection of data, it
 is generally speculated that as many as one in three women
 have suffered physical abuse from their spouse or other family
 member. The Government is concerned about this problem, as.
 well as child abuse. Since 1987, a cabinet-appointed
 committee has been studying abuse patterns in Trinidad and
 Tobago, and its recommendations for governmental and private
 action are now before the Cabinet. There are several
 privately operated shelters for battered women in the country.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assbciation
 The right of association is respected in law and practice. An
 estimated 22 percent of the work force is organized into 45
 labor unions. The unions are independent of government or
 political party control, and they freely represent their
 members' interests. Union members are free to choose their
 own representatives, and unions are free to publicize their
 views and determine their own programs and policies. The
 majority of the unions are grouped into two labor
 confederations, the larger of which is associated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, while the
 other is associated with the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 Workers are permitted, upon expiration of a conciliation
 period, to strike, and employers are permitted to lock workers
 out. After a strike or lockout has gone on for 3 months,
 either of the parties involved can request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, which is
 part of the independent judiciary, for a binding decision.
 Workers in two state-owned oil companies went on strike in
 1989. Strikes and lockouts are not permitted in essential
 public services, and the Minister of Labor may apply for an
 injunction to halt any labor action he finds contrary to the
 national interest. This power has not been invoked since
 independence.
 Workers in essential services with labor grievances may call
 on the conciliation services of the Ministry of Labor or may
 take their cases directly to the Industrial Court. They may
 also file civil suits against the Government.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) has for several years concluded that
 
 
 750
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 various aspects of the country's labor legislation, including
 those related to strike and binding arbitration procedures,
 are inconsistent with ILO Conventions 87 and 98.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The constitutional right of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively is well exercised. Antiunion discrimination is
 prohibited by law, and trade union property, as other private
 property, is protected under law. The Ministry of Labor acts
 as an impartial conciliator in collective bargaining
 impasses. There are a few complaints each year to the
 Ministry of Labor about private antiunion activities, usually
 involving a suspension or dismissal of an employee who alleges
 the action was taken in part because of union activity. The
 Ministry of Labor is generally able to resolve the cases
 brought to it.
 During 1989, the Trinidad and Tobago Unified Teachers
 Association filed a complaint with the ILO against the
 Government for its 10 percent reduction of the salaries of
 public servants, calling it a violation of collective
 bargaining rights. The Government intends to respond to the
 complaint in accordance with ILO procedures.
 The Parliament in 1988 enacted legislation to regulate the
 establishment of free trade zones. It is anticipated that
 wages and terms of employment in the free trade zones may be
 less favorable than the prevailing minimum standard, but the
 legislation provides for internationally accepted worker
 rights, including the right to organize and bargain
 collectively.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Trinidad and Tobago. Although
 there is no domestic legislation on this matter, Trinidad and
 Tobago is a party to the relevant ILO conventions. The ILO's
 Committee of Experts criticized provisions in Trinidad and
 Tobago's law which permits penalties of imprisonment involving
 compulsory labor for breaches of discipline by seamen and
 other persons employed in certain public services.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Legislation prohibits the employment of children under the age
 of 12 years, and children aged 12 to 14 years are permitted to
 work only in family businesses. These restrictions are
 generally respected in practice. Education is compulsory
 until the age of 12 years.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no nationwide minimum wage rate. Most wages are
 covered under collective bargaining agreements and provide a
 decent living for workers and their families. The Ministry of
 Labor is studying recommendations regarding the institution of
 a nationwide minimum wage. Minimum wages and working
 conditions were, in the past, set by the Minister of Labor for
 three occupations.considered difficult to organize into
 unions: gas station attendants, shop clerks, and domestic
 servants. That of shop clerks, for example, was $20 per
 week. This government wage order expired in 1984, however,
 and some employers now pay lower than the previous minimum
 wage. Because this minimum wage level is not considered
 
 
 751
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 enough to live on, minimum wage workers usually have secondary
 sources of support, generally from their families. Working
 hours are determined through collective bargaining agreements
 or other employment agreements. The standard workweek is 40
 hours. Additional hours are considered overtime at a
 negotiated rate. Daily rest periods and paid annual leave
 form part of most employment agreements. There are no legal
 restrictions on overtime work.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill, which sets reguirements for health
 and safety standards in certain industries and provides for
 inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. The Government
 enforces compliance with health and safety regulations,
 although such enforcement is sporadic due to a shortage of
 inspectors. Trade union representatives also monitor
 compliance. A new occupational safety bill was prepared and
 sent to the Legislative Review Committee of Parliament, but
 there has been no action on the bill since 1986. Workers who
 file complaints with the Ministry of Labor regarding
 illegal or hazardous working conditions are protected under
 the Industrial Relations Act. Government inspectors
 investigate such complaints.
 A severance andretrenchment law enacted in 1985 aims at
 providing improved severance benefits for laid-off workers.
 Controversial draft legislation to establish a severance
 benefit fund remained under Cabinet consideration at year's
 end.
 
 
 752
