 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations,
 is a parliamentary democracy in which political and civil
 rights are provided for by the C6nstitution and generally
 respected in practice. Free and fair general elections have
 been held at regular intervals since independence from the
 United Kingdom in 1962. The country is governed by a bicameral
 Parliament and a Prime Minister from the lower house.
 The Police Force and the Defence Force are under the control of
 and generally responsive to civilian authority. However,
 credible allegations of police brutality and corruption
 continued in 1991. The legal system provides measures for
 redress for the complainants in such cases.
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on the
 hydrocarbon sector, but efforts continue to diversify the
 economy into agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism. Many
 major industries are either wholly or partially owned by the
 Government. There is a strong parallel tradition of private
 enterprise and ownership of property, however, and the
 Government is committed to partial divestiture of most state
 enterprises.
 Trinidad and Tobago citizens have and exercise a wide range of
 freedoms and individual rights, but there continued to be
 incidents of the use of excessive force and other abuses by the
 police.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports during 1991 of killings for political
 motives by the Government or other political organizations.
 However, there were credible allegations of abuses of
 authority. In the first 11 months of 1991 there were at least
 15 police shootings, lQ of which resulted in deaths. In one
 case, charges were filed against a police officer in the
 shooting death of David Agard, an off-duty security guard, in
 January. In November a witness for the prosecution reported
 receiving death threats through the mail prior to his scheduled
 appearance in court. Relatives of Agard filed a civil suit for
 damages against the Attorney General and the accused officer.
 A second suit for damages was filed against the Attorney
 General by relatives of a man (Deo Ramlogan) who was shot dead
 by police on October 2.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in a case of death
 by unnatural causes only when a coroner finds the circumstances
 warrant it; otherwise it is not mandatory. In practice,
 inquests are seldom pursued. There is an internal
 investigations unit within the police service. However, there
 are no mandatory internal police investigations of police
 shootings or killings.
 Njisane Omowale, the 19-year-old stepson of Yasin Abu Bakr
 (leader of the Jamaat al Muslimeen, who launched the failed
 -coup in July 1990) died from gunshot wounds in his
 grandmother's house the day the coup collapsed (see the 1990
 Country Reports). The house was stormed by a police inspector
 and eight armed officers, and Omowale was shot in the leg and
 
 
 747
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 died on the scene from loss of blood. Police claimed they had
 opened fire in response to shots from within; however, no
 weapons or ammunition were found on the premises. A newspaper
 subsequently reported that witnesses in neighboring houses had
 been threatened by police and offered passports by men in
 uniform so that they could leave the country and thus not
 testify at a preliminary inquest. After several days of
 testimony, the magistrate at the 1990 preliminary inquest
 dismissed the case, stating "there are no grounds for
 suspecting anyone is guilty" (of Omowale's death). An appeal
 to reopen the inquest was filed, and a judicial review was
 granted. A determination of whether to pursue the inquest is
 not expected until late January.
 b. Disappearance                       .
 There was a possible disappearance case reported by the media
 in 1991. Doodnath Dwarika, a 24-year-old man, was alleged to
 have been detained by police in November 1990; although no
 charges were filed, records show he was taken to several area
 police stations for questioning and that he was treated in the
 casualty department of the local hospital after an apparent
 beating. His current whereabouts are not known, and police
 have declined to provide further information regarding the
 case.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment, and, under law, any
 evidence obtained by such means is inadmissible in court.
 However, during 1991 there continued to be credible allegations
 and charges in'the courts that some police officers had
 physically abused detainees. The law permits victims of such
 treatment to sue for civil damages and to file .criminal charges
 against the individual police officer *involvedi and such suits
 are occasionally initiated. The courts sometimes find in favor
 of the complainant', in which case damages can be collected;
 police officers found guilty of misconduct are subject to
 disciplinary action. In one suit filed in 1991, Edmund
 Phillips alleged that while he was in police custody he was
 kicked and beaten about the head, neck, wrist, abdomen, and
 testicles and was suspended in the air with his hands tied. In
 February Phillips filed a suit against two police officers and
 the Attorney General. For undisclosed reasons, the summons has
 not been served on the Attorney General, and the case remained
 at a standstill at year's end.
 Trinidad and Tobago courts sentence convicted felons to
 corporal punishment as well as prison sentences in
 approximately 50 cases a year. Meh convicted of rape, assault
 with a deadly weapon, or aggravated robbery are subject to
 flogging administered in private by prison officials. The
 naked prisoner is secured facedown to a bench and whipped
 across the buttocks with a freshly cut rod of tamarind wood.
 Floggings consist of 10-20 strokes, and a prison doctor is
 present throughout the proceedings. Severe prison overcrowding
 exists in the Carrera prison, with seven prisoners to a cell
 designed for two in many cases. Construction of a new
 maximum-security prison was under way at year's end, and
 programs for community service in lieu of incarceration for
 minor offenses were under study.
 
 
 748
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution specifies that a suspect has the right to be
 "informed promptly" of the reason for arrest or detention,
 which in practice has normally meant within 48 hours. Court
 orders may be obtained by the police to hold a person longer
 than normal to gather more evidence. However, there are
 recurring credible reports that persons have been detained
 incommunicado for up to 6 days or longer prior to the filing of
 any charges, without the police having obtained a court order.
 Arrests without a warrant are permitted when a person is
 apprehended committing an offense or when reasonable suspicion
 exists that an offense has been or is about to be committed. A
 court ruling in 1991 held that police must allow a person in
 police custody to contact an attorney "as early as possible,
 and in any event before any interrogation takes place."
 Detainees generally are allowed access to a lawyer, if one is
 requested, and to family members, but police sometimes deny
 access if they believe it would impede an investigation. There
 continue to be recurring charges in the courts and press that
 the police have violated one or more of these procedures in
 several cases. Persons arrested have the right to a judicial
 determination of the legality of the detention, and courts have
 found for the complainant in some cases of illegal detention.
 In July Elaine Theodora Bailey, mother-in-law of Yasin Abu Bakr
 and grandmother of Njisane Omowale (see Section l.a.), sued the
 Attorney General and the Police Commissioner for damages for -
 personal injuries, wrongful arrest, false imprisonment,
 detention of goods, and damage to property caused by wrongful
 entry into her home relative to an incident in April 1990 in
 which she was taken into custody by police and interrogated
 over a period of 44 hours prior to being released without
 charge. She filed a second suit for damages relative to the
 incident in which her grandson was killed.
 Preventive detention may be authorized by the Minister of
 Justice and National Security in order to prevent actions
 prejudicial to public safety, public order, or the defense of
 Trinidad and Tobago. The Minister must state the grounds for
 the detention. A detainee under this provision has access to
 counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-member
 tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an
 attorney. The Minister must provide to the tribunal the
 grounds for the detention within 7 days of the detainee's
 request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably
 practicable" following receipt of the grounds. The Minister
 may at his discretion revoke detention orders on the basis of
 the tribunal's recommendations.
 There were no instances of preventive detention in 1991;
 however, in the case of the Jamaat al-Muslimeen, the group
 which launched the July 1990 coup attempt, 114 members filed a
 suit claiming that their detention was illegal and the criminal
 charges filed against them were unconstitutional because they
 were granted an amnesty prior to their surrender. The case was
 argued before the Privy Council in London in November; the
 Privy Council determined that the matter of the amnesty must be
 heard prior to proceeding with the civil and criminal cases
 against the Jamaat al-Muslimeen.
 The practice of exile is illegal and does not exist.
 
 
 749 ,
 
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution specifies that accused persons receive a fair
 and public trial. The judiciary is independent and not subject
 to outside interference. Appeals may be made to the Court of
 Appeals and eventually to the Judicial Committee of the Privy
 Council in London. Under common law practice, defendants enjoy
 a presumption of innocence and the right to confront witnesses
 and present evidence. These rights are generally respected in
 practice.
 All accused persons have the right to an attorney. Legal
 assistance is available from attorneys registered with the
 Legal Aid and Advisory Authority (LAAA) of the Ministry of
 Social Development and Family Services for persons who .
 demonstrate that they cannot afford representation. Judges may
 also appoint attorneys in the courtroom to represent defendants
 without counsel. The attorneys may then file claims for their
 services with the LAAA. The LAAA provides aid and advice in
 criminal as well as civil matters to both adult and juvenile
 defendants.
 An accused person may be freed on bail pending trial, unless
 charged with murder or treason or detained under State of
 Emergency regulations. The presiding magistrate may suspend
 bail after consultation with the prosecution and defense.
 Despite continuing attention by government officials, the
 judiciary, and the bar association to the large backlog of
 cases-awaiting trial or appeal, there remain significant delays
 in bringing cases to trial and in processing appeals.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition
 generally respected in practice. By law, judicially-issued
 warrants are required for searches, except under State of
 Emergency regulations;-in practice, this procedure is not
 strictly adhered to.
 The state-owned telephone company has the ability to monitor
 telephone calls, and informed observers believe that the police
 use this facility for domestic intelligence purposes. There
 are no laws authorizing such taps, however, so evidence
 obtained, in this manner may not be used in court. Legislation
 is being considered which would make it permissible to monitor
 telephone conversations under certain circumstances.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:,
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of expression, and this
 right is protected in practice by the country's independent
 judiciary, a democratic and pluralistic political system, and
 independent and privately owned media. Academic freedom is
 respected and is protected by law.
 The import or circulation of publications may be prohibited
 under the Sedition Act if they are deemed to have a seditious
 intention, but the law has rarely been invoked in recent
 years. A Board of Film Censors is a3lthorized to ban films it
 considers to be against public order and decency, or
 
 
 750
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 contrary to the public interest. This includes films which may
 be controversial in matters of religion, seditious propaganda,
 or race.
 Trinidad and Tobago Television (TTT) is government owned. Its
 coverage is generally unbiased, although the opposition has
 claimed in the past that programming on government-sponsored
 activities, identified as NAR (the ruling National Alliance for
 Reconstruction) initiatives, gives the NAR an unfair political
 advantage. An award-winning 1989 documentary, which included
 allegations of corruption within the previous PNM
 administration, was broadcast on June 17, prompting opposition
 charges of political motivation. CCN, a privately owned
 television station, commenced broadcasting on September 15, and*
 another station was scheduled to begin operation by year's end.
 Only one of Trinidad and Tobago's four radio stations is
 government owned. Eleven new licenses were granted in 1990,
 including radio, television, and cable television; one cable
 franchise plans to carry 30 channels. Two new radio stations
 are scheduled to commence broadcasting by year's end.
 Some journalists have complained privately that the
 interlocking directorates of local corporations results in
 self-censorship by publishers. The two major daily newspapers
 are sometimes critical of the Government in their editorials.
 Their news coverage appears to report accurately criticism by
 opposition parties and trade unions. The widely read tabloids
 are extremely critical of the Government. In 1990 the High
 Court ruled that the Government infringed on a newspaper
 publisher's right to freedom of the press through its refusal
 to grant foreign exchange for the purchase of sufficient
 newsprint. The newspaper in question is generally critical of
 the Government. The Government is appealing that decision.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in practice.
 Registration of private organizations is not required. Permits
 are required in advance for street marches, demonstrations, or
 other public outdoor meetings, and are routinely granted.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state
 religion and no religious test for public office. There are
 large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims in the
 population, and these and other religious groups are allowed to
 maintain association with organizations and persons in other
 countries and to perform religious travel. Religious groups
 are generally free to establish places of worship and to engage
 in religious training, education, and publishing. A perceived
 favoritism in the appropriation of funding for Christian
 (primarily Catholic ) schools to the neglect of Hindu schools
 was addressed by the Government during the year.
 Missionaries are permitted to enter the country and
 proselytize. Conversion from one religion to another is not
 hindered. Licensing of religious organizations is not required.
 
 
 751
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 d. Frbedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no arbitrary restrictions on emigration or travel
 either within or outside the country, nor on the changing of
 residence or workplace.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by
 secret ballot in free and fair multiparty, multicandidate
 elections held, as required by the Constitution, at intervals
 not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago
 House of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution
 allows citizens, as well as legal residents with citizenship in
 other Commonwealth countries, who are at least 18 years of age,
 to vote; there are no restrictions on the participation of
 women in political activities. The Government is formed by the
 party holding the majority of seats in the lower house of
 Parliament. The Parliament consists of two houses: an elected
 House of Representatives whose 36 members represent individual
 voting constituencies, and a 31-member Senate appointed by the
 President, 16 on the advice of the Prime Minister, 6 on the
 advice of the leader of the opposition, and 9 at the
 President's discretion. The Prime Minister is the Head of
 Government; the President, elected by Parliament, is the Head
 of State.
 Prior to December 1986, each election had been won by the
 People's National Movement (PNM). The election of the National
 Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) Government on December 15,
 1986 marked the first change in political power in 24 years of
 independence. In elections held December 16, 1991, the PNM
 (traditionally identified with Afro-Trinidadians) won 21 of the
 36 parliamentary seats, thus returning to power after a 5-year
 hiatus. The United National Congress (traditionally,'the
 Indo-Trinidadian Party) won 13 seats, and the NAR carried only
 Tobago's two seats.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Besides the judiciary, which acts on legal cases involving
 charges of human rights violations, there is an Ombudsman, an
 officer of Parliament, who is empowered to investigate
 complaints of violations of law or policy and to report the
 findings to Parliament. There is also a nongovernmental Bureau
 of Human Rights, which was established by a local attorney and
 focuses on areas of interest and concern to him. Founded in
 1990, Caribbean Elections Watch promotes free and fair
 elections in the Caribbean. The Caribbean Institute for the
 Promotion of Human Rights is headquartered in Port of Spain.
 This regional organization is composed of human rights
 activists who seek to collect information from throughout the
 region and report on Caribbean human rights matters.
 International human rights organizations are free to visit and
 discuss human rights with governmental and nongovernmental
 representatives.
 
 
 752
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no evidence of systematic official discrimination
 based on race, sex, language, or social status in Trinidad and
 Tobago. All persons are fully protected under provisions of
 the Constitution. Trinidad and Tobago includes various ethnic
 and religious groups that live together peacefully, generally
 respecting each other's beliefs and practices.
 There is occasional racial tension between Afro-Trinidadians
 and Indo-Trinidadians, who each comprise over 40 percent of the
 population. The private sector is dominated by Indo-
 Trinidadians and people of European descent. Indo-Trinidadians"
 also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians are
 employed in disproportionate numbers in the civil service,
 police, and military. Until the NAR came to power in 1986,
 government cabinets had been predominantly composed of
 Afro-Trinidadians. Since Indo-Trinidadians are the majority in
 rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are the majority in urban
 areas, competition between town and country for public goods
 and services takes on racial overtones. Some Indo-Trinidadian
 opposition politicians have complained that Afro-Trinidadians
 receive a disproportionate ihare of government benefits.
 Discrimination on the basis of sex is illegal. Many women hold
 positions in the government, civil service, political party
 leadership, business, and the professions. Women's groups
 speak out publicly on all aspects of public life. Women make
 up approximately 36 percent of the paid labor force, and
 collective bargaining agreements cannot be registered with the
 Industrial Court if they exhibit wage disparities between men
 and women.
 Although there are no reliable statistics, physical abuse of
 women by family members appears to be extensive, as does child
 abuse. Parliament passed a domestic violence bill in August
 1991 to address these issues; among other things, the bill
 provides for the filing of restraining orders on abusive family
 members, a court hearing within 7 days of filing, and criminal
 penalties for violation of restraining orders. There are
 several privately operated shelters for battered women which
 receive a minimal amount of governmental assistance.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is respected in law and practice. An
 estimated 24 percent of the work force is organized into 45
 labor unions. The unions are independent of government or
 political party control, and they freely represent their
 members' interests.. Union members are free to choose their own
 representatives, and unions are free to publicize their views
 and determine their own programs and policies. The majority of
 the unidns are grouped into two labor confederations, the
 larger of which is the Trinidad and Tobago Labor Congress
 (TTLC). In June the TTLC joined with the Council of
 Progressive Trade Unions (CPTU). which is affiliated with the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions, to form
 the National Trade Union Center (NATUC). Both the TTLC and
 CPTU have committed themselves to dissolve by June 1992, but
 have not yet resolved the question of international affiliation.
 
 
 753
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Workers are permitted, upon expiration of a conciliation
 period, to strike, and employers are permitted to lock workers
 out. After a strike or lockout has gone on for 3 months,
 either of the parties involved may request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, which is
 part of the independent judiciary, for a binding decision.
 Strikes and lockouts are not permitted in essential public
 services, and the Minister of Labor may apply for an injunction
 to halt any labor action he finds contrary to the national
 interest; in practice, this has never happened. Workers in
 essential services with labor grievances may call on the
 conciliation services of the Ministry of Labor or may take
 their cases directly to the Industrial Court. However, such
 cases are not generally processed any more quickly than those
 in the private sector. Workers in essential services may also
 file civil suits against the Government.
 During the year there were numerous strike actions and
 threatened actions by various unions in the public and'private.
 sectors, some of which included brief episodes of violence.
 Public sector employees pressed for reinstatement of cost of
 living allowances and payment of arrears, in some cases dating
 as far back as 1983; employees in the private sector sought to
 block the proposed partial divestment of state-owned
 enterprises, particularly in the hydrocarbon sector. While
 some disputes were settled through arbitration by year's end,
 resolution of other outstanding issues was held in abeyance
 pending the outcome of the December 16 national elections.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The constitutional right of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively is well established and freely practiced. In
 fact,'collective-bargaining is the predominant method by which
 wage levels are established in most industries. Antiunion
 discrimination is prohibited by law, and trade unipn property,
 as other private property, is protected under law. The
 Ministry of Labor acts as an impartial conciliator in
 collective bargaining impasses. There are a few complaints
 each year to the Minister of Labor about private antiunion
 activities, usually involving the suspension or dismissal'of an
 employee who alleges the action was taken at least in part
 because of union activity. The Ministry of Labor is generally
 able to resolve those cases brought to it.
 Legislation for the establishment of free trade'zones, enacted
 by Parliament in 1988, is currently being implemented. The
 legislation primarily addresses issues such as exchange
 control, customs procedures, duties payable, and exemption from
 the Foreign Investments Act in free trade zones. All Trinidad
 and Tobago laws, inclusive of those affecting working
 conditions and the right of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively, are applicable in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Trinidad and Tobago. Although
 there is no domestic legislation on this matter, Trinidad and
 Tobago is a party to the relevant International Labor
 Organization conventions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Legislation prohibits the employment of children under the age
 of 12 years, and children aged 12 to 14 years are permitted to
 
 
 754
 -TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 work only in family businesses. Children may begin
 apprenticeships at age 15 and regular employment at age 17.
 The probation service within the Ministry of Social Development
 and Family Services is the entity responsible for compliance.
 Education is compulsory until the age of 12 years. Enforcement
 of these restrictions appears lax. School-age children are
 often seen vending on the streets. In practice, if parents do
 not have the funds to buy books and uniforms, their children do
 not attend school.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There are minimum wage rates for selected service sectors-
 domestic employees, retail assistants, gasoline station
 attendants, and hotel and restaurant employees. New
 legislation is under consideration which would broaden the
 slate of workers covered by minimum wage standards. Wage
 levels in other sectors are covered under collective bargaining
 agreements and provide a decent living for workers and their
 families. The poorest paid workers usually have secondary
 sources of support, often from their families. The standard
 workweek in Trinidad and Tobago is 40 hours; the minimum wage
 law defines a 40-hour week for workers who fall within its
 jurisdiction, while collective bargaining agreements set the
 standards in other industrial and service sectors. Additional
 hours are considered overtime and remunerated at a negotiated
 rate. Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of
 most employment agreements. There are no legal restrictions on
 overtime work.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill, which sets requirements for health
 and safety standards in certain industries and provides for
 inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. The Government
 enforces compliance with health and safety regulations,
 although such enforcement is sporadic due to a shortage of
 inspectors. Trade union representatives also monitor
 compliance. Workers who file complaints with the Ministry of
 Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions are
 protected under the Industrial Relations Act of 1972 to the
 extent that, should it be determined upon inspection that
 conditions exist in the workplace which present hazards to life
 or limb, the worker is absolved in refusing to comply with an
 order which would have placed him or her in harm's way. Beyond
 that, it is the right of management "to manage and to manage
 effectively." Government inspectors investigate complaints of
 hazardous working conditions.
 
 
 755
