 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago is a republic with a parliamentary style
 government. Its population of about 1.2 million inhabitants
 is 41 percent black and 41 percent East Indian. The ruling
 People's National Movement (PNM), traditionally supported by
 blacks and some East Indians, has governed the country since
 1956. Opposition parties have contested every election and
 currently control 10 of 36 Parliamentary seats as well as the
 House of Assembly on the sister island of Tobago.
 Trinidad and Tobago's legal system is independent and is
 similar to that of the British, with the Privy Council in
 London serving as the highest Court of Appeals. Although
 press reports occasionally allege improprieties on the part of
 individual officers, the Trinidad and Tobago police service as
 a whole is capable and professional.
 Trinidad and Tobago has the third highest per capita income in
 the Western Hemisphere, although it has suffered recently as
 the worldwide oil glut continues to weaken its oil-based
 economy. The economy is mixed, with whole or partial
 government ownership of many major industries, but there is a
 strong tradition of private enterprise and private ownership
 of property. Social indicators such as longevity and infant
 mortality are closer to those of the First World than those of
 the Third World with which the Government identifies itself,
 politically.
 Trinidad and Tobago's human rights record remained good in
 1985.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no politically motivated killings in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment or punishment, and the
 law-renders inadmissible in court any evidence obtained by
 such means. There are occasional reports in the media and
 charges in the courts that police have mistreated persons
 under arrest. The law permits victims to sue for damages in
 case of mistreatment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Any person who is arrested may apply for a writ of habeas
 corpus. The police usually charge a suspect within 48 hours
 of arrest, but can obtain a court order to hold a person
 longer in order to get further evidence. Recent articles in
 the press have called into question the long-standing police
 practice of detaining suspects for questioning. This practice
 has traditionally been accepted by the public and the
 judiciary, but a 1985 court decision led to questions
 
 
 691
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 regarding the correct interpretation of the law, specifically,
 the length of time that a detainee may be held without being
 charged. This court decision awarded compensatory damages to
 a group of persons who were detained for questioning but never
 charged. Trinidad and Tobago has no specific laws regarding
 forced labor. However, as a member of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) Trinidad and Tobago has adopted the ILO
 conventions on forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In law and in practice, accused persons are accorded a fair
 and public trial by an independent judiciary, from which
 appeals may be made to the Court of Appeals and to the Privy
 Council in London. The judiciary and legal system are
 understaffed and overworked, and a large backlog of cases has
 led to delays in bringing some accused persons to trial.
 Although accused persons generally may be freed on bail
 pending trial, persons accused of murder are not eligible for
 bail under current procedures.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution and law prohibit such arbitrary interference,
 and these prohibitions are generally respected in practice.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The constitutional right of freedom of expression is protected
 and enhanced by the independent judiciary, by the country's
 democratic and pluralistic system, and by the privately owned
 print media. Government-owned Trinidad and Tobago Television
 (TTT) enjoys a monopoly on local television transmission, and
 its coverage tends to support the Government.
 In 1984, a prominent member of the opposition filed a motion
 against TTT protesting the station's refusal to air one of his
 speeches. A High Court judge ruled in favor of the plaintiff
 in 1985, declaring that TTT had "unreasonably withheld the
 right of equality of treatment from a public authority." TTT
 was ordered to submit a statement of policy regarding
 political broadcasting time allotments to the court. The
 Government appealed the case, however, and won the appeal on
 the grounds that the judge had overstepped his authority by
 dictating TTT policy.
 The Government has failed to act on a long-standing
 application of a large number of businessmen to launch a
 private television station. Of the two radio stations
 currently in operation, one is government-owned and the other
 is private but government-licensed. The private station
 recently had its license renewed, but government officials
 have reminded the media that the government intends to retain
 control of broadcasting through the need for licensing
 approval.
 b. Freedom of Peacefdl Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and are respected in
 practice. Permits for street meetings, marches, or other
 demonstrations are required in advance but are normally
 
 
 692
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 granted, including to critics of the Government. The right of
 workers to organize and bargain collectively is protected by
 law, and about 30 percent of the work force is organized into
 trade unions. The unions are grouped primarily into two labor
 congresses, one of which tends to take a moderate stance in
 government/labor disputes, while the other follows a more
 radical course. The Ministry of Labor acts as an impartial
 conciliator in collective bargaining impasses. Unions may
 strike and employers may lock workers out if the Ministry is
 unsuccessful in resolving the labor dispute, certifies the
 dispute as unresolved, and refers it to the Industrial Court.
 The Industrial Court is empowered to impose a binding
 settlement on the parties. In 1985, union leaders
 occasionally complained that the police intimidated striking
 workers on picket lines and that the Government tacitly
 supported the employers in their programs of large-scale
 retrenchments. However, the unions' rights generally are
 respected by the Government. Unions and professional
 associations maintain relations with international
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and respected in practice. There is no state
 religion. Missionaries and clergy are generally permitted to
 enter Trinidad and Tobago to proselytize or to serve the
 members of their group. There are large groups of Christians,
 Hindus, and Moslems in Trinidad and Tobago. There is no
 religious test for public office.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 These freedoms are fully respected. Many thousands of
 citizens have emigrated in search of better economic
 opportunities, particularly to the United States, Canada, and
 the United Kingdom. Many thousands from Caribbean
 Commonwealth countries, such as Grenada, St. Vincent, St.
 Lucia, and Guyana, have immigrated to Trinidad and Tobago for
 the same reason.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by
 electing a House of Representatives in free, multiparty
 elections held at least every 5 years. The leader of the
 opposition has the right to be consulted by the President on
 appointments, incJuding those to the Elections and Boundaries
 Commission which draws constituency boundaries and conducts
 the elections. There are credible opposition allegations that
 the nominally independent Commission has actually supported
 the People's National Movement (PNM) in the past by
 gerrymandering constituencies in its favor. The PNM has won
 all elections since 1956, but its victories can be attributed
 principally to its political skills and to divisions among the
 opposition. The Constitution permits Commonwealth citizens
 who are legal residents and 18 years of age and older to vote.
 Several opposition parties joined to form a single National
 Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) in 1985. These parties
 individually won control of 6 of the 7 county councils in the
 1983 local elections.
 
 
 693
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Trinidad and Tobago has not been the subject of international
 human rights investigations. In addition to the judiciary,
 where claims of human rights violations are actionable, there
 is an Ombudsman who can investigate alleged violations of
 citizens' rights in the application of a law or policy and
 report the findings to Parliament. Trinidad and Tobago has a
 local independent Bureau of Human Rights Issues, as well as a
 local branch of Amnesty International. Amnesty
 International's 1985 report did not comment on Trinidad and
 Tobago. Freedom House rates the country as "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Because of its oil revenues, in the past decade Trinidad and
 Tobago attained a per capita gross national product of $7,183
 (1984), highest in the Western Hemisphere after the United
 States and Canada. The population of 1.2 million inhabitants
 has a growth rate of 1.5 percent a year. Life expectancy at
 birth is 69.2 years, and infant mortality was 20.9 per
 thousand live births. Education and literacy are nearly
 universal. In 1970, average literacy was 92.2 percent (male
 94.7 female 89.7). Further indications of the standard of
 living are the percent of the population with access to safe
 water in 1980 (urban 100 percent; rural 93 percent) and the
 100 percent of caloric supply available for consumption
 relative to nutritional requirements in 1977. However, 39
 percent of the rural population was below the absolute poverty
 level in 1977.
 The laws of Trinidad and Tobago prohibit the employment of
 children under the age of 12. Children between the ages of 12
 and 18 may be employed only in family businesses with the
 exception that children between the ages of 16 and 18 may be
 employed in certain industries specifically exempted from the
 law by order of the President.
 There is no minimum wage rate in Trinidad and Tobago.
 However, minimum wages have been set in three occupational
 categories (gas station attendants, shop clerks, and domestic
 servants) by order of the Minister of Labor. The Minister's
 rational was that these industries were difficult to organize
 and that, therefore, the workers wouldn't be protected by
 collective barganing.
 Occupational health and safety is covered by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill. Because of shortcomings of the 1948
 bill, a new Occupational Safety and Health Bill reflecting
 changes in Trinidad and Tobago's industry has been circulated
 for public comment, but has not yet come before Parliament.
 The new bill is expected to prompt extensive debate when
 brought before Parliament some time during 1986.
 Women enjoy equality under the law. Many have positions in
 the Government, civil service, political party leadership,
 business, and other professions, although their presence in
 these positions is not in proportion to their numbers in the
 population. Women currently serve in Parliament and women's
 groups are quick to speak out on women's rights.
 
 
 694
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Within the Indian community, signs of the Hindu caste system
 remain. Blacks believe they are not treated as well as whites
 and those of mixed blood. Individual Tobagonians enjoy
 equality of treatment but believe that Tobago itself receives
 far less development money than Trinidad. These individuals
 perceive these conditions as limiting social and economic
 opportunities available to them.
 In Trinidad, opposition supporters say that areas which
 historically have supported the ruling party have more roads,
 telephones, and schools than those backing opposition parties.
 
 
 695
 URUGUAY
 On March 1, 1985, the Uruguayan military ended its twelve-year
 rule and handed over power to the elected civilian Government
 of President Julio Maria Sanguinetti. Thus Uruguay returned
 to its traditional form of government--an elected
 constitutional democracy with an executive branch, an
 independent bicameral legislature, and an autonomous judicial
 system. The return to democracy was marked by a high level of
 political participation by all sectors of the population,
 unrestricted political debate, and broad access to the media
 by the major political parties.
 The year 1985 saw the culmination of the gradual loosening of
 political restrictions, a process initiated in 1983 and
 continued in 1984. Soon after taking office, the Sanguinetti
 Government released all remaining political prisoners, lifted
 remaining censorship, and lifted proscriptions from those few
 political groups still outlawed, including the Uruguayan
 Communist Party and the National Liberation
 Movement-Tupamaros. The legislature and judiciary began to
 function normally without outside interference. University
 autonomy was reinstated, and proscribed student organizations
 re-emerged, holding in September their first free elections
 since 1973. An independent labor movement also reappeared
 and, by the end of 1985, most labor unions had held elections
 for new officers.
 Though continuing to suffer the effects of an economic
 recession, Uruguay remains one of the more advanced developing
 countries. Its economy is largely one of free enterprise with
 the Government regulating monopolies in key sectors and
 controlling prices on many basic items.
 Uruguay's political transition brought with it dramatic
 improvements in the area of human rights. Accusations of
 political killings, torture and disappearances ceased.
 Restrictive laws and acts passed under military rule were
 repealed, and the 1967 Constitution, which guarantees habeas
 corpus and freedom from arbitrary arrest, was reinstated.
 Congress set up commissions to handle the issues of
 restitution for those who had lost their jobs for political
 activities and to investigate violations of human rights which
 occurred during the military regime. President Sanguinetti
 indicated before his inauguration that the policy of his
 Government would be "justice, not revenge," and that obstacles
 would not be placed in the way of legal proceedings against
 those accused of human rights violations. In general,
 Uruguayans enjoyed a freedom and openness in political life
 which they had not experienced since the late 1960's, and they
 responded to it with a high level of civic consciousness and
 political involvement.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no cases of political killings in Uruguay in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no cases of political disappearances reported
 in Uruguay since 1978.
 
 
 696
 URUGUAY
 According to a 1985 bicameral Congressional Commission report
 on disappearances, 164 confirmed disappearances occurred
 during the period 1973 to 1978. Of these 32 occurred in
 Uruguay, 127 in Argentina, 3 in Chile and 2 in Paraguay. The
 report noted that witnesses had named 46 military personnel as
 possibly being implicated, some of whom may still be on active
 duty.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Local human rights groups reported no cases of torture or
 deliberately inhumane treatment in 1985.
 In February the de facto military Government granted early
 release to i1 persons convicted of "subversive activities",
 including many whom the local human rights group "Servicio Paz
 y Justicia" (SERPAJ) recommended be released early for medical
 reasons. In March the La Libertad and Punta de Rieles
 national security prisons, were closed. Local human rights
 activists have suggested improvements in what they consider to
 be adverse living conditions in remaining Uruguayan penal
 institutions, contingent upon the availability of adequate
 funding.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile
 There were no reported cases of arbitrary arrest, detention or
 exile in Uruguay in 1985.
 In March, the new Government released all remaining political
 detainees, together with a substantial number of detainees
 held on ordinary criminal charges,
 The Constitution of 1967, which replaced the previous Military
 Code of Justice, requires a written warrant for arrest if the
 person is not caught in the act and guarantees the right of
 habeas corpus. It also requires that an arrested person be
 allowed to give a statement before a judge within 24 hours,
 that he have a right to counsel in such proceedings, and that
 he be informed of the charges against him. The judge must
 begin the juridical process within 48 more hours. In criminal
 trials which may result in a penitentiary sentence, bond is
 allowed, with the amount determined by law according to the
 seriousness of the charge. The death penalty and brutal
 treatment in prisons are both outlawed by the Constitution,
 which declares that prisons shall be used only for
 rehabilitation and re-education. Military justice can be
 applied to civilians only during a state of war or
 insurrection. All of these constitutional safeguards are now
 in force and respected.
 Forced or compulsory labor does not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Full autonomy of the judiciary returned with the new
 Government, and military officers who had been appointed to
 the Supreme Court or the higher Appeals Courts retired from
 their posts. According to the 1967 Constitution, all trials
 shall be public, and trials by commission or in absentia are
 prohibited. Each trial must be opened by a public statement
 of the charge by a public prosecutor or complaining witness.
 Uruguayan legal tradition calls for judges, without the use of
 
 
 697
 URUGUAY
 juries, to hand down decisions on the basis of written
 summaries, which are not available to the public. Several
 lawyers and human rights groups have advocated re-examination
 of the current judicial process in an effort to make it more
 efficient. Ideas include the institution of jury trials,
 tighter juridical supervision over pre-trial investigations by
 police, and the institution of a judicial police force. At
 present judges have to call on local police forces to carry
 out judicial decrees, which often slows the process
 considerably due to the volume of other work for which the
 police are responsible.
 There are currently no political prisoners in Uruguay. Those
 who, like Blanco Party President Wilson Ferreira Aldunate,
 were free on bail pending trial had the charges against them
 dropped. Others, who had already been tried, were pardoned by
 President Sanguinetti.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution affirms the inviolability of the home, which
 is absolute at night and subject to possession of a proper
 warrant during the day. Private papers and correspondence are
 also considered inviolable unless a proper legal warrant or
 exception has been obtained.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech became universal after March 1, 1985. The
 press censorship maintained by the de facto military
 Government was lifted, and oppositon viewpoints are once again
 freely expressed. New newspapers, including those financed by
 such previously proscribed organizations as the Communist
 Party and the March 26 Movement (political action arm of the
 Tupamaros) quickly appeared. Criticism of the Government is
 freely tolerated; academic freedom and university autonomy
 have been reinstituted. Formerly-banned student organizations
 are active once again, and many professors who were fired by
 the military regime for ideological reasons have returned to
 their university positions.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The last restrictions on peaceful assembly and association
 were lifted in early 1985, with the lifting of proscriptions
 against remaining outlawed groups such as the Communist Party
 and the Tupamaros. No license is required for public marches
 and demonstrations, which occur frequently and without
 harassment. Citzenship rights denied to individuals by the
 military on the basis of political affiliation and activity
 have been reinstated.
 Workers have the right to organize freely under the
 Constitution, which encourages the creation of both unions and
 arbitration boards. The formerly-outlawed Interunion Workers
 Assembly and National Workers Association (PIT-CNT) has
 vigorously resumed activity. Most labor leaders proclaim
 their adherence to the theory of class struggle and seek a
 political role for unions. Among the political parties, only
 the Communist Party has traditionally exercised any
 significant influence in the labor movement.
 
 
 698
 URUGUAY
 Both in law and in practice, workers have the right to
 associate, strike, and bargain collectively. The current
 Government recognizes the importance of these rights and is
 promoting them through proposals now before the Parliament
 which would prohibit the firing of workers for union
 activities and create salary councils to promote collective
 bargaining in which labor, management and government are
 represented. Those trade and professional associations which
 wish to participate in the general labor movement may do so.
 All are free to join international bodies. At present
 Uruguayan labor is not affiliated with any of the
 international labor federations, although it has observer
 status in all three.
 c. Freedom of religion
 Religious freedom is constitutionally guaranteed and
 respected. Although a majority of Uruguayans consider
 themselves Catholics, the church plays a less important role
 than in most Latin American countries. Missionaries from
 external religious groups are not hampered in the exercise of
 their calling.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel, nor is the right
 to foreign travel and emigration restricted. There is
 considerable concern for the 300,000 or so Uruguayans who
 departed the country, voluntarily or otherwise, during the
 military regime. Notwithstanding the fact that many of these
 individuals left Uruguay for economic rather than political
 reasons, a parliamentary committee on repatriation has been
 formed to consider ways in which those who wish to return
 might be aided and encouraged.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Uruguay is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy, with
 mandatory universal suffrage at age 18. There are no voting
 restrictions based on race, sex or economic status. The
 country's major politicial parties--Colorado Party, Blanco
 (National) Party and Broad Front (leftist coalition)--have
 kept their cohesion by allowing each ideological current
 within the party to run its own slate of candidates. National
 elections are held every five years; the next one is scheduled
 for November 1989.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Since the Sanguinetti Government took office in March 1985,
 Uruguay has not been a focus of concern of internationally-
 based human rights organizations. The Government is
 completely open to such organizations, and human rights
 investigators are placed under no restrictions as to where
 they can go and who they are allowed to interview.
 Of local human rights groups, the most prominent continues to
 be Servieio, Paz y Justicia (SERPAJ), a non-denominational
 group supported by several religious bodies, which has ties
 with similar groups throughout Latin America. It operated
 
 
 699
 URUGUAY
 underground for the last two years of the military Government
 but was legalized in early 1985. It now devotes itself to
 investigating both non-political human rights issues, such as
 prison conditions, and more politically sensitive questions
 involving cases of death, torture and disappearance which
 occurred during the 1973-1985 period. Another local group,
 the Foro Juvenil (Youth Forum) operated openly throughout the
 last years of military rule and carries out research on
 conditions encountered by youth, women and minorities.
 Several professional associations, including the Uruguayan Bar
 and Medical Associations, have human rights committees which
 investigate members accused of complicity with human rights
 violations during the military Government. The Uruguayan
 Human Rights Commission, a group of lawyers and legislators
 formed during the last years of military rule, dissolved
 itself in late 1985, announcing that with the return of
 civilian, democratic rule, the reasons for its existence had
 passed.
 The years of military rule made most Uruguayans highly
 conscious of human rights issues, both at home and in other
 countries. Human rights developments elsewhere are well
 reported in the local press, with particular attention paid to
 other Latin American countries. The Sanguinetti
 administration has announced that Uruguay intends to
 belvigorously active in the UN and regional groups on human
 rights issues.
 Amnesty International Report 1985 (which covers events only
 through the previous year and thus does not reflect changes
 after the return to democracy on March 1, 1985) expressed
 concern about the large number of political prisoners in 1984,
 the use in 1984 of military courts to try civilians on
 political charges, and the use of torture, and inhumane prison
 conditions. Freedom House rates Uruguay "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Uruguay had a population of 2,936 million in 1985 with a zero
 growth rate. The per capita gross domestic product of U.S.
 $1,655 continued to decline from the levels of previous
 years. The incidence of extreme poverty is low, although it
 has probably increased over the last year. Inflation was
 expected to top 60 percent in 1985. Unemployment has risen
 from less than 6 percent in 1981 to an officially estimated 14
 percent in 1985. The index of real wages is currently about
 48.5 percent below what it was in 1968. The vast majority of
 the population enjoys an adequate diet and at least a
 minimally acceptable standard of living.
 In 1985, life expectancy at birth was 73 years and infant
 mortality was 26 per 1,000 live births, down slightly from
 last year. In 1985, 80 percent of the total population, and
 96 percent of the urban population, had access to safe water.
 The caloric supply available for consumption in Uruguay in
 1977 was 103 percent of nutritional requirements.
 Uruguay had a 94 percent literacy rate in 1975, and virtually
 all children receive a mandatory primary school education.
 The adjusted primary school enrollment ratio was 115 in 1982.
 Secondary school enrollment is relatively high, and university
 education is free. Male students outnumber females in higher
 education by only a slight margin.
 
 
 700
 URUGUAY
 Uruguay has long been one of the most advanced countries in
 Latin America in terms of worker rights. Child labor is not
 permitted until after a child has obtained primary education.
 Children are generally not employed below the age of 15, but
 children of 12 or above can work with special permits from the
 Government. Dangerous, fatiguing or night work, apart from
 domestic service, cannot be performed by children under 18,
 and hours and pay are more strictly regulated than for
 adults. Children 16 or over can sue in court for payment of
 wages, and the right of child laborers to dispose of their own
 wages is mandated by law. Children working in the informal
 sector (street vendors, itinerant laborers and others without
 a permanent seat of operations) or in agrarian work are less
 strictly regulated and generally lower paid.
 For adults, the usual basic work schedule calls for no more
 than an eight-hour day and 48-hour week. After one year of
 service, workers are entitled to 10 paid days of vacation,
 which increases with additional years of service. Wages must
 include a Christmas bonus in addition to paid vacation.
 Workers are at least theoretically protected by minimum wage
 legislation and laws regulating the health and safety of
 working conditions. Wages are generally determined by
 tripartite salary councils, which promote voluntary
 negotiations between employers and unions. The 47 councils,
 which cover all private sector activity, meet every four
 months.
 Women in Uruguay are accorded equality before the law. They
 attend the National University and pursue professional careers
 in large numbers. Women serve on the Cabinet, in the Supreme
 Court, and in the diplomatic corps, including at the
 ambassadorial level. Although there are currently no women in
 Congress, several serve as alternates. Some barriers to
 equality still exist as a result of traditional social
 patterns and restricted employment opportunities. Pay is not
 always equal for men and women, especially for the less
 skilled workers in the private sector. Uruguay is a signatory
 of the 1948 Interamerican Convention on Political Rights for
 Women, but has not yet acceded to the 1953 U.N. Convention on
 Political Rights of Women.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 701
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: URUGUAY
 1983     1984     1985
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL,,,         1.0      0.6      0.0
 LOANS ..............0.0             0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     1.0      0.6      0.0
 A.AID .....................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPPASSIST),,.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       O.       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.0      0.6      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     1.0      0.6      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.,0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      1.0      0.6      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL,,,      1.1      0.7      0.1
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.1      0.7      0.1
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-35
 TOTAL .........   49.1    167.8     72.9   1044.8
 IBRO              45.0      0.0     64.0    506.2
 IFC                2.8      0.0      8.9     32.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOB                0.0    167.8      0.0    481.2
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.3      0.0      0.0     24.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 702
