 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 A former British Colony, Trinidad and Tobago is a stable,
 multi-party, parliamentary democracy. It inherited many of its
 political and legal forms and practices, strongly emphasizing
 rights of the person, from the United Kingdom. It is multi-
 racial and religiously diverse. There is universal adult
 suffrage from age 18, and regular elections are held.
 The economy is based on free enterprise, but with extensive-
 state ownership of industrial plants and public utilities and a
 high degree of government direction of the economy. The
 country has a rapidly developing and generally prosperous
 economy, and wealth is fairly well distributed. Health condi-
 tions generally are good. Education is widely available, and
 the literacy rate is 95 percent. The Government's economic
 welfare programs are administered on a non-discriminatory
 basis.
 The country has a generally excellent record of human rights
 observance. The Constitution enshrines internationally
 accepted fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimin-
 ation by reason of race, origin, color, religion, or sex. The
 judiciary is independent, and the Privy Council in the United
 Kingdom serves as the court of final appeal. No major changes
 occurred in human rights observance in 1982.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There have been no killings for political motives in 1982, but
 telephone and graffiti death threats have been made against an
 opposition member of Parliament and a prominent labor leader.
 The authorities have the will and the ability to arrest and
 punish the perpetrators of any political murders which might
 occur. There are no terrorist groups active in the country.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture
 Torture is forbidden under the law and is not permitted in
 practice.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids cruel and unusual treatment or punish-
 ment and this prohibition is generally observed in practice.
 However, allegations of excessive police roughness in indi-
 vidual cases continued to occur in 1982. Police officers have
 been fined and demoted for such illegal behavior, in prior
 years. Despite some improvements in recent years, physical
 conditions in the prisons remain harsh. A Commission of
 Inquiry into prison conditions, headed by the Anglican Bishop,
 was established in 1974, and, following numerous public
 sessions and public hearings, submitted its final report and
 recommendations in February 1980. The report recommended
 
 
 637
 remedial measures to stop police roughness and to improve
 prison conditions. Thus far, however, only some minor improve-
 ments in prison conditions have been made. Construction has
 just begun on a new and modern prison.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Protection against arbitrary detention or imprisonment is
 constitutionally guaranteed, as is the remedy of habeas
 corpus. In the past and in 1982, there have been instances,
 however, when a suspected person has been held under detention
 for some time before charges were formally placed against him.
 The law requires that a person be charged as soon as reasonably
 possible; by convention, the police have used 48 hours as a
 guideline for bringing charges. However, the police have
 sometimes surreptitiously kept people for longer periods. The
 purpose appears to be to coerce detainees, through a show of
 power, into confessing to a crime or into assisting the police
 in finding, the perpetrators. The police motive is their
 -enthusiasm to halt the growth of crime, it is not political.
 There have been several instances in which defendants were
 acquitted because the only evidence against them.were confes-
 sions obtained through such.methods. The courts have been
 vigilant in protecting defendants against such abuses, and the
 .press has been active in exposing the-abuses. There are also
 ..charges of excessive delays between arrest and trial. This
 shortcoming is a result of an overburdened and understaffed
 legal.system and not a consequence of government policy. The
 _1980 report of a Commission of Inquiry recommended measures to
 correct this problem, but implementation has been slow. There
 are no political prisoners.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trail
 The right of accused persons to a fair .and public hearing by an
 independent and impartial tribunal in criminal cases is guaran-
 teed under the Constitution and is observed in practice. In
 addkition, the state provides legal aid to impecunious citizens
 in both civiland criminal cases. Defendants are generally
 .charged within 48 hours, and charges are formally and clearly
 .. tated. *.The judiciary is independent of the executive and the
 military.: There is no political interference. There are no
 ..politicalor.security courts. Civilians are not tried by mili-
 tary-tribunals. Appeals from civil courts and military tribu-
 nals are made to the court of appeal and then to the Privy
 Council in London in both criminal and civil matters.
 .g.. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitution provides for security of the person and the
 sanctity of-the home. These provisions are, for the most part,
 observed. In the past, there have been press comments about
 alleged over-zealous house searches and the issuance of search
 warrants without sufficient cause. The police must show
 evidence to justify issuance of warrants, and they may be found
 liable in civil actions if they fabricate evidence. There have
 been no charges of forced entry or electronic eavesdropping by
 the police. However, there have been allegations of police
 demolition of squatters' shacks without warning, on a politi-
 cally discriminatory basis, and with an intimidating show of
 force.
 
 
 638
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression and freedom of the press are constitu-
 tionally guaranteed and respected in practice. Opposition
 viewpoints are freely ventilated in Parliament, in public
 meetings, and in press reports, as well as in paid political
 advertisements. However, rules regarding political coverage on
 television tend to favor the incumbent Government. Opposition
 parties and groups publish newspapers and other printed
 materials without hindrance. Criticism of government is
 tolerated. The press has highlighted perceived mismanagement
 and deficiencies of government without hindrance and with some
 effect on government performance. Some of the weekly papers
 have used questionable journalistic tactics which have resulted
 in a spate of statements by government officials critical of
 the press, which the press has taken as a threat to its
 freedom.
 There is no political censorship. The Government owns the only
 television station and one of the two radio stations, but both
 have a certain degree of autonomy and generally have editorial
 independence. News programs frequently highlight government
 deficiencies. Government programs are clearly identified as
 such. The Government has been charged with deliberately
 delaying the opening of a non-government television station,
 allegedly out of fear that programming may be critical of the
 Government and favor other political groups.
 Journalists have not been intimidated, harassed, or arrested.
 Media have not been closed down. There have been no reports of
 electronic surveillance or opening of mail. There are no
 opposition or terrorist groups which inhibit the press or
 others from freely expressing their opinions or conducting
 legitimate activities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is constitutionally guaranteed and is
 respected in practice. Public meetings, including those of
 opposition political parties and groups, are allowed. Permits
 for street meetings must be obtained in advance from the police
 to safeguard against breaches of the peace, but are freely
 granted, including to parties and groups critical of the
 government. Some opposition groups have at time charged that
 the police deliberately delay issuance of permits as a form of
 harassment, but these charges have not been documented and no
 inquiry has been demanded.
 The Government does not impede labor unions in their legally
 guaranteed rights to organize, negotiate, and strike, except
 that strikes are prohibited by law in essential services
 (police, firemen, health and sanitation employees, power and
 telephone workers, civil servants, and air traffic control-
 lers). Trade union organization is extensive, covering about
 30 percent of the work force, and collective bargaining is
 vigorous and widespread. The Ministry of Labor is an impartial
 mediator in labor disputes. Unions are not government
 controlled or influenced and they are not attached to political
 parties, although some tend to support the ruling party and
 others generally favor various opposition groups. Neither
 labor unions nor professional groups have experienced persecu-
 tion or intimidation. All freely maintain relations with
 recognized international bodies in their fields.
 
 
 639
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religious belief and observance is constitutionally
 guaranteed and respected in practice. There is no state or
 otherwise favored religion. Open practice of religion is
 permitted and widely occurs in numerous faiths. There is no
 discrimination on the basis of religion. Adherence to a
 particular faith does not confer either advantage or disadvan-
 tage in civil, economic, political, military, or other secular
 status.
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 There are no restrictions on freedom of movement within the
 country or on foreign travel and emigration, all of which are
 covered under the Constitution's freedom of movement provi-
 sion. Trinidad and Tobago long has served as a haven for
 people from neighboring areas seeking a better economic
 future. In turn, many people have emigrated from the country
 for similar reasons. All citizens have the right to re-enter
 the country, and this right is observed in practice. There are
 no restrictions on where people may reside. Citizenship is
 never revoked, but can be surrendered if citizenship is taken
 out in another country.
 e.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Trinidad and Tobago is governed by elected officials. All
 citizens, regardless of sex, race, or religion, can take part
 in the political process. The right to join political parties
 and to express political views is guaranteed by the Constitu-
 tion. Numerous political parties exist and participate in free
 elections, which are held regularly.
 The ruling party, which has been in power since before indepen-
 dence in 1962, is supported predominantly by urban blacks but
 includes Muslim and Christian East Indian groups.
 Opposition parties have traditionally been supported mainly by
 rural Hindu Indians. Opposition parties participate freely in
 elections and all seats are contested. However, the opposition
 parties complain about gerrymandering of election districts and
 rigging of elections by what they describe as a ruling
 party-dominated Election and Boundaries Commission, and they
 are seeking electoral reform. The ruling party, on the other
 hand, attributes problems in the conduct of elections to
 inefficiences instead of deliberate acts. The opposition also
 accuses the governing party of influencing elections by
 discriminating in favor of certain groups and areas in its
 dispensing of government benefits and by installing its
 supporters in government housing projects in opposition areas
 so as to change the political make-up of those areas.
 The ruling party has a large (26-10) majority in Parliament and
 therefore invariably succeeds in passing legislation it wishes
 and in implementing its policies. Being a highly disciplined
 party, its representatives seldom argue publicly with each
 other and do not vote against the leadership. Opposition
 members are free to speak and do so, and they sometimes have an
 impact on legislation and policy. Women participate in the
 political process; several have been elected to Parliament on
 both the government and opposition sides. Several women are
 government ministers. Hindus, though a minority politically,
 
 
 .640
 are widespread in the civil service and are represented in
 Parliament on the opposition side.
 3.   Government Attitudes Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Government of Trinidad and Tobago supports the interna-
 tional observance of human rights and does not object in
 principle to international and non-governmental investigations
 of alleged human rights violations. The Government, however,
 has expressed publicly its concern that allegations of human
 rights violations can lead to unwarranted interference in the
 internal affairs of sovereign states and that investigations of
 such allegations can be used by the strong to apply pressure on
 the weak. The Government does not support the use of any
 non-economic criteria in the consideration of loan or other
 assistance requests by international financial institutions and
 organizations. Trinidad and Tobago has never been the subject
 of international or non-governmental investigations in the
 human rights field.
 Several non-governmental human rights organizations (Trinidad
 and Tobago Human Rights Commission, Human Rights Bureau, and a
 branch of Amnesty International) operate freely and openly in
 the country. The Commission disseminates information and
 organizes public lectures about human rights and lodges
 complaints with appropriate authorities. The Bureau has
 conducted seminars to which the public was invited to air
 complaints, e.g., regarding allegations of police brutality.
 The Bureau director is active as a barrister in defense of
 individual cases of alleged human rights violations by govern-
 ment officials. Amnesty International's office has been active
 in agitating for abolition of capital punishment. A constitu-
 tionally mandated ombudsman investigates allegations by
 citizens that their rights have been violated by government
 agencies.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Trinidad and Tobago is recently petrodollar rich but it still
 is a developing nation. Economic growth accelerated after oil
 prices were increased in 1974. The Government's economic
 development strategy centers around plans for construction of a
 number of high-technology industrial projects which will
 benefit from Trinidad and Tobago's extensive gas reserves.
 Implementation is now proceeding. The manufacturing sector
 also is being encouraged and is expanding. Capital formation,
 financed both officially and privately, has been at a high
 level in recent years. Infrastructure development is
 proceeding, but is lagging behind the pace of industrial
 construction.
 Implementation of this industrial development program and other
 major construction projects has helped to maintain a substan-
 tial rate of economic growth. Real growth in 1980 was esti-
 mated at 10 percent, following growth of 17 percent in 1979 and
 7.7 percent in 1978. Per capita income (for a population of
 nearly 1.2 million, with a fertility rate of 1.3 percent and an
 annual growth rate of 2.0 percent) is now estimated at about
 $5,600. The economy stagnated in 1981 as oil prices and oil
 production declined. For the immediate future, the Government
 faces large budget deficits and the first balance of payment
 deficit in a decade. Unemployment is also expected to increase.
 
 
 641
 The right to enjoyment of property, which is for the most part
 privately held and transacted, is protected by the Constitu-
 tion. Most farmland is privately owned and the majority of
 landholdings are small, with nearly half under five acres.
 Subsistance farming is on the decline. A government program of
 land redistribution--from its own land and from estates sold to
 the Government--encourages the establishment of medium-sized
 family farms (5-20 acres) devoted to cash crops.
 Largely as a result of the rapid expansion of the economy in
 recent years, the country has recorded a significant reduction
 in the rate of unemployment. From a high of 15.2 percent in
 1975, this had fallen to 10 percent in 1981, and labor
 shortages are reported in some skilled and semi-skilled jobs.
 The Government provides jobs for large numbers of the unem-
 ployed in a public works program. Workers in the stronger
 labor unions, especially in the industrial sector, have been
 particularly successful in negotiating large wage increases.
 Unions have also gained improvements in working conditions.
 Women receive the same pay as men for the same work and occupy
 miany important positions in government, the professions, and
 business. There are women in the police force and in the army.
 Free health care is available and accounts for 10.6 percent of
 government expenditures (1978). One major new hospital has
 been built, plans are underway for modernizing and expanding
 the country's two biggest hospitals, and a network of rural
 health care centers is nearing completion. Health conditions
 generally are good. Nutritional requirements are met (111
 percent). The mortality rate and the incidence of most
 diseases are declining. Life expectancy in 1980 was 71.8. The
 1980 infant mortality rate was 32.3 per 1,000 live births.
 Population per hospital bed (1975) was 455: and population per
 physician (1975) was 1,948. All the urban population and most
 (93 percent) of the rural population has access to safe water.
 The education system, which is free through secondary school
 and accounts for 19.2 percent of government expenditure (1978),
 is being expanded and revised better to prepare those who enter
 directly into the job market. The University of the West
 Indies has a campus in Trinidad, but many citizens still go
 abroad (UK, US, Canada) for higher education. The literacy
 rate is 95 percent. Virtually all school-age children (99
 percent) are enrolled (males 98 and females 100 percent).
 Income levels are quite diverse. In 1975, the poorest 40
 percent of the population received about 11 percent of total
 income, and the top 10 percent received over 31 percent, while
 the middle 50 percent received 57 percent. In a recent study
 by a prominent local economist, however, evidence was provided
 that indicated income distribution had improved substantially
 since the mid-70's. Pockets of poverty--in some urban and
 rural areas--are not large. A housing shortage exists and
 squatters abound on both government and private lands. Housing
 construction programs are underway, but are not rapidly elimi-
 nating the shortage.
 Expenditures in the area of social needs (housing, health,
 education, and welfare) account for about one-third of the
 national budget. Staple food items, important elements in the
 budgets of lower income groups, are kept at relatively low
 prices through government subsidies, and a free school lunch
 program--now functioning on a limited scale--is being
 expanded. Food stamps are available to the elderly and other
 needy persons. Government and private pensions are sufficient
 
 
 642
 to provide for human needs and at least a minimal standard of
 living for retirees. A national insurance (social security)
 plan, to which both employers and employees contribute, is also
 in effect. Benefits under this plan are relatively generous
 and are expanding. The Government administers health, educa-
 tion, and income supplement programs on a non-discriminatory
 basis.
 Tobago continues to charge that it receives less than its share
 of benefits from the economic prosperity of the past few years
 and claims that its development is being neglected because it
 has voted for an opposition party in national and local elec-
 tions since 1976. Talk of secession from Trinidad arises from
 time to time.
 
 
 643
 U.S.GVFRSA3 -LOANS ANO GRANTS- 03LIGATIONS ANO LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TRINIOA) 9 TGSAGO
 1950     1901     1982
 I.ECGN. ASIST,.-TOTAL�...         0.3      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      .1.0     0.3
 GRANTS ....               1. .3             0.0
 A.A1l  ............... .         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         o.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..            0. .0             0.0      0.0
 (SIC.S~oJ.ASSZST.)...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 i.F00a FUR PEACE ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  .............        0.         0      O.c
 TITLE  I-T TAL ..........        .        .0      0.0
 REPAY. IN I-LOANS .....         0.0      o.       0.0
 P;Y, IN FUR. CU4 .              ).3      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL.........          C.0      1.0      0.0
 E.RELIE'.dC.;EV & WFP.         0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.qELI-I AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.0.
 C.OTHtR'h0UVN. ASSIST...         0.3      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..........           0.3       0.0      0.0
 PEA0L CORPS .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 NAROTICS........          0 .3      Q.       0.0
 OTH R .....2.......       0.3       0.0"     0.0
 I1.MIL., ASSIST.-TUTAL   0.              0.u      0.0
 LJAN S ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......  .            0.. .    0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ;.CR60IT SALES-rM.S.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.NTL MIL.EO.TRG ....         2.0      0.0      0.0
 0.TRAN-cXACSS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II!.T0TAL.EON. P MIL...         0.3       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.3      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US. LOANS ........          ?.7     24.8     35.8
 &X-IM BANK-LOANS .......         9.7      4S      35.8
 ALL OTHER .................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 -ASSISTANCE FRM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 190     1961     198Z     1946-82
 TOTAL.........     1.6      7.9       0.0    153.1
 I5RD               0.0      0.0       0.0    111.5
 IFC                0.0      0.O       0.0      2.4
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 loa                0.0      0.0       0.0     1.8
 AO                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AF0B               0O.       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.6       2.9      0.0     14.6
 OTHER-UN.          0.0      0.0       0.0      0.8
 EEC                0.0      5.0       0.0     10.0
 
 
 644
