 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which political and civil rights are provided for by the Constitu-
 tion and generally respected in practice. Free and fair general elections have been
 held at regular intervals since independence from the United Kingdom in 1962. The
 country is governed by a bicameral Parliament and a Prime Minister, who is the
 leader of the majority party in the lower house. The President, whose office is large.
 ly ceremonial, is elected by Parliament. Local matters on the island of Tobago are
 handled by a 12-member elected House of Assembly.
 The police service and the defense force are under the control of and generally
 responsive to civilian authority embodied in the Ministry of National Security. An
 independent body, the Police Service Commission, controls all personnel decisions
 in the police service, and the Ministry has little direct ability to effect changes in
 senior posit ions. A Scotland Yard team found evidence of widespread corruption in
 the police service. Some members of the police service were responsible for
 extrajudicial killings and other human rights abuses, usually committed with impu-
 nity
 The country's mixed economy is based primarily on the hydrocarbon sector, but
 efforts continued to diversify the economy into agriculture, manufacturing, and tour-
 
 
 557
 ism. The Government historically owned many businesses wholly or partly, but an
 extensive divestment program gained momentum during the year. Several state-
 owned corporations were partially or completely privatized, and the Government
 contemplated further divestment, particularly in the energy sector and public utili-
 ties.
 Trinidad and Toba o citizens have and exercise a wide range of freedoms and in-
 dividual rights, but there continued to be incidents of extrajudicial killings, beat-
 ings, intimidation, and other abuses by the police. There were no investigations nor
 any other followup by Government, and the perpetrators of such abuse enjoyed im-
 unit . The administration of justice suffered from police corruption, allegations of
 favoritism, and prolonged delays. Violence against women remained a severe prob-
 lem, unaddressed by the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-There were no reports during 1993
 of killings for political motives by the Government or opposition groups. However,
 there were extrajudicial killings and other abuses of authority by the police. The po-
 lice service did not publicly release statistics on police shootings, but the local press
 reported over a dozen shooting incidents involving police officers, approximately half
 of which resulted in fatalities. In several of these cases, the victims were unarmed.
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in a case of death by unnatural causes
 only when a coroner finds the circumstances warrant it; otherwise it is not manda-
 tory. In practice, inquests were seldom pursued. Despite the existence of a police
 Internal Investigations Unit, there are no mandatory investigations of police
 shootings or killings.
 In September officers of the narcotics unit shot and killed Alim Mohammed and
 Zainool Bushrooram during a marijuana eradication raid in central Trinidad. The
 officers claimed they were fired upon and the two men were killed in the ensuing
 battle. Weapons were recovered at the scene. Eyewitnesses, however, asserted that
 the dead men were unarmed and that the initial shots were fired by individuals who
 then fled the scene. There was no inquest into this shooting.
 There were no reports of deaths resulting from abuse by officers of persons in po-
 lice custody, but an alleged drug trafficker died in the custody of Coast Guard per-
 sonnel. Although his cause of death was listed as a ruptured spleen, there was cred-
 ible evidence that the injury resulted from a severe beating administered during a
 Coast Guard interrogation. There was no further investigation of the circumstances.
 A Scotland Yard probe uncovered evidence of corrupt activities by individual po-
 lice officers, including collusion with narcotics traffickers and drug dealers. It failed,
 however, to uncover evidence to support the allegation that there was a drug cartel
 Trating within the police services. The investigation was abruptly halted in June.
 e Ministry of National Security stated that the next stage of the investigation
 would be handled by selected local officers, but no local followup investigation took
 place.
 In the case of a police constable shot to death during a 1987 training exercise in
 which only blank ammunition was to have been used, the victim's mother alleged
 that her daughter witnessed a shadowy transaction involving two government min-
 isters and a high-ranking police officer the day before. After an inquest that lasted
 nearly 5 years, the chief magistrate referred the case back to the police Internal In-
 vestigations Unit. The Scotland Yard probe reportedly uncovered new evidence that
 may lead to a criminal trial.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 in 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids the Government from imposing or authorizing cruel and
 unusual treatment or punishment. Under law, any evidence obtained by such means
 is inadmissible in court.
 However, there continued to be credible allegations and charges in court that
 some police officers had physically abused detainees. The law permits victims of
 such treatment to sue for civil damages and to file criminal charges against thepo-
 lice officers involved; such suits are occasionally initiated. Damages can be awarded
 and police officers found guilty of misconduct are subject to disciplinary action.
 There were credible reports however, that citizens who lodged complaints against
 police officers were subjected to reprisals.
 In two separate incidents, American citizens lodged complaints against police offi-
 cers alleging that they were verbally abused and intimidated by the officers. There
 were also numerous press reports of police intimidation and abuse of suspected
 
 
 criminals and some members of the general public. Disciplinary actions were rarely
 pursued based on these allegations.
 An American citizen prisoner in a Trinidadianjail was reportedly beaten by sev-
 eral prison officers after minor transgressions. This report prompted questions in
 Parliament, and the prison service conducted an internal investigation into the mat-
 ter. Several prison officers received official reprimands.
 Trinidad and Tobago courts sentence convicted felons to corporal punishment as
 well as prison sentences in approximately 50 cases a year. Men convicted of rape,
 assault with a deadly weapon, or aggravated robbery are subject to floggings admin-
 istered in private by prison officials. The law states that flogging must be adminis-
 tered within 9 months of sentencing but cannot be conducted while an appeal is
 pending; since appeals are routinely filed but rarely heard within 9 months of initial
 sentencing, in practice floggings seldom occur.
 In 1993 there was one reported flogging of a minor. The individual, an 11-year-
 old boy, had been apprehended makinga delivery of over 200 rocks of crack cocaine.
 The magistrate ordered the boy to beflogged as punishment, and the sentence was
 carried out a few days later. The fogging was condemned by local human rights or-
 ganizations and prompted considerabe media attention.
 Overcrowding in prisons continued to be a problem, with, in some cases 11 to 13
 men in a 6- by 9-foot cell. Several prisoners died of Acquired Immune Deficiency
 Syndrome (AIDS), while others suffered from contagious skin diseases. Construction
 is under way on a new maximum security facility which will accommodate 2,000 in-
 mates and help alleviate the overcrowding.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution specifies that a suspect
 has the right to be informed promptly of the reason for arrest or detention, which
 in practice has normally meant within 48 hours. Court orders may be obtained by
 the police to hold a person longer than normal in order to gather additional evi-
 dence. However, there continued to be credible reports that persons were detained
 incommunicado in excess of this period, without the police having obtained a court
 order. Arrests without a warrant are permitted when a person is apprehended com-
 mitting an offense or when reasonable suspicion exists that an offense has been or
 is about to be committed. A 1991 court ruling held that police must allow a person
 in police custody to contact an attorney "as early as possible, and in any event be-
 fore an interrogation takes place."
 Detainees generally are allowed access to a lawyer and to family members but
 police sometimes deny access if they believe it would impede an investigation. There
 continued to be charges in the courts and the press that police violated these proce-
 dures in specific cases. Persons arrested have the right to a judicial determination
 of the legality of their detention, and courts have found for complainants in some
 cases of illegal detention and awarded damages.
 The Government is appealing a June 1992 decision that upheld the amnesty that
 resolved the 1990 coup attempt by the Jamaat al-Muslimeen. Based on this decision,
 the courts had ruled that the detention of 114 Jamaat members was illegal and or-
 dered the Government to pay damages and court costs.
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public safety, public order, or the defense of Trinidad
 and Toba and must state the grounds for the detention. A detainee under this
 provision has access to counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-
 member tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The
 Minister must provide to the tribunal the grounds for the detention within 7 days
 of the detainee's request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. The preventive detention option is not
 known to have been abused.
 Exile is forbidden by law and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution specifies that persons accused
 of crimes receive a fair and public trial. The judiciary is independent and not subject
 to outside interference. Appeals may be made to the court of appeals and eventually
 to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. Criminal defendants
 enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right to confront witnesses and present
 evidence. These rights are generally respected in practice. All criminal defendants
 have the right to an attorney. Legal assistance is available from attorneys registered
 with the Legal Aid and Advisory Authority of the Ministry of Social Development
 and Family Services for those who prove that they cannot afford representation.
 Judges may also appoint attorneys in the courtroom to represent defendants without
 counsel.
 Criminal defendants may be freed on bail pending trial unless charged with mur-
 der or treason or detained under state of emergency regulations. The presiding mag-
 istrate may suspend bail after consultation with the prosecution and defense.
 
 
 Due to inadequate resources and the current structure of the judicial system, both
 criminal and civil cases are often delayed, sometimes for as long as 6 years. All
 criminal trials are preceded by a preliminary inquiry which determines whether
 there is sufficient evidence to proceed with a jury trial. Strict rules of evidence and
 the requirement that all witnesses who will testify during the trial give testimony
 before the inquiry add further delays to the process.
 Certain serious offenses, and all appeals, are tried before a high court, which suf-
 fers from a shortage of judges and a large backlog of cases. Some defendants spend
 many months or even years in jail awaiting their actual trial.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition generally respected in prac-
 tice. However, although judicially issued warrants are required for searches (exce t
 under state of emergency regulations), this procedure is not strictly followed. Th e
 state-owned telephone company has the ability to monitor telephone calls, and in-
 formed observers believe that the police use this facility for domestic intelligence
 purposes. There are no laws authorizing such monitoring, however, so evidence ob-
 tained in this manner may not be used in court.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion, and this right is protected in practice by the independent judiciary, a demo-
 cratic and pluralistic political system, and independent and privately owned media.
 According to some journalists, the interlocking directorates of local corporations
 result in self-censorship by publishers. They also argue that Trinidad's strict libel
 laws, based on preindependence British models, are prone to unpredictable and ex-
 cessive damage awards and constitute de facto censorship. In December 1993, Min-
 ister of Planning Lenny Saith filed a libel suit against a local daily for articles it
 printed delving into his personal financial dealings. The newspaper retracted parts
 of the stories. The threat of libel suits limits the scope of much investigative report-
 n he two major daily newspapers are sometimes critical of the Government in their
 editorials. Their news coverage appears to report accurately criticism by opposition
 parties, trade unions, and private citizens. The widely read tabloids are extremely
 critical of the Government.
 The three television stations, as part of their licensing agreements, are required
 to broadcast informational programming produced and provided by the Government.
 The Government-owned station has, over the years, been accused by the opposition
 of favoring the ruling party. There are currently seven radio stations operating in
 Trinidad and Tobago, one of which is government-owned.
 The import or circulation of publications may be prohibited under the Sedition
 Act, but the law has rarely been invoked in recent years. A Board of Film Censors
 is authorized to ban films it considers to be against public order and decency or con-
 trary to the public interest. This includes films which may be controversial in mat-
 ters of religion, seditious propaganda, or race.
 Academic freedom is respected and protected by law.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These freedoms are protected
 by law and respected in practice. Registration of private organizations is not re-
 quired. Permits are required in advance for street marches, demonstrations, or other
 public outdoor meetings and are routinely granted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state religion and no religious
 test for public office. There are large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims,
 and these and other religious groups are allowed to maintain association with orga-
 nizations and persons in other countries and to perform religious travel. Religious
 groups are generally free to establish places to worship and to engage in religious
 training, education, and publishing. Missionaries are permitted to enter the country
 and proselytize.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -Residents are generally free to emigrate and to travel within or outside
 the country, as well as to change residence and workplace.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by secret ballot in
 free and fair multiparty, multicandidate elections held, as required by the Constitu-
 tion, at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago House
 of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to vote to
 
 
 560
 citizens as well as to legal residents with citizenship in other Commonwealth coun-
 tries, who are at least 18 years of age. There are no restrictions on the participation
 of women in political activities. Women hold many positions in the Government and
 political party leadership.
 The Government is formed by the party holding the majority of seats in the lower
 house of Parliament. The Parliament consists of an elected House of Representa-
 tives whose 36 members represent individual voting constituencies; and a 31-mem-
 ber Senate appointed by the President, 16 on the advice of the Prime Minister, 6
 on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and 9 at the President's discretion. The
 Prime Minister is Head of Government; the President, elected by Parliament, is
 Head of State, a largely ceremonial position.
 Prior to December 1986, each election had been won by the People's National
 Movement (PNM); in December 1991, the PNM was voted back into office after a
 5-year hiatus. The opposition United National Congress won 13 of the 36 parliamen-
 tary seats, the highest proportion it has ever held. Elections for the Tobago House
 of Assembly were held in December 1992, and 11 of the 12 seats were won by the
 National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR), the party that ruled the country be-
 tween 1986 and 1991.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of nongovernmental human rights groups operate freely without gov-
 ernment restriction or interference. Caribbean Elections Watch founded in 1990,
 promotes free and fair elections in the Caribbean. The Caribbean Institute of
 Human Rights, headquartered in Trinidad, is a regional organization composed of
 human rights monitors who collect information throughout the region and report on
 Caribbean human rights matters. The Ombudsman is an officer of Parliament em-
 powered to investigate complaints of violations of human rights law or policy and
 to report his findings to Parliament.
 International human rights organizations are free to visit and discuss human
 rights with governmental and nongovernmental representatives.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race, sex, language, or social
 status, and the Government respects these prohibitions.
 Women.-Discrimination based on sex is illegal. Many women hold positions in
 business and the professions, as well as in government and political parties. Wom-
 en's groups speak out publicly on all aspects of public life. Women make up approxi-
 mately 36 percent of the paid labor force. Collective bargaining agreements cannot
 be registered with the Industrial Court if they exhibit wage disparities between men
 and women.
 Physical abuse of women and children by family members was reported to be ex-
 tensive. Parliament passed a domestic violence bill in August 1991 which provided
 for the filing of restraining orders against abusive family members, a court hearing
 within 7 days of filin, and criminal penalties for violation of restraining orders. Ad-
 ditional legislation will be required, "however, to ensure that adequate mechanisms
 are in place to enforce the bill. There are several privately operated shelters for bat-
 tered women which receive a minimal amount of government assistance.
 Children.-The Government is committed to assuring the human rights and wel-
 fare of children. Protection of children from abuse in the home is provided by the
 Domestic Violence Act. Public assistance legislation provides supplemental income
 to unemployed and indigent parents based on the number of children. In practice,
 however, if parents do not have the funds to buy books and uniforms, their children
 do not attend school. There is no evidence of abuse af [children by any government
 agencies, nor are there any societal practices that violate children's human rights.
 The Government's commitment to children's welfare is limited only by the scarcity
 of available resources.
 National/Ethnic/Racial Minorities.-Trinidad and Tobago includes various ethnic
 and religious groups that live together peacefully, generally respecting each others
 beliefs and practices. However, racial tensions continue between Afr-Trinidadians
 and Indo-Trinidadians, with each group comprising over 40 percent of the popu-
 lation. The private sector is dominated by Indo-Trinidadians and people of European
 and Middle Eastern descent. Indo-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture.
 Afr-Trinidadians are employed in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, po-
 lice, and military. Since Indo-Trinidadians constitute the majority in rural areas
 and Afro-Trinidadians are the majority in urban areas, competition between town
 and country for public goods and services often takes on racial overtones. Indo-
 
 
 561
 Trinidadian opposition politicians complained that Afro-Trinidadians receive a dis-
 proportionate share of government benefits.
 Against the backdrop of a perceived crime wave in central Trinidad, in May Mem-
 ber of Parliament Hulsie Bhaggan publicly linked the increased crime, particularly
 sexual offenses, to racial animosity against Indo-Trinidadians on the part of Afro-
 Trinidadians. Ms. Bhaggan's allegations, and the subsequent police denial, height-
 ened racial tensions for several months and provoked the organization of vigilante
 village watch groups throughout the region. These groups were responsible for sev-
 eral assaults against Afro-Trinidadian males whom they suspected of banditry. In
 almost all cases, these suspicions proved groundless. In July the psychological re-
 search center at the University of the West Indies released a report of the crime
 situation that found no connection between increased crime in the area and racial
 motivations.
 Religious Minorities.-Although Hinduism is the second largest religion in Trini-
 dad and Tobago, there are no sixth-form Hindu secondary schools to prepare stu-
 dents for university; there are 18 Christian and 2 Muslim sixth-form facilities.
 Hindu leaders blame the lag in the performance of Hindu students on government
 failure to provide adequate facilities and opportunities for the Hindu population.
 Members of the Muslim community also charged religious discrimination in non-
 Muslim government secondary schools which prohibit young women from wearing
 the jeelab (head covering) or chador (head covering and shawl) in the classroom.
 School administrators responded that all students are required to wear identical
 uniforms and that preferential treatment contradicted school policy.
 People with Disabilities.-There is no legislation that specifically protects the em-
 ployment rights of the disabled, but there exists a body of social services legislation
 that affords pensions and public assistance for disabled persons unable to find em-
 ployment. The Government provides substantial funding for private schools and in-
 stitutions that provide education, child care, and support for disabled children and
 young adults. The Government has not enacted legislation to assure accessibility for
 the disabled to government services. The Government released a draft policy in the
 fall of 1993 listing pro posed improvements to the existing policy toward the dis-
 abled. The draft was sti under discussion at year's end.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is respected in law and prac-
 tice. There are 32 active labor unions, with a total membership comprising approxi-
 mately 32 percent of the work force. The unions are independent of government or
 political party control, and they freely represent their members' interests. Union
 members are free to publicize their views and determine their own programs and
 policies, including their international affiliations.
 Workers are permitted, upon expiration of a conciliation period, to strike, and em-
 ployers are permitted to lock workers out. After a strike or lockout has been in
 progress for 3 months, either of the parties involved may request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, which is part of the independent
 judiciary, for a bindin decision. Strikes and lockouts are not permitted in essential
 public services (as defined in the Industrial Relations Act), and the Minister of
 abor may apply for an injunction to halt any labor action he finds contrary to the
 national interest; in practice, this has never happened. Workers in essential services
 with labor grievances may call on the conciliation services of the Ministry of Labor
 or may take their cases directly to the Industrial Court. However, such cases are
 not generally processed more quickly than those in the private sector. Workers in
 essential services may also file civil suits against the Government.
 In 1993 members of the Steelworkers' Union staged a 6-week strike against the
 island's only steel manufacturer. The strike concluded in August when the majority
 of the membership voted to accept the company's offer.
 The PNM Government's decision to proceed aggressively with plans to privatize
 many state-owned industries led to marked antsgonism between several significant
 unions and the Government. Both the Oilfield Workers Trade Union and the Na-
 tional Union of Government and Federal Workers repeatedly threatened crippling
 industrial action in efforts to avert the planned privatization of the electrical and
 water utilities. A government decision to streamline Trinidad's ports resulted in dis-
 missal of two-thirds of the port's workers, who were provided with a voluntary sepa-
 raio plan.              1        c   it        v~
 bThe mRiht to Organize and Bargain ColLectieLy.-The constitutional right of
 workers to organize and bargain collectively is well established and freely practiced.
 In fact, collective bargaining is the predominant method by which wage eve s are
 established in most industries. Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by law. How-
 ever, there is no legislation that mandates the rehiring of an employee in a wrongful
 
 
 562
 
 dismissal case. The Minister of Labor acts as an impartial conciliator in collective
 bargaining impasses. There are a few complaints each year to the Ministry of Labor
 about personal antiunion activities, usually involving the suspension or dismissal of
 an employee who alleges the action was taken at least in part because of union ac-
 tivity. The Ministry of Labor is generally able to resolve those cases brought to it.
 Legislation for the establishment of free trade zones, enacted by Parliament in
 1988, was implemented in 1992. All Trinidad and Tobago laws, inclusive of those
 affecting working conditions and the right of workers to organize and bargain collec-
 tively, are applicable in free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although there is no domestic law
 prohibiting forced or compulsory labor, it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Legislation prohibits the employ-
 ment of children under the age of 12, and children aged 12 to 14 are permitted to
 work only in family businesses. Education is compulsory until the age of 12. Chil-
 dren may begin apprenticeship at age 15 and regular employment at age 17. The
 probation service within the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services is
 the entity responsible for compliance, but enforcement of these restrictions was lax.
 School-age children were often seen vending on the streets and at the beach.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Legislation enacted in November 1991 signifi-
 cantly broadened the categories of workers covered by minimum wage standards.
 There is no national minimum wage, but there do exist legislated minimum wages
 for specific sectors. The lowest such rate is that for domestics which is $26.78
 (TT$150) for a 44-hour week. Very few sectors are covered by these rates, and it
 appears that even in sectors where there is a legislated minimum, most workers
 earn more than the minimum. The lowest pay rate for government workers covers
 apprentice woodsmen and is $12.74 (7T$71.35) for an 8-hour day.
 Enforcement of the minimum wage law is entrusted to the Labor Inspectorate.
 The legislation also provides for 3 months maternity leave for household and shop
 assistants, as well as overtime pay, holiday pay, 2 weeks' vacation leave, and 14
 days' sick leave per year. Wage levels in sectors not covered in the law are set under
 collective bargaining agreements and provide a decent living for workers and their
 families. The most poorly paid workers, including those working in minimum wage
 jobs, usually have secondary sources of support, often from their families.
 The standard workweek in Trinidad and Tobago is 40 hours; the minimum wage
 law sets a 40-hour workweek for workers who fall within its jurisdiction, while col-
 lective ba~~aining agreements set the standards in other industrial and service sec-
 tors. Additional hours are considered overtime and are remunerated at a negotiated
 rate. Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agree-
 ments. There are no legal restrictions on overtime work.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948 Factories and Ordinance
 Bill, which sets requirements for health and safety standards in certain industries
 and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. Workers who file
 complaints with the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working condi-
 tions are protected under the Industrial Relations Act of 1972 to the extent that,
 should it be determined upon inspection that conditions exist in the workplace
 which present hazards to life or limb, the worker is absolved in refusing to comply
 with an order which would have placed him or her in harm's way. Government in-
 spectors investigate complaints of hazardous working conditions.
