 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, is a parliamen-
 tary democracy in which there have been free and fair general elections since inde-
 pendene from the United Kingdom in 1962. A bicameral Parliament and a Prime
 Miistergover the country. Parliament elects the President, whose office is largely
 ceremonial. A 12-member elected House of Assembly handles local matters on the
 island of Tobago.
 The Ministry of National Security contrls the police service and the defense force,
 which are both generally responsive to civilian authority. An independent body, the
 Police Service Commission, makes all personnel decisions in the police service, and
 the Ministry has little direct influence over changes in senior positions. Some mem-
 bers of the police service allegedly committed human rights abuses, often with impu-
 nie country's mixed economy is based primarily on the petroleum and natural gas
 industries, but efforts continue to diversify the economy into services, manufactur-
 ing, and tourism. The Government has historically owned many businesses wholly
 or partially; however, a major divestment program continued to privatize several
 state-owned corporations, either partially or completely.
 Citizens enjoy a wide range of civil liberties and individual rights. Human rights
 abuses included overcrowded prisons, violence against women, and allegations of
 beatings and extrajudicial killings by police. Sharply increased violent crime and
 narcotics trafficking created unprecedented strains on the administration of justice
 system, which was severely undermined by murder and intimidation of witnesses,
 allegations of corruption, and excessive delays.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings by the police or other security forces.
 Police shot and killed approximately 11 people during 1994. All allegedly occurred
 during exchanges of gunfire, with the police acting in self-defense, and none was de-
 termined to be extrajudicial killings. The authorities' inquest into the death of a
 man shot by the police in 1990 was still under way at the end of 1994. The inquest
 heard evidence that the post mortem report appeared to have been altered before
 submission to the coroner.
 There were several alleged suicides of prisoners while in police custody. In one
 case, when a 34-year-old man died from drinking herbicide while handcuffed in his
 jail cell, family members charged it was a "cove? for an extrajudicial police killing.
 They assertedthat the police had forced the deceased to drink the poison. No in-
 quest had been held on the matter by year's end, and the inquest may be delayed
 for several years because magistrates hold such inquests on an ad hoc basis.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the imposition of cruel or unusual treatment or punish-
 ment. However, allegations of beating while in police custody were common. For ex-
 ample, one prisoner accused jailers of beating him in custody pending trial and ap-
 peared at a court hearing with his jaws wired shut and showing evidence of other
 injuries. He stated that he had not complained to prison authorities for fear of being
 forced to miss his court date. The authorities conducted an internal investigation
 but closed it when the accused prison officers denied any involvement. Other pris-
 oners complained of beatings by prison guards, but the authorities took no action
 to investigate the complaints or punish the perpetrators. By law the government
 Ombudsman may investigate charges of prisoner beatings, but in practice he does
 not.
 
 
 511
 Courts frequently order the flogging of prisoners, but this is not actually carried
 out in practice. The relevant statute requires that the punishment be carried out
 within 6 months of sentencing; defendants appeal all flogging sentences, and courts
 do not hear the appeals before the 6-month deadline.
 Overcrowding is a serious problem in prisons which, together with shortages of
 guards and unsanitary conditions, leads to serious social and health consequences.
 Conditions are worst in the older facilities: Port of Spain prison was built to hold
 250 inmates, but houses 1,079; Carrera prison, designed to hold 185, has 547. There
 were many reports of rapes, murders, assaults, and attempts to commit these crimes
 among inmates and between inmates and guards. Diseases such as chicken pox, tu-
 berculosis, AIDS, and other viruses spread easily in the prisons. A large, modem
 detention facility is scheduled to open in March 1995.
 The facilities for, and treatment of, women prisoners appear exceptionally hu-
 mane with a strong and successful orientation to rehabilitation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary de-
 tention, imprisonment, or exile of any person. A police officer may arrest a person
 either based on a warrant issued or authorized by a magistrate or without a war-
 rant when the officer witnesses commission of the alleged offense. In less serious
 offenses the authorities typically bring the accused before a magistrate within 24
 hours; for indictable offenses, the accused must appear within 48 hours. At that
 time the magistrate reads the charge and determines the availability of bail. (A re-
 cently enacted bail bill authorizes magistrates to deny bail to violent and repeat of-
 fenders.) If for some reason the accused does not come before the magistrate, the
 case comes up on the magistrate's docket every 8 to 10 days until a hearing date
 is set. The courts notify persons of their right to an attorney and allow them access
 to an attorney once they are in custody and prior to any interrogation. The authori-
 ties do not always comply with these standards however, and a court awarded
 $18,000 to three brothers whom police wrongfully arrested, detained for 3hdays,
 threatened with beatings, and failed to advise of their right to an attorney.
 The Minister of National Security may authorize preventive detention in order to
 prevent actions prejudicial to public safety, public order, or the defense of Trinidad
 and Tobago, and must state the grounds for the detention. A detainee under this
 provision has access to counsel and may have his detention reviewed by a three-
 member tribunal established by the Chief Justice and chaired by an attorney. The
 Minister must provide the tribunal with the grounds for the detention within 7 days
 of the detainees request for review, which shall be held "as soon as reasonably prac-
 ticable" following receipt of the grounds. There have been no reports that the au-
 thorities abused this procedure.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides the right to a fair pub-
 lic trial for persons charged with criminal offenses. It also provides for presumption
 of innocence, reasonable bail, fair and public hearing by an independent and impar-
 tial tribunal, and an interpreter for non-English speakers. The authorities generally
 respected these rights in practice. Appeals may be made to the national court of ap-
 peals and then to the Privy Council in London. All criminal defendants have the
 right to an attorney. In practice, the courts appoint an attorney for those persons
 charged with indictable offenses (serious crimes) if they do not retain one on their
 own behalf. The law requires a person accused of murder to have an attorney. An
 indigent person may refuse to accept an assigned attorney for cause and obtain a
 replacement. In spite of these provisions, however, there were several allegations by
 prisoners charged with narcotics trafficking offenses that the authorities did not
 provide them with attorneys even after they specifically requested counsel.
 Despite the constitutional provisions outlined above, the administration of justice
 system has been seriously undermined by murder, intimidation, corruption, and ex-
 cessive delays. A remarkable number of witnesses and potential witnesses (mostly
 in narcotics-related cases) were killed, or disappeared, emigrated, or otherwise failed
 to cooperate with the prosecution. In most of these instances, the authorities
 dropped charges against the accused as a result of the absence of key witnesses. The
 murders highighted the Government's inabiity to protect prospective witnesses, un-
 dermining pubic onfidene in the justie system's abiity to provide a fair public
 trial to all defendants. The most significant test case is the proceeding against one
 of the reputed major narcotics figures in the countr, who has been charged with
 murder. Witness protection has  been successful through the preliminary inquiry
 stagee of the proceeding.
 Credible witnesses frequently allege bribery of police, magistrates, and judges in
 drug cases, but the authorities conducted no investigations. There were also charges
 that drug traffickers bribed witnesses not to testify. Trials often occur as long as
 6 to 10 years after the alleged criminal act, when evidence may be lost memories
 fade, and any deterrent effect is lost on the accused. Inordinate court delays, which
 
 
 stem partially from the system itself but also from defense attorneys' and prosecu-
 tors' use of repeated adjournments, have undermined public confidence in the judi-
 cial system's ability to provide a fair trial.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities generally respected in practice the constitutional provisions for the rights
 to security of the person, enjoyment of property, and respect for private and family
 life. Police must obtain search warrants to enter private property. There were occa-
 sional reports of search warrants or drug raids executed on the wrong houses, but
 persons injured in this manner have redress through a civil action for damages.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution recognizes these freedoms and
 an independent judiciary, a democratic and pluralistic political system, and inde-
 pendent and privately owned media protect these rights in practice.
 The two major daily newspapers sometimes criticize the Government in their edi-
 torials; the widely read tabloids are extremely critical of the Government. Licensing
 agreements require the three television stations to broadcast a certain amount of
 informational programming produced and provided by the Government. The opposi-
 tion has, over the years, accused the government-owned station of favoring the rul-
 in party. There are seven radio stations, one of which is government owned.
 The Government may prohibit the import or circulation of publications under the
 Sedition Act, but the authorities have rarely invoked it in recent years. A board of
 film censors is authorized to ban films it considers to be against public order and
 decency or contrary to the public interest. This includes films which it believes may
 be controversial in matters of religion, seditious propaganda, or race.
 The law protects academic freedom, and the authorities respect it.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution recognizes
 the rights of freedom of association and assembly, and the Government respects
 them in practice. Registration or other governmental permission to form private as-
 sociations is not required. The police routinely grant the required advance permits
 for street marches, demonstrations, or other public outdoor meetings. Political activ-
 ity by trade associations or professional bodies is not restricted, and these organiza-
 tions affiliate freely with recognized international bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience and
 religious belief, and the authorities respect these rights in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution recognizes freedom of movement as a fundamental
 human right, and the authorities respect it in practice. Residents are free to emi-
 grate, return, and travel within or outside the country, as well as to change resi-
 dence and workplace. Although Trinidad and Tobago is not a party to any U.N. con-
 vention or protocol on refugees, there were no reports of forced expulsion of those
 having a valid claim to refugee status. There is no provision for persons to claim
 or be classified as refugees or asylum seekers; any such cases are handled on a case-
 by-case basis by the Ministry of National Security's Immigration Division.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens choose their government by secret ballot in free and fair multiparty elec-
 tions held at intervals not to exceed 5 years. Elections for the 12-member Tobago
 House of Assembly are held every 4 years. The Constitution extends the right to
 vote to citizens as well as to legal residents with citizenship in other Commonwealth
 countries, who are at least 18 years of age.
 Prime Minister Patrick Manning's People's National Movement (PNM) holds the
 majority of seats in the 36-member lower house of Parliament. The President ap-
 points a 31-member Senate, 16 on the advice of the Prime Minister, 6 on the advice
 of the leader of the opposition, and 9 at the President's discretion. The ruling PNM
 is primarily but not exclusively Afro-Trinidadian; the opposition United National
 Congress party is primarily but not exclusively Indo-Triidadian. The fundamental-
 ist Muslim "Jamaat al Muslimeen", which attempted a coup in 1990, organized a
 New Vision political party and contested a local election in 1994.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women or minorities from participating in
 government or the political parties, and women hold many positions in the Govern-
 ment and political party leadership. There are 14 female Members of Parliament,
 4 of whom are ministers, and the head of a newly formed opposition party is a fe-
 male Member of Parliament.
 
 
 513
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several nongovernmental human rights groups operate freely without government
 restriction or interference. A law established the office of the Ombudsman, which
 receives complaints relating to government administrative issues and investigates
 complaints of human rights abuse; it can make recommendations but does not have
 authority to force any government offices to take action.
 Regional and localhuman rights groups focused on a Privy Council ruling on a
 Jamaican case in 1993, which commuted death sentences for 56 inmates who had
 been on death row for 5 years or more in Trinidad. The Trinidad authorities hanged
 Glen Ashby, a condemned murderer, in July less than 1 week before the 5-year cut-
 off date. Based on the Jamaican case, Ashby's attorneys had filed additional appeals
 to the Privy Council challenging the State's intention to carry out the execution as
 unconstitutional. Prison officials hanged Ashby only minutes before the Privy Coun-
 cil's decision to stay the execution reached Trinidad from London.
 Human rights monitors alleged that Ashby's hanging was illegal because all a
 peal rights had not been exhausted. Legal and human rights groups held a "pubic
 commission of inquiry" in Barbados 1 month after the hanging, but Trinidad offi-
 cials refused to participate on the grounds that such a commission had no authority
 in a domestic legal matter. As a result of the Ashby case, the Prime Minister's blue
 ribbon anticrime committee recommended that appeals of death sentences be lim-
 ited to the national court of appeals, eliminating the Privy Council as the court of
 final decision on such motions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Government respects in practice the constitutional provisions of fundamental
 human rights and freedoms to all without discrimination based on race, origin,
 color, religion or sex.
 Women.-Many women hold positions in business, the professions, and govern-
 ment, but men tend to hold the most senior positions. There is no law or regulation
 requiring equal pay for equal work.
 Physical abuse of women continued to be an extensive problem. Domestic violence
 resulted in the deaths of 15 women, in some cases despite the existence of a protec-
 tion order. There are several shelters for battered women, and a rape crisis center
 offers counseling for rape victims and perpetrators on a voluntary basis. In 1994,
 68 rape victims and 48 battered wives (new cases) came in voluntarily for counsel-
 ing. Law enforcement officials and the courts are generally not sensitive to famil y
 violence problems. There were repeated reports of officers refusing to take women s
 complaints of domestic violence. More than 300 women filed for protection orders
 under the Domestic Violence Act, and some courts decided to stop hearing protection
 order cases because they were too time-consuming.
 The Division of Women's Affairs in the Ministry of Community Development and
 Culture is charged with protecting women's rights in all aspects of government and
 legislation. The Division reeived funding for four positions in 1994 and established
 an agenda with the following priorities: access to credit, employment, domestic vio-
 lence, and sexual harassment in the workplace.
 Children.-The Government's ability to protect children's welfare is limited by a
 lack of funding and expanding social needs. The public school system seriously fails
 to meet the needs of the school age population, due to overcrowding, substandard
 physical facilities, and classroom violence from gangs. There is no pattern of social
 abuse directed against children. The Domestic Violence Act provides protection for
 children abused at home. Abused children are usually placed with relatives if they
 are removed from the home; if there is no relative who can take them, there are
 two Government institutions and several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's)
 which take children.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Various ethnic and religious groups live to-
 gether peacefully, generally respecting each other's beliefs and practices. However,
 racial tensions continue between Afro-Trinidadians and Indo-Trinidadians, with
 each group corprising over 40 percent of the population. The private sector is domi-
 nate byndo-Trinidadian and people of European and Middle Eastern descent.
 Indo-Trinidadians also predominate in agriculture. Afro-Trinidadians find employ-
 ment in disproportionate numbers in the civil service, police, and military. Some
 Indo-Trinidadians assert that they are excluded from equal representation in the
 civil service due to racial discrimination. Since Indo-Trinidadians constitute the ma-
 jority in rural areas and Afro-Trinidadians are the majority in urban areas, competi-
 tion between town and country for public goods and services often takes on racial
 overtones.
 
 
 A very small group in the population identifies itself as descendants of the origi-
 nal native American population of the island. They maintain social ties with each
 other and other aboriginal groups.
 Religious Minorities.--Some groups charged the authorities with religious dis-
 crimination over the question of the extent to which female students should be al-
 lowed to alter the standard school uniforms of the partially state-funded, denomina-
 tional schools by wearing the Muslim bijab. In prior years, denominational school
 boards had accommodated the question of the hijab by allowing students to wear
 a head covering in addition to the regulation uniform. Negotiations between denomi-
 national school beards and representatives of Islamic groups were unsuccessful in
 working out a compromise solution for the 1994-95 school year. The Trinidad and
 Tobago courts will have to decide: What is a hijab, whether it is a bona fide religious
 requirement, and what accommodation in the school uniform, if any, will be re-
 quired. More fundamentally, public discussion of this issue led to calls for broad re-
 examination of the "concordat--the 1960 agreement by which denominational
 schools receive public funding for accepting students from public elementary
 schools-and of church-state relations in general. The Government stated that the
 concordat will not be reopened or revised for the time being.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no legislation which specifically enumerates or
 protects the rights of disabled persons, nor which mandates the provision of access
 to buildings or services. Nonaccessibility of transportation, buildings, and sidewalks
 is a major obstacle to the disabled; only two vans in the country are equipped with
 hydraulic lifts. The Government does provide some public assistance and partial
 funding to a variety of NGO's which, in turn, provide direct services to disabled
 members or clients.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all workers, including those
 in state-owned enterprises, may form or join unions of their own choosing without
 prior authorization. Union membership has been decreasing, with 26 unions still
 functioning, but many doing so with a fraction of their membership from former
 years. Most unions are independent of the Government or political party control, al-
 though the Sugar Workers' Union is historically allied with the current opposition
 party.
 The law prohibits antiunion activities before a union is legally registered, and the
 Ministry of Labor enforces this provision when it receives a complaint, or a union
 may bring a request for enforcement to the Industrial Court. All employees except
 those in "essential services" (basically government employees, including police) have
 the right to strike. There were no major strikes, but a number of work stoppages
 lasted several days. The Labor Relations Act prohibits retribution against strikers
 and provides for grievance procedures if any is alleged. A special section of the In-
 dustrial Court handles mandatory arbitration cases. Arbitration agreements are en-
 forceable and appealable only to the Industrial Court.
 Unions freely join federations and affiliate with international bodies. There are
 no restrictions on international travel or contacts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Act
 of 1972 establishes the right of workers to collective bargaining. The Ministry of
 Labor conciliation service maintains statistical information regarding the number of
 workers covered by collective bargaining agreements and the number of antiunion
 complaints fied. The Industrial Court may order employers found guilty of
 antiunion discrimination to reinstate the worker, pay compensation, or can impose
 other penalties including prison. When necessary, the conciliation service also deter-
 mines which unions should have senior status.
 There are several newly organized export processing zones (EPZ's) in Trinidad
 and Tobago. The same labor laws apply in the EPZs as in the country at large.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsoy Labor.-The law does not explicitly pro-
 hibit forced or compulsory labor, but there were no reports that it was practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum legal age for work-
 ers is 12 years. Children from 12 to 14 years of age may only work in family busi-
 nesses. Children under age 18 may legally work only during daylight, with the ex-
 ception of 16- to 18-year-olds, who may work nights in sugar factories. The Proba-
 tion Service in the Ministry of Social Development and Family Services is respon-
 -sible for enforcing child labor provisions, but its enforcement is lax. There is no or-
 ganized exploitation of child labor, but children can be seen vending and begging,
 and some are used by criminals as guards and couriers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-There is no national minimum wage; the Gov-
 ernment has set minimum wages for 53 job categories in 5 nonunionized occupa-
 tional groupings. The minimum pay ranges from $26 per week (TT$130.45) to $57
 
 
 per week (TT$285). These rates were supposed to be adjusted for cost-of-living in-
 creases at regular intervals, but Parliament has never considered any adjustment
 since passing the laws. The Ministry of Labor enforces the minimum wage regula-
 tions. A minimum wage income is not sufficient to support an individual, but most
 workers earn more than the minimum.
 The standard workweek is 40 hours. There are no restrictions on overtime work.
 Daily rest periods and paid annual leave form part of most employment agreements.
 For those sectors covered, the minimum wage laws provide holiday pay, 2 weeks'
 vacation, and 14 days' sick leave per year.
 The 1948 Factories and Ordinance bill sets requirements for health and safety
 standards in certain industries and provides for inspections to monitor and enforce
 compliance. The Industrial Relations Act of 1972 protects workers who file com-
 plaints with the Ministry of Labor regarding illegal or hazardous working conditions
 to the extent that, should it be determined upon inspection that conditions exist in
 the workplace which present hazards to life or limb, the worker is absolved in refus-
 ing to comply with an order which would have placed him or her in harm's way.
