 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 Trinidad and Tobago is a republic with a parliamentary form of
 government. Free and fair elections have been held at regular
 intervals since independence in 1962. Prior to December 1986,
 each election had been won by the People's National Movement
 (PNM). The election of the National Alliance for
 Reconstruction (NAR) Government on December 15, 1986 marked
 the first change of political power in 24 years of
 independence.
 The Trinidad and Tobago police force is, in general, a capable
 and professional force, but there are recurring press reports
 of abuse of authority and corruption and court cases against
 individual police officers. The legal system provides
 measures for legal redress for the complainant in such cases.
 Trinidad and Tobago's mixed economy is based primarily on
 petroleum production and refining, but the Government is
 seeking to diversify the economy into agriculture,
 manufacturing, and tourism. Many major industries are either
 wholly or partially owned by the Government.. There is a
 strong tradition of private ownership of property, however,
 and the Government is endeavoring to sell several state
 enterprises,.in whole or in part. The economy has suffered
 with the worldwide fall in oil prices,.but Trinidad and Tobago
 continues to have a high standard of living.-
 Political and civil rights are provided for by the
 Constitution and are generally respected in practice. In the
 event of a presidentially declared public emergency,
 legislation may be enacted for limited periods that derogates
 from constitutional rights and protection unless shown "not to
 be reasonably justifiable" for the purpose of dealing with the
 emergency. There were no significant changes in Trinidad and
 Tobago's good human rights record in 1988.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids such treatment, and any. evidence
 obtained by such means would be inadmissible in court.
 Torture is not practiced. There have been allegations in the
 press and charges in the courts that individual police
 officers have mistreated persons under arrest. The law
 permits victims of such treatment to sue for damages in civil
 court and to file criminal charges against the individual
 police officer involved. Such suits are occasionaly
 initiated. The courts often find in favor of the complainant,
 and police officers found guilty of misconduct are subject to
 disciplinary action. There is no evidence that police
 brutality is systematic or condoned by the Government.
 
 
 712
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 The law requires a public coroner's inquest in any case in
 which a person dies in police custody. There have been
 several instances of persons being shot by police officers,
 allegedly in the line of duty, which have raised questions as
 to whether the use of lethal force by the police was
 justified. Inquests were initiated, with heavy media and
 public scrutiny at the time. The inquests were completed in a
 timely fashion, but the results have not been officially
 released.
 Prison officers have publicly complained about poor prison
 conditions, and have expressed concerns that prisoner
 uprisings could occur if improvements were not forthcoming.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The law specifies that a suspect must be charged "as soon as
 possible* after arrest. In practice, police usually charge a
 suspect within 48 hours. The police can, however, obtain a
 court order to hold a person longer in order to gather more
 evidence. Arrests without warrant are permitted when a person
 is apprehended committing an offence or when reasonable
 suspicion exists that an offence has been or is about to be
 committed.
 The law does not allow preventive or incommunicado detention.
 Persons arrested have the right to a judicial determination of
 the legality of their detention. Family members may visit
 detainees. There continue to be recurring charges in the
 courts and press that the police have violated one or more of
 these procedures in individual cases, and the courts, which
 monitor police practices in these matters, often find for the
 complainant.
 The practice of exile is illegal and does not exist. With
 regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution specifies that accused persons receive a fair
 and public trial by an independent judiciary, from which
 appeals may be made to the Court of Appeals and eventually to
 the Privy Council in London. Under common law practice,
 defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence and the right to
 confront witnesses and present evidence. These rights are
 respected in practice.
 All accused persons have the right to an attorney, although
 not at public expense, and may be freed on bail pending trial
 unless they are charged with murder. The presiding magistrate
 may suspend bail after consultation with the prosecution and
 defense. Judicial officials have announced, however, that
 approximately 7,000 warrants for bail jumpers were issued for
 the period 1986-1987. The Government in 1988 proposed for
 public comment a new bail bill which would automatically deny
 bail to anyone accused of one or more of 11 specified
 offenses. After much media coverage which was generally
 critical of the bill's provisions, the Government announced
 that it would conduct an additional study of the draft bill.
 Despite continuing attention by government officials and the
 bar association on the large backlog of cases awaiting trial
 or appeal, there remain significant delays in bringing cases
 to trial and in processing appeals.
 There are no political prisoners in Trinidad and Tobago.
 
 
 713
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence.
 The Constitution prohibits such interference, a prohibition
 generally respected in practice. Warrants are required for
 searches.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of expression, and this
 right is protected in practice by the country's independent
 judiciary, a democratic and pluralistic political system, and
 independent and privately owned print media. Academic freedom
 is protected by law and exists in fact.
 Foreign exchange scarcities have reduced allocations to
 newspapers for the import of newsprint. One newspaper which
 is generally critical of the Government has charged that the
 Government is attempting to stifle press freedom through these
 newsprint import reductions.
 Trinidad and Tobago Television (TTT), which operates the bnly
 television station in the country, is government owned. Its
 coverage is generally unbiased, although disputes have arisen
 over its political broadcasting policy. The Government is
 allotted a specific amount of broadcast time for nonpolitical,
 informational programming. In recent years, the Government
 has received a few applications for the licensing of one or
 more privately owned television stations. No action has been
 taken on these applications to date.
 Of Trinidad and Tobago's two radio stations, one is government
 owned and the other privately owned. Both are currently
 operating without licenses while the Government develops a
 telecommunications policy under which all broadcasting media
 will operate. A draft telecommunications white paper has been
 circulated for public comment. Political opponents of the
 Government have argued that the presence of ruling party
 supporters on the executive boards of TTT and the
 government-owned radio station leads to political bias in
 broadcasting policy.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in
 practice. Permits are required in advance for street marches,
 demonstrations, or other public meetings, and these are
 normally granted, both to critics and supporters of the
 Government. Political opposition leaders have stated that
 they have been the subject of surveillance at public political
 meetings. The Government has not responded to these charges.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions; see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The right to practice one's religion is provided for by the
 Constitution and is respected in practice. There is no state
 religion and no religious test for public office. There are
 large groups of Christians, Hindus, and Muslims in the
 population, and these and other religious groups are allowed
 to maintain association with organizations and persons in
 
 
 714
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 other countries. Religious.groups are free to establish
 places of worship and to engage in religious training,
 education, and publishing. Missionaries are permitted to
 enter the country and proselytize. Although parliamentary
 approval must be obtained for the incorporation of religious
 organizations, this requirement has not been a hindrance to
 the right of religious freedom.
 A public furor arose over the proposed visit of a prominent
 American evangelist to Trinidad and Tobago in February 1988.
 Opponents of the visit, including prominent Christian and
 non-Christian religious leaders, objected to.the visit on the
 grounds that the evangelist would, in their opinion, damage
 the nation's religious harmony. Proponents, and some critics,
 argued that the visit should be permitted on the grounds of
 freedom of religion. The Government eventually agreed to
 permit the evangelist's crusade to enter the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 There are no arbitrary restrictions on travel either within or
 outside the country, nor on the changing of residence or
 workplace.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Trinidad and Tobago choose their government by
 secret ballot in free and fair elections held, as required by
 the Constitution, at intervals not to exceed 5 years.
 Elections for municipal and county officials are held every 3
 years and elections for the 12-member Tobago House of Assembly
 every 4 years. The Constitution allows citizens, as well as
 legal residents from Commonwealth countries, who are at least
 18 years of age to vote, and there are no restrictions on the
 participation of women in political activities. Women
 currently serve as members of the Cabinet, elected and
 appointed Members of Parliament, permanent secretaries in
 ministries, and members of local government councils.
 The country is governed by a bicameral Parliament: an elected
 36-member House of Representatives whose members represent
 single-member voting constituencies and a 31-member Senate
 whose members are appointed by the President, 16 on the advice
 of the governing party, 6 on the advice of the opposition, and
 9 at the President's discretion. The Prime Minister, leader
 of the majority party in the House of Representatives, is the
 head of government. The President, elected by Parliament, is
 the head of state.
 Parliamentary sessions are characterized by frank and robust
 debate on government policy. Opposition parties can and do
 vote against government bills. Opposition parties have
 contested every general election since party elections were
 begun in 1956, except in 1971 when the opposition chose not to
 participate. Several opposition parties combined in 1985 to
 form the National Alliance for Reconstruction (NAR) which, in
 December 15, 1986, elections, won 33 of 36 elected
 parliamentary seats. The People's National Movement (PNM),
 which now forms the opposition, had until then governed since
 1956. During 1988 the NAR expelled some of its prominent
 leaders, who in October announced their intention to form a
 third major party.
 
 
 715
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Trinidad and Tobago has received no requests for international
 human rights investigations. An Amnesty International
 representative responsible for the Caribbean region regularly
 visits the country on routine business, and the Government
 cooperates with these visits. Besides the judiciary, which
 acts on legal cases involving alleged human rights violations,
 the Government also has an ombudsman empowered to investigate
 complaints of violations of law or policy and to report the
 findings to Parliament. "Amnesty.International maintains a
 local branch in Trinidad and Tobago. There is also a Bureau
 of Human Rights, which was established by a local attorney and
 focuses on areas of interest and concern to him. Trinidad and
 Tobago is a party to the United Nations' international
 covenants on human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no evidence of systematic official discrimination
 based on race, sex, religion, language, or social status in
 Trinidad and Tobago. All persons are fully protected under
 provisions of the Constitution. Trinidad and Tobago comprises
 various ethnic and religious groups that live together
 peacefully and respect each other's beliefs and practices.
 Nevertheless, relations between Afro- and Indo-Trinidadians,
 who each comprise approximately 40 percent of the population,
 are complex and at times ambivalent. There is some evidence
 of a certain amount of hiring discrimination against
 Afro-Trinidadians by some segments of the private sector which
 is dominated by Caucasians and Indo-Trinidadians. At the same
 time, there appear to be employment imbalances unfavorable to
 Indo-Trinidadians in some segments of government services,
 particularly in the police and military.
 Women enjoy equality under the law. Many hold positions in
 the Government, civil service, political party leadership,
 business, and the professions, although not in proportion to
 their numbers in the population. Women's groups speak out
 publicly and are heard on all aspects of public life. Women
 make up approximately 34 percent of the paid labor force.
 There are no statistical data available concerning wage
 disparities between men and women.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is respected in law and practice.
 Approximately 19 percent of the work force is organized into
 45 labor unions. The unions are independent of government or
 political party control, and they effectively represent their
 members. The majority of the unions are grouped into two
 labor confederations, the larger of which is associated with
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, while
 the other is associated with the Prague-based World Federation
 of Trade Unions.
 If mediationor conciliation attempts are unsuccessful, and
 upon expiration of a conciliation period, workers are
 permitted to strike and employers are permitted to lockout
 workers. After a strike or lockout has gone on for 3 months,
 
 
 716
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 either of the parties involved can request the Minister of
 Labor to refer the question to the Industrial Court, part of
 the independent judiciary, for a binding decision. Strikes
 and lockouts are not permitted in essential public services,
 and the Minister of Labor may apply for an injunction to halt
 any labor action he finds contrary to the national interest.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The constitutional right of workers to organize and bargain
 collectively is well exercised. Union members are free to
 choose their own representatives, and unions are free to
 publicize their views and determine their own programs and
 policies. Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by law and
 trade union property, as other private property, is protected
 under law. The Ministry of Labor acts as an impartial
 conciliator in collective bargaining impasses.
 The Parliament in 1988 enacted legislation to regulate the
 establishment of free trade zones. It is contemplated that,
 while wages and terms of employment in the free trade zones
 may be less than the national average, internationally
 accepted workers' rights, including the right to organize and
 bargain collectively, will prevail in these zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced labor in Trinidad and Tobago. Although
 there is no domestic legislation on this matter, Trinidad and
 Tobago is a party to the relevant International Labor
 Organization convention.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Legislation prohibits the employment of children under the age
 of 12, although Children aged 12 to 14 can work in family
 businesses. These restrictions are generally respected in
 practice.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is no nationwide minimum wage rate. Most wages are
 covered under collective bargaining agreements and provide a
 decent living for workers and their families. Minimum wages
 and working conditions were set by the Minister of Labor for
 three occupations considered difficult to organize into
 unions: gas station attendants, shop clerks, and domestic
 servants. Although this government wage order expired in
 1984, these minimum wages remain generally honored. Shop
 clerks, for example, receive a minimum wage of $20 per week.
 Since this is not considered enough to live on, such workers
 usually have secondary sources of support, generally from
 their families. Working hours are determined through
 collective bargaining agreements or other employment
 agreements. They do not normally extend beyond a 40- to 48-
 hour workweek. Paid annual leave forms part of most
 employment agreements.
 Occupational health and safety is governed by the 1948
 Factories Ordinance Bill, which sets requirements for health
 and safety standards in certain industries and provides for
 inspections to monitor and enforce compliance. The Government
 does enforce compliance with health and safety regulations,
 although enforcement is sporadic due to a shortage of
 inspectors. Trade union representatives also monitor
 
 
 717
 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
 compliance. A new occupational safety bill has been prepared
 and sent to the legislative review committee of Parliament,
 but there has been no action on the bill since 1986.
 A severance and retrenchment law enacted in 1985 aims at
 providing improved severance benefits for laid-off workers.
 Controversial legislation to establish a severance benefit
 fund is under Cabinet consideration.
 
 
 718
