	TUNISIA
The State Department's 1994 report on Tunisia builds upon the commendable groundwork of its predecessor in stripping away the layers of hypocrisy that underlie Tunisia's professed commitment to improving human rights. In the words of Amnesty International: "Few governments have been more eager to use the language of human rights than Tunisia. It has ratified nearly every UN human rights instrument and has an ombudsman and human rights offices in several government ministries and departments."
Tunisia's glib assurances on human rights have always posed an interpretive challenge. The task for the careful observer is to separate the rhetoric from the more disquieting reality — that over the last three years, thousands of suspected political opponents have been charged, summarily tried and imprisoned simply for speaking out against the government, for proclaiming their religion or for affiliating with an unpopular cause.
During 1994, the Tunisian government carried the campaign against its political opponents to a new level. To a greater extent than ever before, the Tunisian government has targeted friends, family and clients of the politically disfavored; shut down outlets to the outside world by banning the more outspoken of the foreign press; and made it nearly impossible for citizens outside the ruling party to organize or assemble. More disturbing still, there are unmistakable signs that the government has raised the stakes for lawyers and human rights advocates who had otherwise dared to represent those charged with the "crimes" of free speech and assembly.
The report comprehensively summarizes the principal events marking this deterioration in Tunisia's human rights record. The most striking illustration of the worsening human rights climate in 1994 was the case of Moncef Marzouki, whose essential crime was to declare his intention to run for president in elections scheduled for March 1994. Dr. Marzouki announced his candidacy, as he later conceded, merely to show that the government would never live up to its promise of an "open
245
CRITIQUE 1994
election." He then wrote to President Ben Ali to ask that his candidacy be certified by the signatures of 30 deputies, as required by law. At the time, few Tunisian newspapers even dared to report anything beyond the fact that Marzouki had presented his candidacy.
There followed a bizarre series of events arising out of a much disputed "interview" with the Spanish newspaper Diario 16 on March 21, 1994, in which Marzouki was reported to have stated that "in this country, one is tortured for expressing ideas." He was also said to have described how, upon declaring his candidacy, he was denounced by the official press as an ally of the Islamists (although he had never expressed any allegiance to the Islamic movement), how he felt the possibility of a true pluralist democracy in Tunisia to be "a Utopia," and how his candidacy sought to promote the separation of the judiciary from the power of the state. Two days later, Marzouki was arrested for "the propagation of false news" that would "disturb the public order." He spent the next four months in jail.
The report also properly notes the government's increasingly restrictive control over the press. The domestic Tunisian press has never presented much of a problem to the government because, as the State Department comments, the authorized press engages in pervasive self-censorship. The 1993 amendments to the Press Code expanding the definition of "defamation" only exacerbate the fears of the indigenous press. As for the foreign press, the report confirms the widely held understanding that Tunisia's Ministry of the Interior censors all imported publications prior to release. In 1994 the government moved boldly to extend its control over the foreign press by shutting down the offices of the BBC, denying entry to a reporter for Le Monde and then prohibiting the importation of Le Monde and another French paper, Liberation. The Committee to Protect Journalists reported at least seven acts of censorship, expulsion or harassment by the Tunisian government against the foreign press in 1994. These open attacks against the international press signal Tunisia's growing indifference to how its conduct is perceived by the outside world.
The report also sketches out the third arena in which the Tunisian
246
_TUNISIA
government has moved to transform the political landscape — the recent manipulation of the Law on Associations to thwart the organization of opposition political groups. The leading example of this, which the report cites, is the government's calculated attack on the independence of the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH). However, the report continues to downplay the significance of what it describes as a "settlement" between LTDH and the Tunisian government after the Law on Associations had been amended in a way that effectively put the LTDH out of business. The February 1993 "settlement" has in fact led to the virtual co-optation of the LTDH by the government. As a watchdog over the government's human rights practices, the LTDH has been suspiciously silent since the settlement.
The new Law on Associations made two principal changes. First, it prohibited individuals from holding a leadership position in both a political party and a non-governmental organization. Second, it allowed all Tunisian citizens to petition a court to compel their acceptance in any organization to whose principles they subscribed. For the LTDH, the immediate effect of these two, provisions was to force a decision on whether to continue taking part in political activity. More directly, it also forced open LTDH membership to all Tunisians who might claim to support its principles. This, the LTDH feared, would result in government-sponsored and -controlled "members" seizing control of the organization's governance.
Rather than compromise, the LTDH voted itself out of existence on June 14,1992. A March 1993 ruling of an administrative court changed the status of the LTDH under the Law on Associations, thus allowing it, in theory, to resume activity. However, most observers thereafter discounted the LTDH as a genuine voice in opposition to the human rights abuses of the Ben Ali government. The State Department report neglects to focus on the practical effect of the transformation of the LTDH and its co-optation by a wave of new "members" aligned with the ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD). (By some estimates, between 50- and 60% of the LTDH membership are now RCD supporters.) The former leadership of
247
CRITIQUE 1994
the LTDH — activists such as Moncef Marzouki and Mansour Jaffa — no longer guide the organization.
The report has also overlooked one of the most disturbing developments affecting the bar and the judiciary in 1994. No discussion of the denial of fair public trial can be complete without exposing the government's increasingly malicious attacks on the defense bar and the independence of the judiciary. For example, in December 1994, in a move that further exposed the Tunisian government's absolute intolerance for any kind of criticism (both real and imagined), 22 judges who attended a training seminar organized in Tunis by the International Commission of Jurists/Center for the Independence of Judges and Lawyers (ICJ/CIJL) were pressured into withdrawing their names from a document setting out suggestions for judicial reform in Tunisia.
According to the ICJ/CIJL, each individual participant in the seminar, which took place from November 14-24,1994, was called by the Center for Juridical and Judicial Studies, a branch of the Ministry of Justice, and pressured to remove their names from the document. The participants were obliged to sign a letter to CIJL Director Mona Rishmawi, declaring the Summary of the Activities of the Court null and void. The letter accused Rishmawi of distorting the discussions and the conclusions of the participants and said that the document "reflects a deliberate intention to cause prejudice to Tunisian judicial authority."
These actions against the judiciary are mild in comparison to the plight of Nejib Hosni, a lawyer who was honored by the Lawyers Committee in 1992 for his record of human rights advocacy. Hosni is an outspoken advocate on behalf of Tunisians of every political stripe, whose only crime has been to speak in favor of human rights and against the government. In a shocking act of retribution by the Tunisian government, Hosni was jailed in June 1994 on what appeal ¿o be fabricated charges of fraud in connection with a long-ago concluded land sale. As of July 1995, Hosni remains in jail with no right to bail, limited access to his attorneys and no visits by friends and colleagues. The case, surprisingly, is not mentioned at all in the State Department report.
248
_TUNISIA
Hosni is a lawyer in private practice in the town of Kef in Western Tunisia, near the Algerian border. Since 1984, he has specialized in defending clients in political cases from all types of backgrounds, including leftists. Islamists, trade unionists and Arab nationalists. He has been active in defending supporters of the banned Islamist opposition An-Nahda, for the defense of whom a number of lawyers have been imprisoned. His work as a lawyer has always elicited acts of harassment by the government. For example, Hosni's passport was confiscated in April 1992 and was returned to him only under substantial outside pressure when he sought to attend the Lawyers Committee's annual Human Rights Awards Dinner in New York.
On June 15, 1994, Hosni was arrested and charged with falsifying a contract. He is now detained in prison in Kef. Given the timing of his arrest and the dubious nature of the charges against him, it is clear to most observers that Hosni has been arrested in retaliation for pursuing lawful human rights activities and professional duties. Moreover, it appears that the arrest may have been an attempt to punish him for his work with the Lawyers Committee and for the guidance and informational support he has provided to a number of international human rights advocacy groups.
Like Hosni, many other defense lawyers have been jailed for shorter or longer periods on a variety of questionable charges. These include Radhia Nasraoui, Mohammed Nouri, Bechir Essid (who served two years in prison) and Habib Ziadi. All defense attorneys are exposed to discipline under Article 46 of the law governing the operation of the legal profession. Under that provision, a lawyer who is deemed to be conducting himself improperly in the course of a proceeding can be charged and judged within the same proceeding. Lawyers have been stopped in the middle of pleading their case, and then summoned before magistrates or referred to a disciplinary committee, because of allegedly improper references to politics or for having claimed that their clients have been tortured. One lawyer known to the Lawyers Committee described her pleading in defense of a client charged with libeling the president. Police officers attending the hearing became so unhappy with the substance of her
249
CRITIQUE 1994
pleading that they stopped the proceedings — over the objection even of the presiding judge — and took the lawyer into detention. She was not released until four days later. Neither this case, nor any of the others mentioned above, is dealt with in the State Department report.
Finally, the report overlooks one other growing segment of the Tunisian populace singled out for persecution — the families and sympathizers of the political detainees or exiles. Amnesty International has reported that hundreds of people suspected of sympathizing with the Islamist or left-wing opposition were arrested in 1994. Hundreds more, many of them women, were detained merely because they were married or related to An-Nahda members. Their homes were searched at night without warrants and they were threatened with torture if they refused to provide information about the whereabouts of their relatives. Many women report having been threatened with rape or having been sexually abused in police stations and the Ministry of Interior. Radhia Nasraoui, an attorney and wife of the jailed leader of the Tunisian Communist Party, has reported similar acts of sexual harassment.
The government's overt campaign to dismantle the an-Nahda movement succeeded to a substantial degree through the mass military tribunals of 1992. The movement continues to exist but has borne a heavy toll. In the interval, the government has cast the net of persecution still wider in a campaign to intimidate and harass not just the Islamists, but political opponents of all stripes; not just the leaders of the opposition political parties, but the rank and file and their families, friends and business colleagues; and not the parties themselves, but also the institutions that once served to shelter and nurture respect for human rights — the bar and judiciary, the independent press and the informal associations through which citizens assembled and organized.
It is these kinds of subtle and not so subtle acts of harassment, directed at the lawyers, families and friends of the political opposition, that make the Tunisian government's persecution of its citizens so insidious. That trend is understated, if not entirely overlooked, by the 1994 State Department report.
250
