 TUNISIA
 The fundamental civil and political liberties of
 Tunisian citizens guaranteed by the Constitution
 are usually respected by the Government. The in-
 creasingly visible activity of the political opposi-
 tion to the ruling Destourian Socialist Party--in
 part the result of growing government tolerance--has
 begun to alter the domestic political situation in
 the waning years of the Bourguiba era. One focus of
 the opposition's public criticism has been the Govern-
 ment's record of observance of human rights.
 The central event in Tunisian political life during
 1978 was the outbreak of civil disorders accompanying
 a largely politically motivated general strike called
 by the National Trade Union Confederation (UGTT) on
 January 26. The strike quickly disintegrated into the
 worst civil disorder Tunisia has experienced since
 gaining independence from France 22 years ago. Be-
 cause the police were unable to control the violence,
 the Government had to resort to the rare measure of
 using the military to restore order. Property damage
 was extensive. At least fifty persons were killed and
 many others injured. Hundreds of people were arrested,
 including the UGTT General Secretary Habib Achour and
 most of the Union's top and middle level leadership.
 Most of the current questions on human rights observ-
 ance in Tunisia stem from these events.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Many of the defendants prosecuted in connection with
 the events of January 26 protested, in their open
 public trial, that they had been subjected to physical
 abuse and mistreatment by the police during the early
 
 (641)
 
 
 642
 stages of police confinement in order to extract con-
 fessions intended to support the accusations against
 them and other defendants. None of the torture charges
 has been proven. Several defendants asserted that they
 were not allowed to see an investigating magistrate
 until signs of mistreatment had disappeared and thus
 physical evidence was lacking.
 The Tunisian League for the Rights of Man has asso-
 ciated itself with several specific torture charges
 made in court and elsewhere, and it reportedly plans
 to file formal complaints against identified police
 agents and other responsible parties. Opposition po-
 litical forces in Tunisia have also taken up the tor-
 ture issue in their newspapers.
 There is no evidence that torture is widely prac-
 ticed or condoned by responsible Tunisian authorities.
 The Tunisian Government's failure to discuss the
 torture charges publicly has added to the difficulty
 of verifying them and weakened the force of Govern-
 ment denials. The Government's response has been
 limited to official press agency statements describing
 the charges as self-serving fabrications of its domes-
 tic and foreign adversaries.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Defendants in the UGTT trials have also publicly
 complained of various forms of cruel and degrading
 treatment while in confinement.
 Charges have included denial of sleep and proper
 medical attention, isolation and solitary confine-
 ment and poor prison conditions. There is evidence
 to suggest that one arrested trade unionist, Hussein
 Kouki, died as the result of medical inattention
 despite alleged requests to see a physician or to be
 transferred to facilities with suitable medical care.
 As a result of on-site prison investigations in late
 1977, the Tunisian League for the Rights of Man
 
 
 643
 acknowledged improvements but remained critical of
 detention conditions in general. As noted above,
 the League has also criticized the treatment given
 to persons arrested in connection with the January
 events. The Government through its news agency and
 in controlled publications strongly denied allega-
 tions of mistreatment, including any responsibility
 for Kouki's death. Despite the Government's efforts
 to improve its long-neglected penal system, prison
 facilities remain antiquated and crowded. Prison
 regulations appear to be fairly liberal. Family
 visits and food parcels are permitted on a regular
 basis.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Charges of arbitrary arrest or imprisonment have not
 been made against the Government, even by the regime's
 harshest critics. In the tense days following
 January 26, however, over a thousand suspected or real
 troublemakers were arrested and some violations of due
 process probably occurred. Many were released a few
 days afterward. Others were subjected to quick trials
 in local common courts on various charges of riotous or
 violent behavior. Some were acquitted while others re-
 ceived prison sentences varying from a few months to
 five years. Approximately 150 were held for later
 trials on more serious charges.
 This latter group included most of the UGTT's upper
 and middle-level leaders; most of the others in the
 group had direct union connections. All of these
 apparently were suspected of having been involved in
 the organization and execution of the general strike,
 which the Government viewed as the-cause of the accom-
 panying civil disorder. Formal investigations were
 quickly opened. Most of this group had been brought
 to trial by the end of the year. The Criminal Court
 of Sfax issued eight convictions for two years (three
 suspended sentences) and four acquittals. A mistrial
 was declared in Sousse involving 101 defendants, and
 the charges against 89 subsequently were dropped. The
 
 
 644
 
 State Security Court tried thirty persons (most of
 whom were senior union officials) and sentenced the
 two principal labor leaders to ten years imprison-
 ment. Fourteen others received terms ranging from
 six to eight years and fourteen were acquitted or
 given suspended sentences. Twelve others are impris-
 oned awaiting trial before the State Security Court.
 A third trial of twenty defendants was held in Tozeur.
 Eleven defendants were acquitted. The remaining nine
 were convicted and received prison sentences ranging
 from one month up to four years. In contrast to the
 other UGTT trials, the trial in Tozeur was closed to
 the public. Defense attorneys have argued that the
 evidence did not justify charges against their clients
 and they have protested the length of pre-trial deten-
 tion as well as lack of sufficient time to study the
 prosecutfon's lengthy brief and to consult with their
 clients.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 During 1978 all criminal and political trials in
 Tunisia were public, with the exception of the
 December trial in Tozeur. The right to counsel is
 respected and family of the accused as well as out-
 side observers are allowed to attend. Following the
 January 26 disturbances, however, many prison terms
 were handed out for riot connected offenses after
 only brief deliberation. Some defense attorneys ob-
 jected, claiming there was no time to appear or plead
 their clients' cases properly. Attorneys participat-
 ing in the trials, however, were able to defend their
 clients without hindrance from the bench. Notwith-
 standing demands for harsh sentences made by the prose-
 cution, the Courts were generally restrained in their
 verdicts and many of the accused were acquitted.
 e.  Invasion of the Home
 The provision of the Tunisian Constitution gua-
 ranteeing "privacy of the home and correspondence" is
 generally respected. Citizens have and exercise the
 right to deny authorities warrantless searches.
 
 
 645
 2. Governmental Policies-Relating to the Fulfillment.
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Over two-thirds of the Tunisian Government's budgets
 have traditionally been devoted to meeting the material,
 social and educational needs of the population. Educa-
 tion has been the major item in the Tunisian budget and
 defense expenditures one of the smallest. The Govern-
 ment is currently stressing infrastructure projects and
 occupational opportunities in the more depressed rural
 areas. Considerable attention is being given to low-
 cost housing, family planning and agricultural develop-
 ment. The World Bank's 1978 economic report was gener-
 ally complimentary to the Government's efforts to
 improve income distribution and to hold down prices of
 essential goods. Independent studies have also noted
 the steady increase in per capita income, and of
 consistent improvement in living standards, health
 care and educational opportunities.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Apart from the Government's handling of its confronta-
 tion with the UGTT, over the past year Tunisia has
 witnessed a significant liberalization in domestic
 policies affecting civil liberties.
 A new opposition grouping led by several ex-Ministers,
 the Movement of Social Democrats (MSD), is being
 being formed. This group has petitioned the Govern-
 ment for formal recognition as a legal political
 party. It has published its platform in its two weekly
 newspapers, Er-Rai and Democratie. The MSD accepts the
 Constitution and sees itself as the loyal opposition.
 Its criticisms of the Government's policies and prac-
 tices have been increasingly specific and direct.
 
 
 The Government has not approved the MSD request for
 party status, however, and it recently closed for
 three months one of the two MSD papers, apparently
 as a warning that unrestrained criticism would not
 be tolerated. These two papers (sister publications)
 published full accounts of the Sfax and Sousse trials
 including the numerous charges of torture and mis-
 treatment noted above.
 The Tunisian League for the Rights of Man became in-
 creasingly active last year, taking stands on human
 rights issues and criticizing various governmental
 practices. The League enjoys legally-recognized
 status, and the Government has taken no steps to limit
 its freedom of action. Reports are frequently issued
 and public meetings are held. The original Tunis
 chapter of the League recently organized branches in
 Sousse and Sfax, Tunisia's second and third largest
 cities, and plans to organize other chapters.
 The Constitution provides that the President of the
 Republic must be Muslim. Otherwise there is no evi-
 dence of religious or racial discrimination in Tuni-
 sia. The small Jewish population lives in general
 harmony with the Muslim majority and enjoys protec-
 tion of the law. Tunisia is progressive regarding
 the status of women and the National Union of Tuni-
 sian Women (UNFT) was recently awarded a United
 Nations Human Rights prize. Although the UGTT under
 its newly-elected leadership is openly supportive of
 the Government and its party, it remains formally
 independent of Government authority. Strikes still
 occur, although less frequently than in recent years.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom to travel is guaranteed by the Tunisian
 Constitution. While there are currency exchange con-
 trols and regulations on workers' emigration, Tunisian
 citizens enjoy generally unrestricted freedom of move-
 ment within the country and abroad. Nevertheless,
 
 
 647
 the Government at times has withdrawn passports from
 or denied them to persons considered to be dangerous
 to the regime.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Tunisia remains a single party state, although
 this may be changing, given the de facto emergence of
 the Social Democrats and other non-PSD groupings.
 Participation in the Government party, the PSD, is
 open to all. Internal dissent with certain limits is
 allowed and there have been no expulsions from the
 Party since the early 1970s. There is no evidence of
 government efforts to restrict participation in the
 MSD. In 1978, for the first time in two decades, an
 independent candidate ran against the PSD candidate
 for a vacant national assembly seat. Although the
 Tunisian Communist Party (PCT) was declared illegal
 in 1963, there is no pattern of repression directed
 against known PCT supporters living in Tunisia. Poli-
 tical activities of the PCT as well as other radical
 dissent groups remain proscribed, however. With the
 exception of certain convicted criminals, all Tuni-
 sians above the required age are free to vote and are
 encouraged to do so.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Amnesty International and the International Federa-
 tion for the Rights of Man in 1978 issued critical
 reports on the Tunisian Government's imprisonment of
 former labor leaders charged with inciting the January
 disturbances, and on the various allegations of torture
 made by the detainees. Several national human rights
 groups as well as about a dozen national and interna-
 tional labor organizations also have expressed varying
 degrees of concern over alleged human rights and labor
 freedom violations. Most of these concerns stem from
 Government actions taken in the wake of the events of
 January 1978.
 
 
 648
 When the Government has responded, it has generally
 taken the view either that the reports were biased
 or based on misinformation. Representatives of
 international labor and human rights organizations
 are often received by high government officials in-
 cluding the Prime Minister. Foreign observers
 attended the Sfax and Sousse trials as well as the
 Achour trial in Tunis. Amnesty International has
 been permitted contact with families of some of the
 defendants and representatives of various national
 and international labor organizations have met with
 several of the accused Tunisian trade unionists as
 well as their families.
 
 
