 TUNISIA
 In 1979 the Government of Tunisia quietly released large
 numbers of persons serving sentences on political and
 related charges. By the middle of the year an estimated 700
 persons who had been convicted on charges stemming from the
 general strike and riots of January 26, 1978, were out of
 prison, many on conditional release or benefitting from
 reduced sentences. And in August Habib Achour, the former
 UGTT Secretary General, and eight other political prisoners
 were given conditional presidential pardons. In an effort
 to clean the slate the Government also brought to trial the
 last of a number of other political offenders, some of whom
 had been held without trial for almost two years.
 These steps appear to have been not only a reaction to
 criticism from abroad but also part of a domestic effort to
 bring about a process of national reconciliation in the
 aftermath of the events of January 1978, when the Government
 reacted strongly to what it perceived as a threat to the
 system by calling up the military to restore order. These
 efforts have had some success. While Tunisia's political
 system is still dominated by the ruling Destourian Socialist
 Party, an informal opposition continues its guarded
 criticism of the Government and its institutions. Also, in
 the past year significant changes in the electoral code have
 been effected which should permit citizens to play a greater
 role in Tunisia's political process.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Allegations of police torture and maltreatment continue to
 be voiced in open court. Many accused persons have charged
 that they were beaten and tortured by police during
 interrogation. Hamadi Zallouz, one of a group of some 60
 persons charged with involvement in the publication of a
 clandestine newspaper sharply critical of the regime,
 reportedly died while under detention in late 1978 or early
 1979. Several of the accused claimed in open court that
 this was the result of police torture, but human rights
 activists in Tunisia cannot confirm this charge. The
 Government has not commented on this or other specific
 allegations of torture.
 The Tunisian League for the Rights of Man has protested the
 alleged torture and mistreatment of prisoners and has
 indicated its intention to file complaints against persons
 responsible. However, no such judicial complaints have
 actually been filed. It is understood that investigations
 were ordered by the Government, but if any disciplinary
 measures were taken against police or other officials they
 have not been made public. Virtually all of the charges of
 torture have occurred in connection with cases allegedly
 involving political acts against the state and its
 institutions. None of these charges has been formally
 proved -- or definitively rebutted. The Government itself
 has refused to discuss publicly the charges of torture,
 except to dismiss them as self-serving fabrications of its
 foreign and domestic enemies.
 
 (835)
 
 
 836
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Prisoners charged with political or politically-related
 crimes have also claimed in court that they suffered cruel
 and degrading treatment while under police detention. They
 alleged that they were denied sleep, food and drink for
 prolonged periods during interrogation by police. Some also
 charged that they were denied prompt and adequate medical
 care. Some of the criticism of the conditions under which
 the former trade union leader Habib Achour was being held
 was exaggerated. Reliable sources who visited him in prison
 at Bizerte found him reasonably well accommodated. On
 August 3, 1979, Habib Achour and eight other persons
 received Presidential pardons, conditional on good behaviour.
 Achour remains under house arrest at his residence in a
 Tunis suburb, however, and his access to persons other than
 his family is controlled.
 The conditions of detainment in Tunisian prisons are
 deficient. Facilities are antiquated and crowded. On the
 other hand, prison regulations are fairly liberal. Family
 visits and food parcels are permitted on a regular basis,
 except while the prisoner is in temporary detention awaiting
 trial. Based on its 1977 investigation of the penal system,
 the Tunisian League for the Rights of Man acknowledged some
 improvement, but remained generally critical. There have
 been no executions on political charges in Tunisia since the
 early sixties.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 As of September 1979 there were believed to be between 80
 and 100 political prisoners. These included members of the
 illegal Tunisian Peoples' Revolutionary Party, persons found
 to be involved in the publication of a clandestine anti-
 government newspaper, and some members of an alleged
 Marxist-Leninist group. The remainder, approximately
 thirty-five, are trade unionists, who were arrested in
 connection with the events of January 26, 1978. However,
 most of the approximately 700-800 who were charged and
 convicted by civil and criminal courts after the general
 strike of that year, had been quietly released by the
 middle of 1979. And in a case involving 101 trade unionists
 from Sousse, charges against 89 were subsequently dropped.
 Although it does not commonly use the term, the Government
 acknowledges that it holds political prisoners. Political
 offenders are not, however, invariably charged with
 political crimes. Even where the state perceives a
 political threat, the accused is often charged with less
 controversial crimes such as incitement to riot, possession
 of weapons, currency irregularities, or violations of the press
 code. When a crime is alleged, or when the accused has
 been caught in the act of committing an offense, the
 Tunisian penal code provides that he can be detained without
 trial for an unlimited investigative period. He may also be
 held indefinitely when detention is considered necessary to
 assure execution of an eventual sentence. In the case of
 minor offenses (punishable by imprisonment for less than one
 year) and where the offender has no previous record,
 preventive detention may not exceed five days. Provisional
 liberty is discretionary with the examining magistrate.
 There are no limits to the length of inquiry, to the
 bringing of charges, or to an eventual trial. Suspected
 offenders do not disappear nor are they held clandestinely.
 
 
 837
 Such practices would run counter to the Tunisian law and
 tradition. Police surveillance and informal house arrests
 are known to occur, however.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tunisian law prescribes that trials are to be conducted in
 public, and this guarantee is usually respected. In some
 trials involving sensitive political issues, however, public
 access is restricted. Allegedly this was the case in the
 December 1978-January 1979 trial of 20 trade unionists at
 Tozeur, and defense attorneys protested in the court that
 families, public and journalists had been excluded. In the
 July-August 1979 trial of 60 persons accused of involvement
 in the clandestine publication of a newspaper allegedly
 defamatory of the regime, defense attorneys also protested
 similar irregularities in procedure as well as the
 interrogation by the court of some of the accused in the
 absence of their fellow-accused. In these circumstances,
 the 20 defense attorneys refused to plead. In another trial
 of 44 persons allegedly connected with two clandestine
 political groups, the Tunisian Peoples' Revolutionary Party
 and the National Progressive Front for the Liberation of
 Tunisia, defense attorneys were critical of the length of
 pretrial detentions, of procedural irregularities and of the
 speed with which the trial was conducted.
 Immediately following the civil disorders of January 26,
 1978, the Government established a rural work camp program
 into which it drafted several hundred city youths for one
 year tours. The original participants in this Ministry of
 Interior program suffered multiple infringement of their
 human rights: impressment, transportation and forced
 labor -- without indictment or trial. According to human
 rights activists, however, this program over the course of
 the year has evolved into an operation similar to the 1930's
 American Civilian Conservation Corps, staffed mostly by
 volunteers from rural areas.
 The right to present a defense is generally respected,
 although the defense is sometimes limited in its freedom of
 action. A February 1979 Amnesty International report
 concluded that the conduct of the state security court at a
 trial in September-October 1978 of 30 trade unionist fell
 short of relevant constitutional requirements regarding the
 guarantees essential to presentation of a defense. In
 trials not involving charges of a political nature, the
 Tunisian judicial. system generally is considered to be
 relatively fair and efficient. The courts appoint attorneys
 in cases where the accused are otherwise not represented,
 and the Tunisian attorneys' association makes free counsel
 available to indigent persons in civil cases.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The constitutional guarantee of privacy of the home and
 correspondence is generally respected.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education:
 Tunisia is a middle income state, with a per capita GNP of
 over $900 per annum. Tunisia has a mixed economy of state
 and private enterprise. Its population is roughly 47 per
 cent urban, 53 percent rural. Approximately 43 percent of
 
 
 838
 the population is under age 14. A high percentage (about 32
 percent) of the Government's current expenditure is devoted
 to education. The literacy rate among Tunisians aged 15 and
 over is about 38 percent up from 15.5 percent in 1960, 24
 percent in 1970, but literacy rates are significantly lower
 for females and for the inhabitants of rural areas. The
 Government also devotes about 10.6 percent of its budget to
 health care. By way of contrast, in 1979 Tunisia devoted
 only 5.7 percent of current government expenditure to
 defense. In 1978 there were 450 persons per Government
 hospital bed. This situation is being improved. Free
 medical and hospital care is available to all citizens,
 though the quality of health care varies greatly depending
 on location. Poor hygiene and the relative scarcity of
 services in rural areas remain the country's most serious
 health problems, despite Government efforts.
 The Government of Tunisia identifies the country's main
 problems as unemployment and maldistribution of income.
 Unemployment is particularly severe among young Tunisians,
 many of whom have ingested unrealistic expectations along
 with education -- which is public and free through the
 university level. The Government has made an effort to
 improve and protect the purchasing power of the poorest
 urban Tunisians. One means used is price controls on
 essential foodstuffs -- a burden which is in part borne by
 the Tunisian agricultural sector. Another means used is
 direct Government" subsidies ($120 million in 1978) on items
 which figure prominently in consumer patterns at the lowest
 income levels. Wages and salaries as a percentage of
 national incoml have fallen steadily over the past eight
 years. Better employment opportunities, education and other
 services in urban areas are causing continuing migration to
 urban areas. One result is an acute urban shortage of
 adequate, affordable housing. Despite the Government's
 efforts, roughly 30 percent of the population of the
 country's capital is housed in makeshift communities in and
 around Tunis. Important improvements have been made in
 rural housing, however. Significant efforts have been made
 in making potable water available to Tunisia's non-urban
 population, and the situation is improving.
 Corruption cannot be said to be a significant hindrance in
 the fulfillment of vital human needs.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The freedoms of speech, press, religion and assembly are
 guaranteed by the Tunisian constitution and have been
 reaffirmed by Tunisia's adherence to the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights. In practice, however, there
 are certain limitations on these rights. Strong attacks on
 the President, senior members of the government, and against
 the structure of the Tunisian state are not permitted.
 This, however, does not prevent the opposition from voicing
 constant, if guarded, criticism of the Government's
 practices and attitudes.
 Apart from a provision that the President of the Republic
 must be of the Moslem faith, there are no official
 disabilities or limitations on the freedom of religion in
 Tunisia. A small and dwindling Jewish community lives in
 general harmony with the Moslem majority and has
 traditionally enjoyed the protection of the state.
 
 
 839
 Although freedom of association is guaranteed under the
 constitution, Tunisia remains a one-party state. An
 application in 1978 by the Social Democratic Movement, a
 moderate opposition group, for status as an officially
 recognized party was not approved. This denial was
 reaffirmed by the national congress of the ruling Destourian
 Socialist Party (PSD) in September 1979. Any public
 assembly which is not authorized by the Government is
 considered illegal. The Government maintains its position
 that Tunisia is not yet ready for a multiparty system, and
 that there is adequate room within the country's single
 political party for responsible dissent. Nevertheless, the
 opposition Social Democratic Movement regularly publishes
 two weekly papers which are sold openly.
 Several political groupings have been banned in Tunisia.
 These include the Tunisian communist party; the Popular
 Unity Movement, followers of the former Socialist Minister
 of National Economy, Ahmed Ben Salah; the Tunisian Peoples'
 Revolutionary Party (PRPT), a collection of Pan-Arabists and
 followers of Bourguiba's early rival, Ahmed Ben Yussef; and,
 finally, the Tunisian Baathist Movement.
 The Tunisian press code requires that Government
 authorization be obtained prior to the printing or
 distribution of any publication. Apart from the Social
 Democrats' two weeklies, no other domestic opposition
 publications exist. The press code also allows for the
 censorship and banning of foreign publications which are
 judged defamatory of the regime of which contain false or
 inflamatory information, and the Government uses this
 authority.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom to travel is guaranteed by the Tunisian
 constitution. Foreign travel is basically limited by
 currency controls. Restrictions are applied on the
 emigration of skilled workers because of perceived domestic
 economic needs, but these can usually be overcome. At times
 the Government denies passports or exit permits on political
 grounds to persons considered to be dangerous to the regime.
 Also for political reasons, the Tunisian Government
 discourages other Governments from inviting persons critical
 of the regime to make officially-sponsored trips aboard.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Participation in the political process in Tunisia is in
 effect limited to members of the Destourian Socialist Party
 (PSD), the country's only authorized political party. Among
 the disciplinary measures provided for in internal PSD
 regulations are removal from party office, and in extreme
 cases, expulsion from the party, which is tantamount to
 banishment from political life. Expulsion as a disciplinary
 measure was last used in the early seventies against the
 "liberal" faction within the party. These liberals were
 later to form the Social Democratic Movement which, outside
 the National Assembly, functions as a kind of informal
 opposition. The Social Democrats' two opposition weeklies
 are tolerated although their director was charged with six
 
 
 840
 violations of the press code during the year. The courts
 upheld three charges and imposed various fines totalling
 over $2000. Given the inseparability of party and state in
 Tunisia, practices within the party have an obvious bearing
 on the citizens' participation in the political process.
 The PSD has always been and continues to be tightly
 controlled by the President.
 With the usual exceptions for certain classes of convicted
 criminals and mental incompetents, all Tunisians of legal
 age have the right to vote and are encouraged to exercise
 it. Heretofore, however, the act of voting was of little
 siginificance for, the few independent candidates apart, the
 citizen had the choice of either submitting a blank or
 spoiled ballot or of voting for the list of PDS candidates
 which correspond to the number of seats to be filled.
 During the past year, however, in an effort to promote
 greater openness and public participation in the country's
 political system, the Government sponsored a change in the
 law pertaining to National Assembly elections. This
 amendment, which was adopted in July 1979, provides that
 each slate presented in an electoral district must contain
 twice the number of seats to be filled. Although the law
 implicitly reaffirms that the right to present a slate is
 not restricted to the PSD, opposition groups announced they
 would not participate because they would not be allowed to
 compete on an equal basis.
 Although Tunisian political life is still dominated by the
 PSD and the party leadership still determines who will be
 the PSD's candidates, the new law enhanced the citizen's
 role in the electoral process and introduced a heretofore
 unknown element of choice. It also left the door open for a
 "loyal opposition," when and if opposition forces decide to
 challenge the PSD in future elections. Since the elections,
 there have been two challenges of the results arising out of
 claims of voting irregularities.
 Legislation on women's rights, encouraged by President
 Bourguiba himself, provides women equal access to civil
 rights, education, and employment. The Government admits,
 however, that this ideal has not as yet been fully realized.
 For example, in 1975 Tunisian females over age 10 had a
 literacy rate of about 32.1 percent compared to 57.7 percent
 for males. Women are notably underrepresented both in
 Government and in non-Government organizations. In
 addition, women's property and inheritance rights, because
 of conservative opposition, remain abridged despite the
 Government's earnest efforts to overcome entrenched local
 and religious customs.
 Trade union freedom and collective bargaining became a
 reality in Tunisia between 1973 and 1978, a period during
 which there was frequent exercise of the right to strike.
 This period ended with the general strike of January 26,
 1978. Since then, trade unionism in Tunisia has become
 inactive.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 In early 1979, both Amnesty International and the
 International Federation for the Rights of Man issued
 critical reports on the Tunisian Government's imprisonment
 
 
 841
 of labor leaders charged with inciting the January 1978
 disturbances, and on the various allegations of torture made
 by the detainees. Several foreign human rights groups as
 well as about a dozen foreign and international labor
 organizations also expressed varying degrees of concern over
 alleged human rights and labor freedom violations. Most of
 these concerns stemmed from Government actions taken in the
 wake of the events of January 1978. Subsequently, the
 release from prison on August 3, 1979, of Habib Achour,
 former Secretary General of the General Union of Tunisian
 Labor (UGTT), brought favorable comment from the International
 Labor Organization, the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions, Amnesty International and the Tunisian Human
 Rights League. All of the foregoing organizations commented
 upon the political and humanitarian considerations prompting
 the release, and expressed the hope that the release of the
 other trade unionists still in prison would soon follow.
 Aside from the humanitarian and domestic political
 considerations, Achour's release probably stemmed in part
 from the unfavorable publicity directed against Tunisia in
 the International Labor Organization and in other
 international labor fora.
 The Tunisian Human Rights League continues to operate
 without Government interference, and during the year the
 number of its chapters has grown from 4 to 8. League
 observers are generally admitted freely in court trials.
 Neither the Prime Minister-nor the Minister of Interior has
 agreed to receive representatives of the League, although
 League representatives have been received officially at
 lower levels.
 
 
 842
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TUNISIA
 1977     1978     1979
 -----      -------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL*..        23.9     38.7     31.8
 LOANS.............        13.1      18.5     14.8
 GRANTS.............        10.8      20.2     17.0
 A.AID ..........*.......       10.9      20.1     14.8
 LOANS..............         6.2       9.5      5.2
 GRANTS.............         4.7      10.6      9.6
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.) ..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE....         12.0     17.6     16.4
 LOANS............         6.9       9.0      9.6
 GRANTS ....  ..           5.1      8.6      6.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         6.9       9.0      9.6
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS...            6.9      9.0      9.6
 PAY. IN FOR. CURRo...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ......           5.1      8.6      6.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.5      2.4      208
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,....          4.6      6.2      4.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..          1.0      1.0      0.6
 LOANS ..........0.0                 0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,*......:::      1.0      1.0      0.6
 CONTR. TO IFI....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ...            1.0      1.0      0.6
 OTHER..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTALo.o         25.4     26.1     21.1
 LOANS..............         25.0     25.0     20.0
 GRANTS.............          0.4      1.1      1.1
 A.MAP GRANTS.........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS..           25.0     25.0     20.0
 C.INTL ILEDTRNG..            0.4      1.1      1.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS  ....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,..        49.3      64.8     52.9
 LOANS..............       38.1      43.5     34.8
 GRANTS.............         11.2     21.3     18.1
 -----------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS.........           0.0      0.0     14.5
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.             0.0      0.0     14.5
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----      --------------------------------- ---------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     194b-79
 -----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........    98.7     71.9     100.7    735.5
 IBRD              89.5     67.0     99.0     571.1
 IFC                0.0      1.2       0.0     22.0
 IDA                4.8      0.1       0.0     70.6
 IDB               ,0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               4.2       0.0      0.0     23.8
 UNOP               0.2      2.1       1.7     38.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      1.5       0.0      9.3
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0,0      0.0
 
 
