 TUNISIA
 The full range of internationally-recognized human rights
 is guaranteed under the Tunisian constitution and generally
 is respected by Tunisian authorities. Tunisia is working
 to maintain a democratic system in the face of external
 antagonisms and internal economic and political pressures.
 The Tunisian Government is increasingly aware of the
 importance of human rights as both a domestic and an
 international issue. Authorization for the organization
 of a Tunisian "League for the Rights of Man" in April 1977
 is an eximple of the growing sensitivity of the Government.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been periodic charges that torture is used in
 internal security operations. The government has vehemently
 denied these allegations and the U.S. Government has no
 evidence that would confirm them.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There have been allegations of mistreatment in Tunisian
 prisons, most recently during the trial of political
 opponents in the summer of 1977. Evidence to confirm
 these allegations is lacking.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 All persons presently imprisoned are accused of, or have
 been convicted of, committing some act proscribed by Tunisian
 law.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Tunisian judicial system, which is based on the French
 model, affords accused persons a fair and public trial with
 right to counsel. There have been no allegations that an
 accused has been denied a fair trial. The court's ruling
 that the defendants in the political trials of 1977 were
 not guilty of the principal charges reflects the inde-
 pendence of the judicial system.
 (416)
 
 
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The provision of the Tunisian constitution guaranteeing
 "privacy of the house and correspondence" to our know-
 ledge has been respected.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Tunisia's 1976 budget, typical of previous budgets, indi-
 cates the government's emphasis and concern for the needs
 of the poor. Education receives 22.4 percent of total
 government expenditures; defense, 6.97 percent; and public
 health, 8.7 percent. The World Bank's 1977 economic
 report on Tunisia states: "The government has taken
 measures to implement these priorities (mobilizing resources
 and improving the welfare of the Tunisian people) in an
 attempt to combine rapid economic growth with increasingly
 equitable distribution of its benefits." This. report
 further comments with respect to the new Five-Year Plan
 that "substantial economic gains could be distributed
 to the Tunisian people through a number of policy measures
 resulting from the government's concern with social balance."
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 Freedom of thought and religion are guaranteed in the consti-
 tution-and are respected. By law the President must be a
 Muslim. Tunisia's treatment of its Jewish citizens, a small
 but significant minority group, is exemplary in the Arab
 world. Legal equality of women is guaranteed by the.consti-,
 tution and strongly adhered to in practice. Tunisia has
 been among the leaders in the Arab world in its progressive
 stance- on the status of-women.
 The constitution also guarantees freedom of expression,
 opinion and assembly. The policies and views of the
 single political party dominate most forms of public
 expression, and the government discourages, through its
 control of paper supply, the preparation and circulation
 of orinted material not conforming to government policies.
 
 
 418
 Permission to hold public political meetings critical of
 the party or established institutions is usually denied.
 Tunisian political activists who confine themselves to
 the verbal expression of their views in private are not
 subject to harassment. The government granted its
 approval in October 1977 of a new Arabic newspaper which
 will be published by leaders of the Tunisian "Social
 Democratic" group.
 The Tunisian Workers Union (UGTT) is the sole labor
 confederation and is independent of the government and
 party. The UGTT has often publicly articulated workers'
 views on issues, even when at variance with the party and
 the government. Strikes often occur.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no legal or other restrictions on movement within
 the country, foreign travel or emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Tunisian political system is a one-party state. Nearly
 all major elements of Tunisian society are represented in
 the party. "Political orthodoxy" is broadly defined, and
 dissent, while constrained, is allowed within the confines
 of the official party. However, the party has expelled
 some members whose views conflicted sharply with those
 of the leadership.
 A. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Government Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Tunisian Government's recent proposal to invite members
 of the "League for the Rights of Man" to investigate prison
 conditions and its willingness to allow outside observers
 from Amnesty International at the trial of alleged anti-
 government activists illustrate Tunisia's encouraging
 policy in this regard.
 
 
