 TUNISIA
 The improvement of human rights in Tunisia accelerated
 markedly during 1980. On January 27, a terrorist raid
 on army and police posts in the southern city of Gafsa
 occurred. The country was shocked by the attack, which
 cost several dozen lives. Moreover, the country's
 political leadership was sobered by the knowledge that
 there were numerous young people similar to those in-
 volved in the raid: idle, dissatisfied and politically
 alienated.
 In February, Prime Minister Nouira was incapacitated
 by illness. President Bourguiba appointed Minister of
 National Education Mohamed Mzali to succeed him. The
 second half of 1980 was marked by a series of reforms
 and liberalizations.
 In terms of human rights, Tunisia at the end of 1980
 is a more open and responsive society than it was at
 the beginning of the year. All political prisoners
 have been released, and some political exiles are begin-
 ning to return. Efforts are being made to ensure
 probity in government and in the ruling Destourian
 Socialist Party. Trade union freedoms are being re-
 stored, and the government has told students that they
 can organize a new national representation. At the
 same time, the government is emphasizing   the creation
 of jobs and the modernization of agriculture, two areas
 which are critical to Tunisia's economic well-being
 and social stability.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture per se is not prohibited by Tunisian law, but
 Article V of the constitution guarantees the "integrity
 of the person, freedom of conscience and religious
 belief, and equal rights under the law." Despite these
 guarantees, in past years there were charges that tor-
 ture was used during interrogation. There have been
 no such allegations during 1980. During the early
 months of the new government, the Ministry of Interior
 reportedly circularized specific instructions to the.
 police that integrity of the person should be strictly
 respected. Shortly afterwards, some police officials,
 who had been accused by Tunisian Human Rights League
 officials of repeated violations of the person, were
 relieved of their responsibilities. In at least one
 case, two police officials charged with maltreatment of
 arrested persons were suspended from duty. Although
 cases of police abuse doubtless still occur, those in
 authority do not condone or acquiesce in such practices.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Summary executions have not occurred in Tunisia. Although
 Tunisian law provides for capital punishment for serious
 
 
 1108
 
 criminal offenses, such sentences by Tunisian courts are
 rare. In March, a special session of the state security
 court condemned fifteen persons involved in the January
 attack on army and police posts in Gafsa. Following a
 review court's denial of appeal, thirteen were executed
 by hanging (two are still at large). Criminal courts
 handed down three other death sentences in 1980, each one
 for premeditated murder.
 Tunisian law does not provide for physical punishment
 as a corrective measure. There were no allegations
 of such punishment in 1980. Living conditions in most
 Tunisian prisons are poor. The prison system continues
 to draw criticism from local legal and human rights
 bodies, and the government reportedly is seeking to
 make improvements.
 c. Disappearances
 There have been no charges of abductions, secret arrests
 or clandestine detention by security forces or other
 elements answerable to the government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Tunisian law provides that anyone suspected of a minor
 offense (punishable by imprisonment for less than one
 year), who has no previous criminal record, may be held
 in preventive detention for up to five days. Persons
 suspected of having committed a more serious offense
 can be detained without trial for an unlimited investi-
 gation period before being charged or released. There
 are no time limits within which an accused person must
 be brought to trial.
 Law and practice allows for arrest on suspicion alone,
 but formal warrants eventually must be issued if the
 suspect is detained. Despite such broad discretionary
 powers, there is no pattern of systematic abuse. The
 whereabouts of a suspect must be made known to counsel
 and family, and access to prisoners is seldom denied
 for more than a few days even in extreme cases.
 There are no longer any political prisoners in Tunisia.
 Although the government has never accepted the applica-
 bility of the term "political prisoner", all persons
 serving prison terms on politically-related charges
 were released quietly between early and mid-1980. In
 addition, some Tunisians who had been living in exile
 because of political differences with the government
 have been allowed to return. The Tunisian Human Rights
 League has confirmed this information.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The constitution provides that "each person will be
 considered innocent until his guilt is proved in court,
 where he is guaranteed the necessary conditions for
 self-defense." These prescriptions were generally re-
 spected in 1980, including during the politically
 charged trial of 60 persons accused of participating in
 the January attack on Gafsa. In that trial, which
 lasted 18 days and which involved 57 defense attorneys
 (52 state appointed), 20 persons were acquitted, 25
 
 
 1109
 persons received prison terms from six months to life,
 and 15 received death sentences. This case was tried
 by the state security court, which was called into
 special session by Presidential decree. Such extraordi-
 nary state security courts are seldom summoned. The
 last instance was in 1978 in connection with a general
 strike and widespread civil violence.
 In m6st cases, including those involving politically
 related charges, trials are conducted within the normal
 judicial system composed of courts of original juris-
 diction (local or regional) and two levels of appellate
 courts. Without exception, the courts appoint attorneys
 for an accused who, for whatever reason, does not have
 counsel. During 1980 there were unconfirmed allegations
 that defense attorneys were unduly restricted in their
 defense efforts. Avenues of appeal exist in all judi-
 cial proceedings, and such rights are exercised and
 respected. There were no reports of closed or secret
 trials during 1980. The right to public trial is re-
 spected, and charges are made known both to the accused
 and his counsel prior to trial.
 The new government is taking steps to ensure the consti-
 tutionally guaranteed independences of the judiciary.
 To this end, the Office of General Prosecutor of the
 Republic was abrogated in August, 1980; in previous
 years it had played an inordinately influential role in
 politically sensitive cases. The authority of the
 General Prosecutor now has been dispersed to the state
 attorneys in the various regional court districts. The
 intent, according to government statements, is to decen-
 tralize judicial authority and to preserve judicial
 independence.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Privacy of the home and correspondence is respected in
 Tunisia except as authorized by a formal warrant, issued
 through the Ministry of Justice. No allegations of
 governmental disrespect of these rights have been voiced
 during 1980, either by private citizens or by human
 rights advocates.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 During the last decade, Tunisia has experienced consis-
 tent GNP growth and general development. Living stand-
 ards for most Tunisians continued to improve during 1980.
 Tunisia has based its economic policies on a high level
 of saving and investment, on exploitation of its limited
 natural resources, on the expanding tourist industry,
 and on years of social and political stability. It also
 benefited from the fortuitous rise in international
 prices for oil and phosphates. The gross domestic product
 has more than doubled in the last ten years.
 Tunisia has a fair record of income distribution, but
 imbalances between the relatively modernized urban
 centers, particularly on the coast, and the traditional
 rural areas have widened. Income distribution ranges
 
 
 1110
 from approximately $4,000 a year for a median family in
 the capital to about $1,650 in rural areas. (Per capita
 income is estimated at $1,000.) Although expenditures
 in the more disadvantaged zones continue to expand, most
 government services remain relatively less available in
 the rural areas. Because of historical factors, the
 coastal population tends to be more economically and
 educationally advanced than are the inhabitants of cen-
 tral and southern Tunisia. The government is aware of
 these imbalances and is making efforts to extend scholar-
 ship aid to gifted children from these disadvantaged
 areas. Numerous development projects in central and
 southern Tunisia are now underway.
 Private ownership of property is guaranteed by the con-
 stitution and private property rights are respected.
 However, a pervasive system of government controls on
 prices, investments, and on economic activity in general,
 limits initiative and flexibility in the private sector.
 The system of price controls and subsidies of certain
 foodstuffs and basic necessities protects the purchas-
 ing power of Tunisia's poorest citizens. It also reduces
 the responsiveness of the economy--and of the agricul-
 tural sector in particular--in taking advantage of pro-
 duction possibilities.
 Inflation during 1980 was held in the range of ten
 percent, principally because of the heavy government
 subsidies for basic foodstuffs. The official unemploy-
 ment rate is 16 percent, but if underemployment is taken
 into account, the rate may be above 30 percent. The
 government has assigned priority to job creation in a
 rapidly growing labor force. The government this year
 expanded its social security system to include some
 workers, such as farmers, who had not been previously
 covered. Family allowances for less advantaged workers
 also have been implemented.
 Medical treatment and hospitalization are Iree for those
 unable to pay, but the quality of health care is not
 uniformly adequate. The government is establishing new
 medical school facilities and expects to double the
 number of physicians in the next five years. Numerous
 new regional hospital centers are under construction.
 The government is also expanding its rural maternal and
 childhood health program and is emphasizing nutrition
 and preventive health care, as well as treatment. The
 availability of safe drinking water is a problem in
 some sparsely settled rural areas. The government, as-
 sisted by foreign aid, is responding to this need
 through ongoing potable water projects.
 The government offers strong financial and political
 support to family planning services and health care for
 women. Efforts are also being made to expand the role
 of women in health delivery services: as administra-
 tors, nurses and physicians. Of medical students cur-
 rently enrolled, 25 percent are women.
 Universal literacy has been a major goal of the govern-
 ment since independence, and about one-third of the
 budget is spent on education. Education is free
 through the university level and is supposed to be com-
 pulsory through the eighth grade. This provision is
 
 
 1111
 not always respected, especially in rural areas where
 there are neither enough schools nor teachers. Females
 particularly are under-represented, especially those
 from poorer and more traditional families. The literacy
 rate has increased from less than 15 percent to more
 than 55 percent in the last twenty years. This rate
 of progress is slowing, and in percentage terms may
 now be in a reversal stage. Despite massive expendi-
 tures, the education system has not kept pace with the
 increased birth and survival rates of the past decades.
 Tunisian women are among the most emancipated in the
 Arab world. Provisions of the constitution, along with
 the personal status code of 1957, eliminated many forms
 of legal sex discrimination. Males are still the legal
 heads of all households; Muslim women are limited in
 their choices of marriage partners to Muslim men; female
 children inherit only one-half as much as their brothers;
 and widows' legal rights to their own children are
 subordinate to rights of the childrens' paternal uncles.
 and grandfathers.
 Although females are under-represented in rural schools,
 they constitute 41 percent of overall national primary
 school enrollment (418,000 in a total of 1,024,000). At
 independence in 1956, only 60,000 girls were enrolled
 in primary school, out of a total of 210,000. In
 secondary school, 36 percent are females (87,000 out of
 242,000). In trade and professional schools below uni-
 versity level, 31 percent are females (17,000 out of
 54,000), as are approximately 30 percent of the 20,000
 Tunisians attending university. Since 1956 the number
 of women in non-traditional jobs and professions in-
 creased from about 26,000 to more than 200,000. About
 one-third of Tunisia's 2,600 public school teachers are
 women. At independence there were virtually no women
 educators.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 These freedoms are guaranteed by the constitution and
 have been reaffirmed by Tunisia's ratification of the
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 These rights have been restricted in earlier years, but
 there has been a perceptible loosening of controls dur-
 ing 1980. In general, the Tunisian citizen enjoys free-
 dom of individual expression. Tunisians frequently
 criticize their government, but repeated, abusive and
 public attacks carry the risk of official intervention.
 Many newspapers and magazines are published in Tunisia.
 Most of them either openly support the government or
 avoid editorial and news coverage which might displease
 the authorities. These include both publications con-
 trolled directly by the government or by the ruling
 Destourian Socialist Party, as well as the most indepen-
 dent publications. Two independent dailies and two
 independent weeklies exist, as well as one weekly and
 
 
 1112
 one monthly published by a faction of the moderate
 social democratic opposition group. During 1980 the
 government licensed the publication of two additional
 newspapers by another social democratic faction. These
 papers have yet to appear because of financial and or-
 ganization problems.
 According to the Tunisian press law, no publications can
 be printed or sold in Tunisia without appropriate authori-
 zation from the government. The same press code also
 forbids direct attacks against the President, senior
 members of the government or the structure of the Tuni-
 sian state. During 1980 the opposition and independent
 press has continued to voice constant--if guarded--
 criticism. There are no clear lines as to what can or
 cannot be said, but publishers who "go too far" risk
 being closed down, either temporarily or permanently.
 During 1980 one independent newspaper was closed for
 three months, and two Islamic oriented magazines closed
 in 1979 were not permitted to resume publication. The
 government also denied publication permits to several
 radical opposition groups, including the disbanded
 Tunisian communist party. Most major western newspapers
 and periodicals are available in Tunisia, but from time
 to time an individual issue is withheld. Tunisian radio
 and TV is state owned. The government allows the relay
 transmission of Italian television without restriction
 or censorship. Foreign journalists occasionally are
 denied entry into Tunisia; the Le Monde/UPI correspon-
 dent was expelled for three months in early 1980.
 There have been no allegations of interference with
 academic inquiries in the natural or social sciences
 during 1980.
 Authorization for public meetings must be requested but,
 in practice, the government does not vigorously enforce
 these regulations. There has been no harassment or
 persecution of professional, political and other organi-
 zations during 1980.
 The Tunisian trade union movement, which was curtailed
 in 1978, now appears to be on the way to recovery. All
 trade unionists who were removed from office and sen-
 tenced to prison terms after the January 26, 1978 general
 strike have been released. A number of them, as well as
 representatives of the pro-government faction, are work-
 ing to organize an extraordinary national congress in
 January 1981 which will elect a new leadership. The
 government has given assurances that the Congress will
 function freely and democratically, and that it will
 recognize whatever leadership emerges.
 Strikes are common. Although most of them are tech-
 nically illegal, the government does not take any puni-
 tive actions except in instances involving personal
 violence. In October, the government took measures
 aimed at restoring the employment of trade unionists
 who had been removed for participation in the 1978
 general strike.
 The government has taken a similar conciliatory position
 regarding the National Student Unior. which has been
 moribund since the early 1970s. A National Student
 
 
 1113
 Congress is planned for the spring of 1981. Again, the
 government has pledged that it will recognize whatever
 leadership might be elected. As proof of its inten-
 tions, the government released from prison all students
 who had been convicted on politically related charges.
 Such students were free to return to their studies in
 the fall of 1980, along with other students who had been
 expelled for political activity. Government scholar-
 ships were also restored.
 The constitution states that Islam is the state religicn,
 but it also guarantees freedom of worship. This free-
 dom is respected, and there are active Jewish and
 Christian communities in Tunisia. Non-Muslims are not
 subject to economic or employment disadvantages, with
 the exception that employment opportunities with the
 government are almost entirely reserved for Muslims, who
 comprise over 99 percent of the population.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Although there are limits on the amount of foreign ex-
 change a Tunisian citizen normally can obtain for for-
 eign travel ($250.00 per year), the majority of Tunisians
 is free to travel abroad and to return without restric-
 tion. Tunisian women are not subject to any legal
 travel restriction because of their sex or marital status.
 Domestic travel for all Tunisian citizens is free and
 unrestricted. The government recently has instituted
 reforms which make passports easy and inexpensive to
 obtain. About six persons have had their passports with-
 drawn or denied, for political reasons. Several such
 persons have been obliged to take up residence outside
 of Tunis, and their freedom of movement remains limited.
 As of late 1980 there were 61 documented foreign refugees
 living in Tunisia, most of whom are of advanced age and
 permanently settled. Foreigners are not encouraged to
 choose refuge in Tunisia, but the Tunisian government
 cooperates closely with the United Nations High Commis-
 sion for Refugees (UNHCR), which has an office in Tunis and
 which contributes directly to the support of about 30
 refugees living in Tunisia. Tunisia also participates
 in the UNHCR's international efforts.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The constitution guarantees universal suffrage. Women
 are encouraged to vote, and an increasing number are
 active in political and government affairs. The Destour-
 ian Socialist Party (PSD) is the only recognized party
 in Tunisia, but opposition groups are permitted de facto
 if not de jure. The Tunisian communist party was dis-
 banded in 1963 and remains illegal. The government
 continues to deny authorization for the Social Democratic
 Movement, a moderate opposition group, to form an inde-
 pendent political party. Independent or opposition
 candidates are free to stand as individuals in municipal
 and national elections.
 The political system was liberalized during 1980. Changes
 in the government were made shortly after Prime Minister
 Mzali took office in April, and several ministries re-
 
 
 1114
 portedly were offered to Social Democratic activists.
 One presently is serving as Minister of Transport. As
 a gesture of reconciliation, the exclusion from the PSD
 of 10 persons who had formerly been active in the party
 was lifted. Most of these persons are now associated
 with the Social Democratic Movement, and senior govern-
 ment officials frequently meet with the leadership of
 this group. Also during 1980, a "clean up" operation
 within the PSD was initiated. The party leadership
 was changed, and one former deputy director of the PSD
 (a National Assembly member) was expelled from the
 party on charges of interfering in the judicial process.
 Apparently as an example to others, judicial actions
 on corruption charges were initiated against several
 persons then active in party and political affairs.
 Party matters and political affairs in general continue
 to be dominated by Habib Bourguiba, who is President
 for life of the Republic and of the party.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The government has not taken a public position concern-
 ing the activities of any international human rights
 organizations with respect to Tunisia. In past years,
 Amnesty International has criticized the human rights
 situation in Tunisia, and its representatives have
 visited the country to observe State Security trials.
 The Tunisian Human Rights League, which now has chapters
 in various Tunisian cities in addition to its national
 headquarters in Tunis, reportedly has access to senior
 government officials. According to sources within the
 League, its relationship with the government improved
 considerably during 1980. The League has transmitted
 several complaints about alleged human rights violations
 to government officials in recent months, and has ob-
 tained satisfaction in some instances. The League
 operates freely and with no apparent governmental con-
 straint.
 
 
 1115
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TUNISIA
 1978     1979     1980
 -----------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSST.-TOTAL...        38.7     32.2     29.0
 LOANS..............        18.5     14.8     17.3
 GRANTS.............        20.2     17.4     11.7
 A.AID .....       .....        20.1     14.8     10.9
 LOANS................       9.5      5.2      4.7
 GRANTS .............       10.6      9.6      6.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FOOD FOR PEACE.......        17.6     16.4     17.4
 LOANS..............         9.0      9.6     12.6
 GRANTS...............       8.6      6.8      4.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         9.0      9.6     12.6
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         9.0      9.6     12.6
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........         8.6      6.8      4.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         2.4      2.8      3.9
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         6.2      4.0      0.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.0      1.0      0.7
 LOANS...............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.0      1.0      0.7
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         1.0      1.0      0.7
 OTHER............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        26.1     21.1     15.6
 LOANS..............        25.0     20.0     15.0
 GRANTS.............         1.1      1.1      0.6
 A.NAP GRANTS..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FS....        25.0     20.0     15.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         1.1      1.1      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL ..        64.8     53.3     44.6
 LOANS..............        43.5     34.8     32.3
 GRANTS...,........        21.3     18.5     12.3
 OTHER US LOANS .....  ..         0.0     11.7     11.s
 * EX-IN BANK LOANS.......         0.0     11.7     11.5
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........     71.9    100.7    199.9    931.8
 IBRD              67.0     99.0    171.0    739.6
 IFC                1.2      0.0      0.0     21.8
 IDA                0.1      0.0      0.0     70.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0     23.4
 UNDP               2.1      1.7      4.9     43.5
 OTHER-UN           1.5      0.0      0.0      9.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0     24.0     24.0
 
 
 1116
