 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic dominated by a single political party. President Zine el-
 Abidine Ben Ali and his Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD) continue to control
 the Government, including the legislature. The President appoints the Prime Min-
 ister, the Cabinet, and 23 governors. Four opposition parties hold 19 of the 163
 seats in Parliament. The executive branch and the President strongly influence the
 judiciary.
 The police share responsibility for internal security with a paramilitary national
 guard. The police operate in the capital and a few other cities. In outlying areas,
 their policing duties are shared with, or ceded to, the national guard. Both forces
 are under the control of the Minister of Interior and the President. The security
 forces continued to be responsible for serious human rights abuses.
 Tunisia has made substantial progress towards establishing an export-oriented
 market economy based on manufactured exports, tourism, agriculture, and petro-
 
 
 1577
 leum. The per capita gross national product for 1997 was approximately $2,000
 while real per capita income grew by 6.9 percent. Sixty percent of citizens are in
 the middle class and enjoy a comfortable standard of living. Tunisia has a high level
 of literacy, low population growth rates, and wide distribution of health care.
 The Government's human rights performance improved in some important areas,
 but it continued to commit some serious abuses. The ability of citizens to change
 their government has yet to be demonstrated. Members of the security forces report-
 edly physically abused prisoners and detainees; there was only one publicly reported
 case, which the Government denied. Security forces also monitored the activities of
 government critics and at times harassed them, their relatives, and associates. Pris-
 on conditions reportedly ranged from Spartan to poor. The judiciary is subject to ex-
 ecutive branch control, and due process rights are not always observed. The Govern-
 ment infringed on citizens' privacy rights. The Government continued to impose sig-
 nificant restrictions on freedom of expression, and journalists practice self-censor-
 ship. The Government demonstrated a pattern of intolerance of public criticism, en-
 acting selectively enforced regulations that further restricted freedom of speech, the
 press, assembly, and'association. The Government continued to use control of adver-
 tising revenue as a means to discourage newspapers and magazines from publishing
 material that it deemed undesirable. The Government frequently seized editions of
 foreign newspapers containing articles it considered objectionable. Towards the end
 of the year, the Government tolerated a higher degree of criticism in parliamentary
 debates and in the press. The Government limits partially the religious freedom of
 members of the Baha'i faith. The Government returned passports to several promi-
 nent human rights activists and to the families of at least 10 Islamist activists who
 live abroad, but continued to restrict the freedom of movement of other government
 critics and their family members. The Government resumed regular contact with the
 Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH) in May, but ended it in August. It contin-
 ued to place serious obstacles in the way of the LTDH's effective operation, subject-
 ing League members and other human rights activists to reported harassment, in-
 terrogation, property loss or damage, loss of employment, and denial of passports.
 The Government continued to demonstrate its strong support for the rights of
 women and children, however, legal and societal discrimination against women con-
 tinued to exist in certain areas.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Human rights activists alleged that
 police used unwarranted lethal force against an elderly woman, Ghezala Hannachi,
 during a search of her home in September, when they pushed Hannachi to the
 ground, causing her to fall and incur fatal injuries. The Government maintained
 that Hannachi (who allegedly had a preexisting heart condition) suffered a heart at-
 tack upon learning that her son had been implicated in a narcotics investigation.
 The Government asserted that the police rushed Hannachi to the hospital and that
 she died en route.
 Human rights activists alleged that two deaths in custody occurred as a result
 of official negligence (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The-Penal Code prohibits the use of torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment; however, security services allegedly have used various
 methods of torture to coerce confessions from detainees. The forms of torture alleg-
 edly include electric shock, submersion of the head in water, beatings with hands,
 sticks, and police batons, and food and sleep deprivation.
 Human rights lawyers alleged that police and prison authorities reportedly mis-
 treated prisoners by subjecting them to physical abuse. According to human rights
 activists, Abdel Moumen Belanes, a member of the outlawed Tunisian Communist
 Workers Party, was beaten severely by prison guards on April 30 and May 12. Cred-
 ible sources alleged that, in response to BelaneS's vocal criticism of prison condi-
 tions and his refusal to salute prison guards, up to 12 prison guards stood upon his
 torso and arms and trod upon him with heavy boots. His attorneys also alleged that
 Belanes was held in solitary confinement and that he was not permitted to receive
 visitors for 1 month after the beating. Upon receiving complaints from the Tunisian
 Human Rights League about the treatment that Belanes had received, the Govern-
 ment launched an investigation of the case and transferred Belanes to another pris-
 on with ostensibly better conditions, but maintained that all allegations of abuse
 were unfounded. The Government inquired into 1996 allegations by a German citi-
 
 
 1578
 zen that he was beaten severely in custody and concluded that the allegations were
 unfounded.
 Human rights advocates maintain that charges of torture and mistreatment are
 difficult to substantiate because government authorities often deny medical exami-
 nations until evidence of abuse has disappeared. The Government maintained that
 it investigates all complaints of torture and mistreatment filed with the prosecutores
 office and noted that alleged victims sometimes publicly accused authorities of acts
 of abuse without taking the steps required to initiate an investigation. Absent a for-
 mal complaint, the Government may open an administrative investigation, but is
 unlikely to release the results to the lawyers of affected prisoners.
 According to defense attorneys and former prisoners, prison conditions ranged
 from Spartan to poor. One credible source alleged that 40 to 43 prisoners occupied
 one cell; another alleged that 120 prisoners were confined to a cell designed to hold
 50. Recently released prisoners claimed that they were provided with insufficient ac-
 cess to water and toilet facilities, creating serious sanitation problems. Human
 rights lawyers claimed that prison conditions for many of their clients did not meet
 minimum international standards.
 There were credible reports that conditions and prisons rules were more stringent
 for political prisoners than for the general prison population and that the author-
 ties limited the quantity and variety of food that families could bring to supplement
 prison fare. One credible report alleged the existence of special cell blocks and pris-
 ons for political prisoners, where they may be held in solitary confinement for
 months on end. Since 1996 National High Commissioner for Human Rights Rachid
 Driss, whose organization is government-funded, has made eight unannounced pris-
 on inspections. Although Driss declared that prison living conditions and prisoner
 hygiene were 'good and improving," details of his inspections have not been made
 Human rights activists alleged that official negligence resulted in two cases of
 death in custody. Ridha Khemiri died in Bellarijia prison on July25, after undertak-
 ing a hunger strike of more than 40 days. The LTDH alleged that the Government
 did not take appropriate measures to end Khemiri's hunger strike and therefore
 contributed to his death. The Government stated that prison authorities attempted
 to provide medical care and nourishment for Khemiri on several occasions but that
 he categorically refused all treatment. The Government maintained that prison au-
 thorities were in the process of transferring Khemiri to a hospital when he died of
 cardiac arrest brought on by his prolonged hunger strike.
 Ahmed Ouafi, a chronic asthmatic, died in custody on September 4, allegedly after
 suffering from increasingly serious asthma attacks over a period of 3 weeks. The
 Human Rights Leagte claimed that prison authorities' negligence in providing med-
 ical treatment for ouari hastened his death from natural causes. The Government
 stated that Quai was provided with extensive medical treatment throughout his in-
 carceration and that he died in a hospital.
 The Government does not permit international organizations or independent
 human rights organizations to inspect or monitor prison conditions. In September
 the Tunisian Human Rights League announced that the Government had agreed to
 its long-standing request to conduct prison inspections, however, none were con-
 ducted by year's end.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exine.-The law authorizes the police to make
 arrests without warrants in the cases of suspected felons or crimes in progress. The
 Government may hold a suspect incommunicado for 10 days following arrest. De-
 tainees have the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest before questioning
 and may request a medical examination. They do not have a right to legal represen-
 tation during prearraignment detention. Attorneys, human rights monitors, and
 former detainees maintain that the authorities illegally extend the o-day limit by
 falsifying the date of arrest.
 Detainees have a right to be represented by counsel during arraignment. The Gov-
 ernment provides leta represention  or de nts. At arraignment, the examining
 magistrate may deci~de to release the accused or to remand him to pretrial deten-
 tion. The law permits the release of accused persons on bail, which may be paid by
 a thirdparty. In cases involving crimes for which the sentence may exceed 5 years,
 or which involve national security, pretrial detention may last an initial period of
 6 months and may be extended by court order for two additional 4-month periods.
 During this period, the court conducts an investigation, hears arguments, and ac-
 cepts evidence and motions of both parties.
 A case proceeds from investigation to the Criminal Court of Appeals, which sets
 a trial date. There is no legal limit to the length of time the court may hold a case
 over for trial nor is there a legal imperative to a speedy hearing. Complaints of pro-
 
 
 1579
 longed detention awaiting trial were common, and President Ben Ali publicly en-
 couraged judges to make better use of release on bail and suspended sentences.
 Human rights activists alleged that the Government subjected the family mem-
 bers of Islamist activists to arbitrary arrest, reportedly utilizing charges of "associa-
 tion with criminal elements" to punish family members for crimes committed by in-
 dividuals (see Section 1.f). Rachida Ben Salem, the wife of an Islamist activist now
 living in Holland, was arrested on such charges while attempting to cross the Liby-
 an border on May 18. On November 19, she was sentenced to 2 years and 3 months
 in prison for association with a "clandestine organization" and leaving the country
 illegally (see Section 2.d.). The Government maintained that Ben Salem was as-
 sisted in her flight from the country by members of the illegal An-Nahda movement
 and that she therefore was correctly charged, prosecuted, and convicted.
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political detainees. The Constitu-
 tion prohibits exile, and the Government observes the prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tral.-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, the executive branch and the President strongly influences the
 judiciary. In practice, the judicial branch is part of the Ministry of Justice and the
 executive branch appoints, assigns, grants tenure to, and transfers judges. In addi-
 tion, the President is head of the Supreme Council of Judges. This situation renders
 judges susceptible to pressure in politically sensitive cases.
 The court system comprises the regular civil and criminal courts, including the
 courts of first instance, the courts of appeal, and the Court of Cassation, the nation's
 highest court, as well as the military tribunals within the Defense Ministry.
 The Code of Procedure is patterned after the French legal system. By law, the
 accused has the right to be present at trial, be represented by counsel, question wit-
 nesses, and appeal verdicts. However, in practice, judges do not always observe
 these rights. The law permits trial in absentia of fugitives from the law. Both the
 accused and the prosecutor may appeal decisions of the lower courts. Defendants
 may request a different judge, if they believe that a judge is not impartial. The
 Court of Cassation, which considers arguments on points of law, as opposed to the
 facts of a case, is the final arbiter.
 Trials in the regular courts of first instance and in the courts of appeals are open
 to the public. The presiding judge or panel of judges dominates a trial, and defense
 attorneys have little opportunity to participate substantively. Defense lawyers con-
 tend that the courts often fail to grant them adequate notice of trial dates or allow
 them time to prepare their cases. Some also reported that judges restricted access
 to evidence and court records, requiring in some cases, for example, that all attor-
 neys of record examine the court file on one appointed day in judges chambers
 without copying material documents. They also complained that the judges some-
 times refused to allow them to call witnesses on their clients' behalf or to question
 key government witnesses.
 Mohamed Moaada and Khemais Chammari, who were both paroled at the end of
 1996, continued to suffer restrictions to their freedom (see Section 2.a.).
 Military tribunals try cases involving military personnel and civilians accused of
 national security crimes. A military tribunal consists of a civilian judge from the Su-
 preme Court and four military judges. Defendants may appeal the tribunal's verdict
 to the Court of Cassation.
 There is no reliable information on the number of political prisoners. Human
 Rights Watch and Amnesty International report that there may be hundreds of po-
 litical prisoners, convicted and imprisoned for membership in the Islamist group An-
 Nahda and the Communist Workers Party, for disseminating information of these
 banned organizations, and for aiding relatives of convicted members.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person, the home, and for the pri-
 vacy of correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." The law re-
 quires that the police have warrants to conduct searches, but police sometimes ig-
 nore the requirement if authorities consider that state security is at stake or that
 a crime is in progress. Authorities can invoke state security interests to justify tele-
 phone surveillance. There were numerous reports of government interception of fac-
 simile and computer-transmitted communications. The law does not explicitly au-
 thorize these activities, although the Government stated that the Code of Criminal
 Procedure implicitly gives investigating magistrates such authority. Many political
 activists experience frequent and sometimes extended interruptions of residential
 and business telephone and facsimile services. One activist complained that his mail
 and telephone service has been interrupted since 1996.
 The security services monitor the activities of political critics and sometimes har-
 ass, follow, question, or otherwise intimidate their relatives and associates. Human
 rights activists alleged that the relatives of Islamist activists who are in jail or liv-
 
 
 1580
 ing abroad were subjected to police surveillance and mandatory visits to police sta-
 tions to report their contact with their relatives. One credible source also alleged
 that the Government attempted to pressure the wives of Islamist activists living
 abroad into divorcing their husbands. The Government maintained that the
 Islamists' relatives are members or associates of the outlawed An-Nahda movement
 and that they are correctly subjected to legitimate laws prohibiting membership or
 association in that organization.
 The security services often question citizens seen talking with foreign visitors or
 residents, particularly visiting international human rights monitors and journalists.
 Police presence is heavy through out the country. The Government regularly prohib-
 ited the distribution of some foreig publications (see Section 2.a.). Traffic officers
 routinely stop motorists for no apparent reason to examine their personal identifica-
 tion and vehicular documents.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, expression, and the press; however, in practice, the Government restricts
 freedom of speech and of the press.
 In February the Ministry of Education issued a circular requiring that organizers
 of all public meetings on university campuses submit in advance to the Ministry of
 Interior a list of participants and copies of all papers to be presented or discussed.
 In March the Ministry of Tourism issued a similar circular requiring that hotel
 managers submit the details of all planned events, including the names of all par-
 ticipants, to the Ministry of Interior prior to the event. The regulations appear to
 be selectively enforced. For example, a May conference of the Arab Lawyers Union
 was permitted to proceed without adhering to the regulations. Nonetheless, many
 citizens complained that the overall effect of the regulations was to further restrict
 free speech and discourage individuals from criticizing the Government (see Section
 2.b.).
 In April the Government placed former opposition party leader Mohamed Moaada
 under house arrest after he released a lengthy communique ticizing the Governs
 ment. In the communique, Moaada alleged that following eis release from prison on
 parole on December 31, 1996, he and fellow opposition leader Khemais Chammari
 were subjected to police surveillance of their homes and movements and prevented
 from returning to their jobs or obtaining their passports. Moaada claimed that be-
 ginning in March his telphone service was interrupted and that he was prohibited
 In receiving visitors. The Government ended Moaada's house arrest in July and
 returned his passport in September. Chammari received his passport in April and
 left the country.
 In April four members of the Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTT) were
 arrested and jailed on charges of possession and distribution of false material preju-
 dicial to the public order and of defamation of the secretary general of the UGht.
 The charges were filed after the four signed a petition criticizing the UGTT Sec-
 retary General for having too much personal power, mismanaging union resources,
 violating internal UGTT rules, exercising authority dictatorially, and transforming
 the UGT into an organization that on y served the interests of its leaders. Ai
 though all four UGTT members were released on bail in May, the case is still under
 consideration by te investigating judge. An arrest warrant was issued for a fifth
 UGTT member on the same charges in May, but because that individual is in hid-
 ing, he has not faced court proceedings on the charges.
 Human rights activists alleged that a secondary school teacher, Mohamed
 Hamzaoui, faced criminal charges in retaliation for critical statements he made of
 the Government. Hamzaoui was arrested in Sfax on August 17 on charges of posses-
 sion, distribution, and use of drugs. According to human rights activists, Hamzaoui
 first was brought into a police station for questioning on his antiovernment state-
 ments. Upon returning home, he was confronted with evidence ofdrags that police
 allegediy found in his home in his absence. Credible sources reported that Hamzaoui
 was neither a drug trafficker nor a drug user. On October 10, Hamzaoui was con-
 victed on one count of drug possession and sentenced to 1 year in prison and an
 approximately $910 (1,000 dinar) fine. The Government released Hamzaoui from
 prIson upon presidential order on October 16.
 In September prominent activist and Human Rights League Vice President
 Khemais Ksila was arrested on defamation charges after he circulated a commu-
 nique announcing his intention to begin a hunger strike to protest government re-
 prisals for his human rights activism (see Section 4). In the cmmuizque, Ksila also
 criticized the Government for restricting freedom of expression. Ksila was scheduled
 to be tried on January 21, 1998. The GovenMent maintained that Ksila was being
 prosecuted in full accordance with the law.
 
 
 1581
 
 Although several independent newspapers and magazines and one private cable
 television station exist, the Government relies upon direct and indirect methods to
 restrict _press freedom and encourage a high degree of self-censorship. Primary
 among these methods is "depot legal, the requirement that printers and publishers
 provide copies of all publications to the Chief Prosecutor, Ministry of Interior, and
 Ministry of Culture prior to distribution. Similarly, distributors must deposit copies
 of publications printed abroad with the Chief Prosecutor and various ministries
 prior to their public release. While publishers need not wait for an authorization,
 they must obtain a receipt of deposit before distribution. On occasion such receipts
 are reportedly withheld, sometimes indefinitely. Without a receipt, publications may
 not be distributed legally. The Press Code stipulates fines and confiscations for fail-
 ure to comply with these provisions. In addition, the Government provides official
 texts on major domestic and international events and reportedly has reprimanded
 publishers and editors for failing to publish these statements.
 The Government also relies upon indirect methods, such as newsprint subsidies,
 control of public advertising revenues, and threatened imposition of restrictions
 upon journalists to encourage self-censorship in the media. There were reports that
 the Government withheld advertising orders, a vital source of revenues, from publi-
 cations that published articles that the Government deemed offensive. The Govern-
 ment exerted further control over the media by threatening to impose restrictions
 on journalists, such as refusing permission to travel abroad. In addition, Tunisian
 journalists were frequently questioned by members of the security services on the
 nature of press conferences and other public functions hosted by foreigners that they
 attended. Foreign journalists often complain of being followed and allege that their
 hotel rooms and notes often are searched in their absence.
 The Government owns and operates the Tunisian Radio and Television Establish-
 ment (ERTT). The ERTTs coverage of government news is taken directly from the
 official news agency, TAP. There are several regional radio stations and one local
 cable television channel. Bilateral agreements with France and Italy permit
 Tunisians to receive the French television channel France 2 and the Italian Rai
 Uno. Recent estimates put the number of satellite dishes in country at 100,000.
 After blocking sales for several years, the Government instituted regulations in 1996
 to govern their sale and installation. Dishes smuggled from Algeria are also avail-
 able on the black market in many areas.
 In June the World Association of Newspapers (WAN) expelled the Tunisian News-
 paper Association for its failure to oppose repression of freedom of the press. In ex-
 pelling the Tunisian Newspaper Association, the WAN cited its 3-year investigation
 of press freedoms in Tunisi~a which revealed "numerous instances   of jailing and
 harassment of journalists, the banning of foreign publications and broadcasts, and
 the withdrawal of passports from Tunisian journalists."
 The Press Code contains broad provisions prohibiting subversion and defamation,
 neither of which is clearly defined. The Government routinely prevented distribution
 of editions of foreign newspapers and magazines that contained articles critical of
 Tunisia. Editions of Le Monde and Al Hayat, for example, were embargoed several
 times each month.
 Following a November speech in which the President called upon the press to ex-
 ercise greater freedom of expression, one independent newspaper and one independ-
 ent political review published articles that contained statements critical of the Gov-
 erniment, including those made by opposition members of the Chamber of Deputies,
 with no repercussions. The Government also placed advertising in several opposition
 party political reviews, thereby permitting them to resume publication for the first
 time since early 1996.
 Like journalists, university professors indicated that they sometimes practiced
 self-censorship by avoiding classroom criticism of the Government or statements
 supportive of the Islamist An-Nahda movement. Professors alleged that the Govern-
 ment utilized the threat of tax audits, control over university positions, and strict
 publishing rules to encourage self-censorship. The presence of police on campuses
 also discouraged dissent. Academics stated that while the February 17 Ministry of
 Education circular requiring advance notification and approval of al public con-
 ferences was only selectively enforced, it further chilled academic freedom and rein-
 forced the climate of fear that prevails on campuses.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government imposes some restrictions on this right.
 Groups wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must obtain a permit from
 the Ministry of Interior. The authorities routinely approve such permits, except in
 cases involving proscribed organizations. Government circulars requiring advance
 notification of meetings, with detailed information, imposed further restrictions on
 freedom of assembly (see Section 2.a.).
 
 
 1582
 Although the LTDH often had difficulty in obtaining permission to use public
 spaces, the Government permitted the League in May to hold a public celebration
 of its 20th anniversary. The Government also gave the LTDH assurances that it
 would be permitted to hold a public congress and elections without interference. The
 LTDH, other human rights organizations, and human rights activists continued to
 suffer harassment and restrictions (see Section 4).
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of association, the Government re-
 stricts this right by barring membership in political parties organized by religion,
 race, or region. On these grounds, the Government prosecutes members of the illegal
 Islamist movement An-Nahda. It also bans organizations that threaten disruption
 of the public order and prosecutes members of the Communist Workers Party.
 Human rights activists alleged that the Government extended its prosecution of
 Islamist activists to include family members who are not politically active (see Sec-
 tions 1.d., 1.f., and 2.d.). The Government reportedly used the charge of association
 with criminal elements to prosecute these family members for crimes allegedly com-
 mitted by their relatives.
 Former MDS opposition party leader Mohamed Moaada was detained and ques-
 tioned on December 19 and 20 on charges of association with an illegal organization
 after he reportedl met in Europe with leaders of the illegal Islamist movement An-
 Nahda. Moaada claimed that he was placed under house arrest, where he remained
 without telephone service and unable to receive visitors. The Government main-
 tained that Moaada was not arrested but was only questioned in connection with
 his activities abroad and was required to remain in the governorate of Tunis pend-
 ing the result of a judicial inquiry. Moaada is scheduled to appear before an inves-
 tigating judge on February 11, 1998 (see Section 2.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion, but the Government permits
 the practice of other religions. The Government controls mosques and pays the sala-
 ries of the prayer leaders. The 1988 Law on Mosques provides that only personnel
 appointed by the Government may lead activities in the mosques.
 The Government regards the Baha'i faith as a heretical sect of Islam and permits
 its adherents to practice their faith only in private. With 1,300 adherents, the Jew-
 ish community is the country's largest indigenous religious minority. The Govern-
 ment assures the Jewish community freedom of worship and pays the salary of the
 Grand Rabbi. The Christian community, estimated at about 2,000, is composed
 mainly of foreigners. It freely holds church services and operates a small number
 of schools.
 The Government views proselytizing as an act against the "public order." Authori-
 ties ask foreigners suspected of proselytizing to depart the country and do not per-
 mit them to return. There were no reported cases of official action against persons
 suspected of proselytizing.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights. People are free to change
 their place of residence or work at will. In practice, however, the Government re-
 stricts the freedom of movement and foreign travel of those critical of the adminis-
 tration.
 Human rights monitors complain that the Government arbitrarily withholds pass-
 ports from citizens. Although the Government returned passports to several promi-
 nent political and human rights activists such as Mohamed Moaada and permitted
 them to travel abroad, it continued to withhold the passports of many other citizens,
 such as human rights activist Moncef Marzouki. Human rights activists alleged that
 the Government withheld the passports of the family members of Islamist activists
 who live abroad. In November the Government issued passports to the families of
 at least 10-and possibly more-Islamist activists who live abroad. Although the
 Government declined to provide comment on the case, human rights activists re-
 ported that nearly all of the Islamists' families who had previously been denied
 passports received them in November.
 Rachida Ben Salem, the wife of an Islamist activist living in Holland, was ar-
 rested on May 18 while attempting to cross the Libyan border with a false passport.
 On November 19, she was sentenced to 2 years and 3 months in prison for associa-
 tion with a clandestine organization and leaving the country illegally. Although the
 Government and human rights activists agree that Ben Salem did possess a false
 passport, human rights activists alleged that the Government illegally withheld Ben
 alem's passport (she had not previously been convicted of any crime) and that the
 Government therefore punished Ben Salem for the alleged crimes of her husband
 (see Sections 1.d. and 1.f.). In addition, because Ben Salem was arrested before at-
 tempting to cross the Libyan border, her defense attorneys asserted that she was
 convicted wrongly of leaving the country without a passport. The Government main-
 
 
 1583
 tained that Ben Salem was correctly charged, prosecuted, and convicted, and that
 she was treated in a fair and humane manner.
 In June the Government -prevented human rights activist Radhia Nasraoui from
 leaving the country to testify at hearings before the European Parliament on Tuni-
 sia.
 Former opposition party leader Mohamed Moaada was put under house arrest in
 April following his release of a communique critical of the Government, which the
 Government claimed violated the terms of his parole. During that time, he was pre-
 vented from leaving his residence or receiving visitors. The Government ended
 Moaada's house arrest in July but resumed it on December 20, when he was de-
 tained briefly and questioned on charges of association with an illegal organization
 (see section 2.b).
 The Government has signed the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of
 Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and cooperates with the office of the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in assisting refugees. The Government
 acknowledged UNHCR determination of refugee status that was accorded to 207 in-
 dividuals during the year. Approximately 100 cases await determination by the
 UNHCR. The Government provides first asylum for refugees, based on UNHCR rec-
 ommendations. There is no pattern of abuse of refugees. Although a few refugees
 were deported during the year, none were forced to return to countries.where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides that the citizenry shall elect the President and mem-
 bers of the legislature for 5-year terms. However, the ability of citizens to change
 their government through democratic means has yet to be demonstrated. The ruling
 RCD party and its direct predecessor parties have controlled the political arena
 since Tunisia gained independence in 1956. The party dominates the Cabinet, the
 Chamber of Deputies, and regional and local governments. The President appoints
 the Cabinet and the 23 governors. The Government and the party are closely inte-
 grated; the President of the Republic is also the President of the party, and the par-
 ty's Secretary Goneral holds the rank of minister.
 President Ben Ali was reelected for a 5-year term in 1994. Under the Constitu-
 tion, he can stand for reelection in 1999 for the last time. Candidates for President
 must receive the endorsement of 30 sitting deputies to launch a campaign. The 163-
 seat Chamber of Deputies does not function as an effective counterweight to the ex-
 ecutive branch. The Electoral Code provides for a winner-take-all formula for 144
 of its seats. The ruling party won all seats in the 1994 parliamentary elections.
 Nineteen additional seats were reserved for unsuccessful candidates and divided
 among 4 opposition parties after the 1994 elections. Election is by secret ballot. All
 legal parties are free to present candidates. In October the Government held a spe-
 cial election to fill a seat vacated by an RCD deputy who resigned to take a govern-
 ment post. An RCD candidate won a freely contested election against a candidate
 from the Movement of Democratic Socialists (MDS) opposition party.
 In July the Chamber of Deputies approved legislation providing for the public fi-
 nancing of political parties. According to the legislation, each party represented in
 the Chamber of Deputies is to receive an annual public subsidy of approximately
 $54,000 (60,000 dinars), paid in two installments, plus an additional payment (to
 be determined by decree) which is proportional to its number of elected deputies.
 Although opposition parties welcomed the legislation as an important step toward
 greater political pluralism, several parties criticized the Government for restricting
 the subsidies to those parties already represented in Parliament. Most opposition
 parties urged the Government to extend the legislation to include all parties recog-
 nized by the Ministry of Interior.
 As part of the same reform package, the Government also amended the Constitu-
 tion to permit greater use of popular referendums to decide constitutional and legis-
 lative questions, although details concerning the implementation of the amendment
 have not been made public yet. The Government also adopted legislation lowering
 the minimum age for election to the Chamber of Deputies from 25 to 23 and extend-
 ing the right to stand as a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies to all Tunisian
 citizens, whether their citizenship was transmitted by a Tunisian mother or father.
 The most vocal and active of the opposition parties, the MDS, remained weakened
 following a split in its ranks in the wake of the conviction, imprisonment, and re-
 lease of party President Moaada and party vice president Chammari in 1996. The
 Government continued to recognize Ismail Boulahia as the new official MDS presi-
 dent. A separate MDS faction contended that it retained the support of a majority
 of the MDS ruling council and refused to recognize Boulahia as its leader.
 
 
 1584
 Women participate in politics, but they are underrepresented in senior govern-
 ment positions. welye o the 163 members of the Chamber of Deputies are women.
 In addtion, one women is the junior minister for Women's and Children's Affairs
 in the Pime Minister's office.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Tunisian Human Rights League is the most active independent advocacy or-
 ganization, with branches in many parts of the country. The organization receives
 and researches complaints and protests individual and systemic abuses. Although
 the Government made several important concessions to the League, it continued to
 place significant obstacles in the way of its effective operation. In May the Govern-
 ment permitted the LTDH to publicly mark its 20th anniversary and publish one
 communique. From May until August, the Government resumed regular contact
 with the League for the first time since the summer of 1996, establishing a joint
 committee that met on a regular basis to discuss human rights abuses. The Govern-
 ment provided assurances that the LTDH would be able to hold a public congress
 and elect new local and national officers without interference. The Government
 ended its meetings with the LTDH after it accused the organization of prompting
 members pf the International Human Rights Federation to give inaccurate testi-
 mony regarding Tunisia before the U.N. Human Rights Commission. In September
 the ea   e announced that the Government had agreed to its longstanding request
 to conduct prison inspections, although none were conducted before the end of the
 year (see also Section 1.c.).
 LTDH members and other human rights activists reported government harass-
 ment, interrogation, pr rty loss or damage, unauthorized home entry, and denial
 of passports. The LT)H continues to be unable to find local newspapers willing to
 publish its communiques that are critical of the Government. Some LTDH chapters
 reported that they have been unable to hold meetings in public spaces and that
 their members have suffered government reprisals-including temporary unemploy-
 ment-for their human rights activities.
 In April human rights activist Radhia Nasraoui alleged that security officials bur-
 glarized and ransacked her law office. The office's sole computer, three telephones,
 and an electric heater were stolen and Nasraoui's legal files were torn apart and
 strewn on the floor. The Government maintained that the burglary was conducted
 by two youths with previous criminal records and that they were convicted for the
 break-in on June 19 and August 14, respectively.
 In May LTDH vice President Slaheddine Jourchi was fired from his editorial posi-
 tion at the independent political review Realites. Although the Government main-
 tained that the review was an independent entity and not subject to government
 control, many activists alleged that ,Tourchi was fired as a result of his controversial
 position as LTDH vice president.
 In June the Government reportedly pressured members of the LTDH not to at-
 tend hearings that the European Parliament had scheduled in Strasburg on the
 human rights situation in Tunisia. Only Radhia Nasraoui attempted to leave the
 country to testify at the hearings; security officials prevented her from leaving the
 country to do so.
 Following the testimony of Khemais Chammari at the European Parliament hear-
 ings in June, the press conducted a campaign of criticism of Chammari through
 much of the summer, labeling him a traitor in articles and letters. Many human
 rights activists alleged that the articles and letters were prompted by the Govern-
 ment, a charge that the Government denied. In September one newspaper criticized
 Chammari and Saadoun Zmerli, another LTDH activist, for their testimony before
 the Un. Human Rights Commission in Geneva.
 Human rights activists Moncef Marzouki and Khemais Ksila claimed that they
 suffered government retaliation for their human rights activism. Marzouki alleged
 that the Government continued to withhold hiseps  ort and deny him permission
 to receive and treat te    t his medical practice.  ila claimed that the Govern-
 ment denied him permission to work and withheld his passport. Although the Gov-
 ernment di n  t me    on Marzouki's charges, it maintained that Ksila was de-
 nied his passport correctly due to his previous criminal conviction in a traffic acci-
 dent.
 The Arab Institute for Human Rights, headquartered in Tunis, was founded in
 1989 by  the testhe Arab Organization for Human Rights, and the Union of
 Arab Lawyers. It is an information, rather tha an  advocacy, organization.
 Amnesty International (Al) continued to maintain a Tunisian chapter. Its mem-
 bers complained that the Tunis office suffered repeated loss of telephone and fac-
 simile service. Hechi Jegham, the president of the chapter, was detained and
 
 
 1585
 questioned by police on March 8 and 9, reportedly about an upcoming international
 lawyers conference to which he had been invited. The Government maintained that
 Jegham and two other citizens who are not members of Al were detained in full
 accordance with the law for maintenance of public order, which permits the Govern-
 ment to question citizens about conferences that are scheduled to include foreign
 participants. The Government continued to deny entry to a London-based AI re-
 searcher responsible for Tunisian affairs, claiming that she has an anti-Tunisia bias.
 Although the Government permitted a few foreign human rights researchers to
 enter the country, all reported that the security services closely monitored their ac-
 tivities. In May the Government permitted representatives of international human
 rights organizations to address the Human Rights Committee of the Arab Lawyers
 Congress and to circulate freely among the Congress' participants (see Sections 2.a
 and 2.b.).
 Human rights offices in certain ministries and a governmental body, the Higher
 Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, address and sometimes resolve
 human rights complaints. The Committee's last publicly distributed report covered
 the 1993-1994 period.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens shall have equal rights and responsibil-
 ities and be equal under the law. The Government generally observes this in prac-
 tice. Legal or social discrimination is not prevalent.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics to
 measure its extent. The Tunisian Association of Democratic Women operates the
 country's only counseling center for women who are victims of domestic violence.
 The center, located in Tunis, assists approximately 20 women per month. Instances
 of rape or assault by someone unknown to the victim are rare. Battered women first
 seek help from family members. Police intervention is often ineffective because po-
 lice officers and the courts tend to regard domestic violence as a problem to be han-
 dled by the family. Nonetheless, there are stiff penalties for spouse abuse. Both the
 fine and imprisonment for battery or violence committed by a spouse or family mem-
 ber are double those for the same crimes committed by an individual not related
 to the victim.
 Women enjoy substantial rights and the Government has made serious efforts to
 advance those rights. A 1996 law, for example, strengthened women's right to prop-
 erty ownership by authorizing joint loan applications and encouraging discussion
 prior to marriage of the possibility of joint ownership of property acquired during
 the marriage. The Government also encouraged couples to include language concern-
 ing joint property in their marriage contracts, and liberalized certain family allow-
 ances to students and orphans. Nonetheless, women still face legal and societal dis-
 crimination in certain social and economic areas and in employment. In spite of the
 Government's efforts to change property ownership practices, most property ac-
 quired during marriage, including property acquired solely, is still held in the name
 of the husband. Inheritance laws, based on Shari'a (Islamic) law and tradition, dis-
 criminate against women.
 The junior Ministry for Women and the Family oversees programs concerning
 women s issues. It maintains effective links with women's professional associations
 and with the government-su pported Women's Union and Women's Research Center.
 Women in increasing numbers are entering the work force, employed particularly
 in the textile, manufacturing, health, and agricultural sectors. According to govern-
 ment statistics for 1995, women constituted 22 percent of the work force; excluding
 the agricultural sector, they accounted for 44 percent. Women represent 42.9 per-
 cent of workers in the industrial sector and 46.1 percent of workers in the health
 sector. There are an estimated 1,500 businesses headed by women. Women rep-
 resent one third of the civil service, employed primarily in the fields of health, edu-
 cation, and social affairs at the middle or lower levels. Women represent 60 percent
 of all judges in the capital and 25 percent of the nation's total jurists. Approximately
 43 percent of the university students enrolled in the 1996-97 academic year were
 women. On the other hand, while the rate of illiteracy has dropped markedly in
 both rural and urban areas, the rate of female illiteracy in all categories is at least
 double that of men. Among 10- to 14-year-old children, 5.5 percent of urban girls
 are illiterate, compared with 2.2 percent of urban boys; and 27 percent of rural girls,
 compared with less than 7 percent of rural boys.
 Several active nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) focus, in whole or in part,
 on women's advocacy, or research women's issues, and a cadre of attorneys rep-
 resent women in domestic cases. Media attention focuses on women's economic and
 
 
 1586
 academic accomplishments, and usually omits reference to culturally sensitive is-
 sues.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates a strong commitment to public edu-
 cation, which is compulsory until age 16. Primary school enrollment for the 1996-
 97 scholastic year was roughly the same as the preceding year, secondary school en-
 rollment showed an 8 percent increase. The Government reported that 98 percent
 of children attend school full-time. The Government offers a maternal and child
 health program, providing pre- and post-natal services. It sponsors an immunization
 program targetingpreschool-aged children, and reports that over 95 percent of chil-
 dren are vaccinated.
 In 1995 the Government promulgated laws to constitute a code for the protection
 of children. The code proscribes child abuse, abandonment, and sexual or economic
 exploitation. Penalties for convictions for abandonment and assault on minors are
 severe. There is a Ministry for Children and Youths and a presidential delegate to
 safeguard the rights and welfare of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination based on disability
 and mandates that at least 1 percent of the public and private sector jobs be re-
 served for the disabled.
 All public buildings constructed since 1991 must be accessible to physically dis-
 abled persons. Many cities, including the capital, have begun to install wheelchair
 access ramps on city sidewalks. There is a general trend toward making public
 transportation more accessible to disabled persons. The Government issues special
 cards to the disabled for benefits such as unrestricted parking, priority medical serv-
 ices,preferential seatingon ublic transportation, and consumer discounts.
 Indigenous People.-The Government estimates that a small Berber minority con-
 stitutes less than 3 percent of the population. Some older Berbers have retained
 their native language, but the younger generation has been assimilated into Tuni-
 sian culture through schooling and marriage. Berbers are free to participate in poli-
 tics and to express themselves culturally.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTT)
 is the country's only labor federation and claims about 15 percent of the work force
 as members, including civil servants and employees of state-owned enterprises.
 There is no legal prohibition against the establishment of other labor federations.
 A union may be dissolved only by court order.
 The UGTT and its member unions are legally independent of the Government and
 the ruling party but operate under regulations that restrict their freedom of action.
 The UGT*Is membership includes persons associated with all political tendencies,
 although Islamists have been removed from union offices. The current UGTT leader-
 ship follows a policy of cooperation with the Government and its economic reform
 program. There are credible reports that the UGTT receives substantial government
 subsidies to supplement modest union dues and funding from the National Social
 Security Account. In April authorities arrested four UGTT members who signed a
 petition that criticized the UGTT secretary general (see Section 2.a.).
 Unions, including those representing civil servants, have the right to strike, pro-
 vided they give 10 days' advance notice to the UGTT and it ap proves of the strike.
 This advance approval, however, is rarely sought in practice. In recent years, the
 majority of strikes have been illegal because the UG fT has not approved them in
 advance. However, the Government has not prosecuted workers for illegal strike ac-
 tivity. The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) has charac-
 terized the requirement for prior UGTT approval of strikes as a violation of worker
 rights. The law prohibits retribution against strikers, but some employers punish
 them nevertheless, forcing the strikers to pursue costly and time-consuming legal
 remedies to protect their rights.
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels in which labor and manage-
 ment are equally represented. Tripartite regional arbitration commissions settle in-
 dustrial disputes when conciliation fails.
 Unions are free to associate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and observed in practice. Wages and working
 conditions are set by triennial negotiations between the UGTT member unions and
 employers.
 Forty-seven collective bargaining agreements set standards for industries in the
 private sector and cover 80 percent of the total private sector work force. Each ac-
 cord is negotiated by representatives of unions and employers in the area it covered.
 The Government's role in these negotiations is minimal, consisting mainly of lend-
 
 
 1587
 ing its food offices if talks appear to be stalled. However, the Government must ap-
 prove, ut may not modify, the agreements. When approved, the agreements set
 standards for all employees, both union and nonunion, in the areas they cover.
 The UGTI also negotiates wages and work conditions of civil servants and em-
 ployees of state-owned enterprises.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. The UGTI, however, is
 concerned about antiunion activity among private sector employers, especially the
 firing of union activists and the use of temporary workers to avoid unionization. In
 certain industries, such as textiles and construction, temporary workers account for
 a large majority of the work force. The Labor Code protects temporary workers, but
 enforcement is more difficult than in the case of permanent workers. A committee
 chaired by an officer from the Labor Inspectorate of the Office of the Inspector Gen-
 eral of the Ministry of Social Affairs, and including a labor representative and an
 employers' association representative, approves all worker dismissals.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Tunisia abolished compulsory
 labor in 1989. The law now prohibits forced or compulsory labor by either adults
 or children and it is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded child labor, and the Government enforces this prohibi-
 tion effectively (see Section 6.c.). The minimum age for employment in manufactur-
 in is 16 years. The minimum age for light work in agriculture and some other non-
 in ustrial sectors is 13 years. The law also requires children to attend school until
 age 16. Workers between the ages of 14 and 18 must have 12 hours of rest a day,
 which include the hours between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Children between 14 and 16
 may work no more than 2 hours a day. The total time that they spend in school
 and work may not exceed 7 hours per day. Inspectors of the Ministry of Social Af-
 fairs examine the records of employees to verify that employers comply with the
 minimum age law. Nonetheless, young children often perform agricultural work in
 rural areas and work as vendors in urban areas, primarily during the summer vaca-
 tion from school.
 The UGTT has expressed concern that child labor continues to exist disguised as
 apprenticeship, particularly in the handicraft industry, and in the cases of young
 girls whose families place them as household domestics in order to collect their
 wages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages, which are set by a commission of represent-
 atives from the Ministries of Social Affairs, Planning, Finance, and National Econ-
 omy in consultation with the UGTT and the employers' association. The President
 approves the commission's recommendations. The minimum wage schedule was ad-
 justed in August and in November. After the second increase, the industrial mini-
 mum wage is $155 (170 dinars) per month for a 48-hour workweek and $136 (149
 dinars) per month for a 40-hour workweek. The agricultural minimum wage is $4.74
 (5.20 dinars) per day. When supplemented by transportation and family allowances,
 the minimum wage covers only essential costs for a worker and family.
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards. They inspect
 most firms about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of
 the economy. Moreover, more than 240,000 workers are employed in the informal
 sector, which falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has responsibility for enforcing health and safety
 standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations covering such
 hazardous occupations as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction. Working
 conditions and standards tend to be better in firms that are export-oriented than
 in those producing exclusively for the domestic market. Workers are free to remove
 themselves from dangerous situations without jeopardizing their employment, and
 they may take legal action against employers who retaliate against them for exercis-
 ing this right.
