TUNISIA
It might be said that Tunisia's human rights record in 1993 reflects an improvement over the previous years. But that judgment would only be justified by comparison to the extreme actions taken by the Tunisian government in 1992 to eliminate the Islamic opposition movement known as An-Nahda. To the extent that 1993 showed some small steps towards a controlled relaxation of political restrictions, the few gains made in the human rights arena — notably the reinstatement of the Tunisian League of Human Rights (LTDH) — must be assessed against the devastating record of mass arrests, incommunicado detentions and the torture of suspected An-Nahda members in 1990 and 1991, and the military tribunals of 1992 that convicted 265 of the An-Nahda leadership, thereby paralyzing the movement for many years to come.
Indeed, the reinstatement of the LTDH may be seen as a paradigm for what constitutes human rights progress in present-day Tunisia. Since its reinstatement, the League has been noticeably silent on the continuing violations of human rights in Tunisia, in contrast, for example, to its forthright and candid reporting of abuses in 1991. The government's commitment to human rights does not extend to toleration of forthright criticism of its own spotty human rights record, and the receding of the Islamist challenge has done nothing to lessen governmental intolerance,
This year's State Department report reviews the events of 1993 with a much more discerning skepticism than in previous years. While acknowledging continuing legislative reforms relating to human rights, the report properly notes that the provisions of the law do not always accord, in practice, with freedom of speech or of association, or the guarantee of a fair trial.
With the An-Nahda movement now in apparent disarray, the Tunisian government appears to have undertaken a campaign to blunt the remaining voices of opposition. The report correctly notes two of the most publicized instances in which Tunisian citizens spoke out against their government. But the report understates the significance and extent of the government's response. In the first incident, a group of 18 professionals and intellectuals formed the National Committee to Support Prisoners of Conscience. In a February 1993 proclamation, the Committee condemned the government's human rights record, warned against the "dangerous deterioration in respect for individual and collective freedoms" and vowed to work for the release of prisoners of conscience and the eradication of torture. The Tunisian government reacted with customary harshness. It arrested the founding members of the Committee and ordered an Algerian-bom Tunisian resident expelled from the country. Although 17 of the Committee members were later released, one of them, Salah Hamzaoui, was detained for two weeks. In
360
_TUNISIA
addition, it appears that Dr. Moncef Marzouki, a Committee member and president of the LTDH, may have been temporarily suspended from the practice of medicine as a result of his participation in the Committee's February declaration.
The second incident occurred on April 9, 1993, when some 200 university professors, students, doctors, lawyers and engineers demanded a forum for a "national world debate" and decried the erosion of respect for human rights and liberties. The State Department report states that the Tunisian government "took no action" in response to this petition. However, while it appears that none of the signatories were detained, the government responded with a shrill communique condemning their "pathetic politicking" and characterizing them as "bitter, disillusioned social climbers." Given the government's virtual monopoly over the organs of the press, which the report acknowledges, a denunciation such as this, even if not accompanied by arrests, is a formidable deterrent to the formation of opposition groups.
The pattern of selective attacks against various sources of opposition to the Ben Ali government was illustrated during 1993 by the steady pace of arrests or persecution of journalists, lawyers and student leaders. One example, noted but not e?q3lained by the State Department, was the August 8 arrest of Slaheddine Zikikout. Zikikout, a student in Paris, was arrested upon his arrival at the port of Tunis, apparently based on uncertain charges of his association with members of An-Nahda. His trial was attended by an observer from the hitemational Federation of Human Rights Leagues who reported that the trial record showed Zikikout had been detained incommunicado for 52 days before being presented in court. This report is significant (and should have been noted by the State Department) because it confirms the continuing failure of the Tunisian government to control the widespread abuse of garde à vue detention by the police, notwithstanding reforms pledged in late 1992, in the wake of the An-Nahda trials. Amnesty International reported at least fhreq other instances during 1993 of suspected An-Nahda sympathizers being held in extended incommunicado detention. The report does not mention these cases.
Among the more prominent student leaders arrested on fabricated drug charges was Nafouel Ziada, Secretary General of the UGET {Union Générale des Etudiants Tunisiens). Ziada was convicted in absentia on April 7 and sentenced to two years imprisonment. The conviction and sentence were upheld even though the sole prosecution witness (also a detainee) said in court that he did not know Ziada. The State Department report noted Ziada's arrest and conviction, but did not describe the witness's recantation or place in context the severe chilling effect of the case on student opposition groups.
In addition, the State Department appears to have overlooked the ongoing harassment of the few remaining lawyers willing to defend the government's political opponents. The Lawyers Committee has previously expressed concerns
361
CRITIQUE 1993
to the UN Commission on Human Rights about the Tunisian government's mistreatment of lawyers who have represented members of An-Nahda or the Tunisian Communist Workers Party (PCOT) One example that the report should have mentioned is the harassment of prominent defense attorney Radhia Nasraoui, whose home was searched by police without authorization in December 1992 and April 1993. Police officers and government agents have obtrusively followed Maitre Nasroui and have placed late night phone calls to her home prior to her court appearances in political trials.
Finally, consistent with the evidence that Tunisia has merely redirected, and not abandoned, its practice of targeting opposition groups, the report should have placed greater emphasis on fmdings by Amnesty International concerning the harassment, torture and imprisonment of women. The Amnesty International report, released in June 1993, described the detention of hundreds of women in Tunisia over the previous two years, scores of whom were reported to have been tortured, ill-treated or sexually abused. Most were wives and relatives of An-Nahda or PCOT members. Their accounts of mistreatment confirm that the Tunisian authorities continue their practice of holding political enemies in prolonged detention, where they are tortured or otherwise mistreated and later convicted based on "confessions" secured through questionable means. The Amnesty International report is credible, detailed and consistent with a substantial body of evidence concerning the detention practices of the Tunisian police. Instead of endorsing the credibility of reports of widespread torture, the State Department report merely noted that Amnesty International's findings had been condemned by the government and government-sponsored womens' groups.
At the end of 1993, the Tunisian government was touting the legislative elections scheduled for March 30, 1994. But as the State Department report clearly states, "...The ability of the citizens of Tunisia to change their government through democratic means is yet to be demonstrated." For example, although 1993 saw the first modifications to the majority winner-take-all election system that has prevailed throughout Ben Ali's term of office, the allowance of 19 additional parliamentary seats was, as the report remarks, a token gesture. No candidate may run for president without the endorsement of 30 members of parliament, and the government's most entrenched opposition, the An-Nahda movement, is not permitted to operate as a lawful political party. Thus, despite the 1993 "reforms," the handful of legal "opposition" parties had all endorsed President Ben Ali's reelection, thereby ensuring that the 1994 vote will be an empty formality. For the Tunisian electorate, democracy, in any genuine sense of the word, is still a remote prospect.
362
