 TUNISIA
 The Republic of Tunisia is dominated by President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and
 the Constitutional Democratic Raiy (RCD). The President appoints the Prime Min-
 ister, Cabinet, and 23 governors. Four opposition parties hold 19 of the 163 seats
 in Parliament. Municipal elections were held in May, and the RCD won 4,084 of
 4,090 seats. The judiciary is not independent of the executive branch.
 The police share responsibility for internal security with a paramilitary national
 guard. Both forces are under the control of the Minister of Interior and the Presi-
 dent. The security services continued to be responsible for human rights abuses, al-
 though the number of complaints of incidents of mistreatment of persons in custody
 declined from the preceding year.
 The major sectors of the economy include agriculture, tourism, petroleum, textiles,
 and manufactured exports. Remittances from workers abroad are an important
 source of revenue. Because of a third year of drought and a reported decline in tour-
 ism from Europe, economic growth in 1995 is estimated at 3.4 percent, down from
 the previous 5 to 6 percent yearly increases. The Government continued its long-
 standing successful efforts to improve the social and economic conditions of the pop-
 ulation, particularly the urban poor and those living in rural areas.
 The Government s human rights performance improved somewhat during the first
 half of the year but showed signs of deterioration in the last half. Serious problems
 remain. The Government continued to stifle freedoms of speech, press, and associa-
 tion. It continued to deny press credentials to a journalist who had published an
 interview with a political dissident. Under threat of police harassment, the resident
 reporter for Agence France Presse departed the country. Both journalists and aca-
 demics continued to practice a high degree of self-censorship. The Government con-
 tinued to use the threat of withholding government advertising as a means to dis-
 suade newspapers from publishing undesirable material. Under such pressure, a
 local human rights group has been unable to find a publisher willing to print its
 bulletins.
 The Government considers the Baha'i faith a heretical sect and in July deported
 a Baha'i leader who was a long-time resident in Tunisia. After the case attracted
 international attention, the Government permitted the individual to return to his
 home. The arrests in October of two opposition politicians were regarded as a gov-
 ernment move to curb political dissent. The Government interfered with the cor-
 respondence of one human rights group and in November threatened another
 human rights gup with prosecution for not following the law in publishing its an-
 nual report. Also in November, the Government prohibited Moncef Marzouki, a
 human rights advocate and former presidential candidate, from traveling to the U.S.
 to attend a democracy conference. Authorities prevented some associations from
 holding meetings in hotels and other public hails. Membership in the Islamist move-
 ment known as An-Nahda is prohibited, and during the year the Government sen-
 tened several persons to prison for their association with An-Nahda.
 Human rights monitors called for the investigation of two deaths in custody, but
 the Government indicated that neither death was due to official misconduct. Over-
 all, there was a decline in the number of complaints lodged by detainees who allege
 they were mistreated by the security services. The President appointed a special
 commission to investigate claims of prisoner abuse. Although the commission did
 not release its frdings, the Government used the report as the basis for dismissing
 two prison administrators from their duties. Although the Government has at-
 
 
 1268
 tempted to advance women's rights, social discrimination against women remains a
 problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political andi Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Two reports of deaths in custody
 came to light. Noureddine Alaimi died on September 10 while being held at a police
 station in Metlaoui, and Jaafar Ben Ali Kichaoui died on June 7 while serving a
 4-month prison term. The Government conducted investigations into both cases. It
 found that Alaimi had committed suicide by hanging himself after his arrest for
 drunkenness and disorderly conduct, and that Kichaoui was killed by another in-
 mate who was subsequently charged with murder.
 The Government also confirmed the death in August 1994 of Ezzedine Ben Acha,
 an Islamist who had been in prison since his conviction in 1991-92. An official in-
 vestigation attributed his death to a heart attack, but Ben Aicha's family claimed
 that foul play was involved. Investigations continued in the cases of two prisoners
 who died in custody in 1991-Abderraouf Laaribi and Abdelwahed Abdelzi.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were allegations that the security services mistreated detainees and prisoners
 in their custody, although the number of such complaints declined from 1994.
 Human rights activists state that charges of mistreatment are difficult to substan-
 tiate. However, the Tunisian League for Human Rights (LTDH), an independent
 group, brought several cases of alleged mistreatment to the attention of President
 Ben Ali's office. In response, the President appointed a commission to investigate
 the treatment of prisoners. The commission reported to him in September but did
 not publish its findings. The LTDH claimed that the commission had confirmed
 some instances of mistreatment. As the result of the investigation, the Director Gen-
 eral of Prisons and the Director of the Prison in Tunis were removed from their po-
 sitions.
 The Government continued to ensure that police officers are aware of human
 rights requirements. All officers are required to sign statements that they are aware
 of Tunisian and international human rights standards and will abide by them. All
 judges and prosecutors receive human rights training at the Magistrates Institute.
 Sahnoun El Jourhi, a leader of the banned An-Nahda Islamist Movement, who
 was serving a 15-year sentence, died in prison in January. Officials reported the
 cause of death as liver cancer. Jourhi's family did not dispute the reported cause
 of death but alleged that prison officials failed to arrange proper medical care for
 El Jourhi because he was an Islamist.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards. Although the Govern-
 ment agreed in principle to allow LTDH to visit prisons, it did not permit the group
 to make any visits during the year.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law authorizes the police to make
 arrests without warrants for suspected felonies and crimes in progress, and to hold
 suspects in prearraignment detention for a maximum of 10 days. Attorneys, human
 rights monitors, and former detainees maintain that the authorities unoficially ex-
 tend the 10-day limit by delaying the registration of the date of arrest. Detainees
 have the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest before questioning and to
 be represented by counsel during their arraignment hearings.
 Detainees do not have the right to a lawyer during prearraignment detention but
 may request an examination by a medical doctor. Otherwise most are held incom-
 municado during this period. In a minority of cases, the prosecutor may order the
 release of a detainee pending arraignment. The Government provides legal rep-
 resentation for indigents.
 At the arraignment, the examining magistrate may decide to release the accused
 or to remand him to pretrial detention. There has been a system of bail since 1993,
 but judges rarely make use of it. Detainees are usually released without bail or with
 the personal guarantee of a third party.
 In cases involving crimes for which the sentence may exceed 5 years, or which
 involve national security, pretrial detention may last for an initial period of 6
 months, and is renewable by court order for two additional 4-month periods. During
 this period, the court conducts an investigation, hears arguments, and accepts evi-
 dence and motions from both parties. The case then goes before the Criminal Court
 of Appeal which has an indefinite period within which to set a trial date.
 The Government banned the Islamist movement An-Nahda in 1992 because An-
 Nahda was judged to be in violation of the law prohibiting political parties orga-
 nized by religion, race, or region. Membership in An-Nahda is punishable by impris-
 
 
 1269
 onment. In March the Government arrested Kamel Masmoudi, a Tunisian who was
 also a Canadian citizen, and convicted him for membership in An-Nahda. Masmoudi
 was sentenced to 8 years, but was released in July after receiving a Presidential
 pardon.
 Exile is prohibited by law and is not practiced by the Government.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is part of the Ministry of Justice.
 It is not independent of the executive branch, which appints, assigns, grants tenure
 to, and transfers judges. This situation renders judges susceptible to pressure in po-
 litically sensitive cases. The court system comprises the regular civil and criminal
 courts, including the Court of Appeals, and the Supreme Court, as well as military
 tribunals within the Defense Ministry.
 Defendants in criminal cases generally receive due process. They have the right
 to be present at their trials, represented by counsel, question witnesses, and appeal
 verdicts. However, because the presiding judge dominates a trial, the defense attor-
 ney has little opportunity to participate directly. Some defense lawyers complain
 that the courts do not grant them sufficient time to prepare their cases. Although
 trials in the regular courts are open to the public, judges have restricted access in
 cases involving accused Islamists or leftists. Family members and other interested
 parties must obtain police approval to attend such trials.
 The judiciary is sensitive to criticism. A female lawyer was charged with defaming
 the judiciary after protesting a court ruling against a client who had charged her
 husband with assault. The court had found that cigarette burns on the inside of the
 client's upper thigh had been self-inficted.
 In December Najib Hosni, a well-known human rights lawyer who has defended
 detainees accused of political offenses, was put on trial for charges related to a
 fraudulent real estate transaction in 1989. In January 1996, the court found Hosni
 guilty of forging the name of a terminally ill co-owner of a piece of land, which
 Hosni had contracted to buy from the other co-owners. Hosni reportedly alleged that
 he was mistreated during detention. Some observers speculated that the Govern-
 ment's motive in prosecuting Hosni was that he had previously defended accused
 Islamists in court and had spoken freely with international human rights advocates.
 While in detention, Hosni received an honorary degree from an American law school
 and a human rights award from the American Bar Association.
 Military tribunals try cases involving military personnel and civilians accused of
 national security crimes. The tribunal consists of a civilian judge from the Supreme
 Court and four military judges. Defendants may appeal the tribunal's verdicts to the
 Supreme Court.
 There is no reliable information on the number of political prisoners. An undeter-
 mined number of persons were arrested during the year for suspected membership
 in illegal political organizations, principally Islamist and Communist groups. Many
 of these detainees may be considered political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person and the home and for the
 privacy of correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." Police must
 have warrants to conduct searches, but this requirement is sometimes ignored in
 cases in which the authorities consider that state security is involved or in which
 a "flagrant crime" is deemed to have been committed. The authorities closely mon-
 itor the activities of Islamists and leftists, search their homes without warrants, and
 harass their relatives and associates by repeatedly interrogating them. The authori-
 ties have also interfered with the delivery of the mail. Police presence is heavy
 throughout the country. Traffic officers routinely stop motorists to examine their
 identity and vehicular documents.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, expression, and the press. In practice, however, the Government limits the
 exercise of these freedoms. The Press Code contains broad provisions prohibiting
 subversion and defamation, neither of which is clearly defined. The authorities use
 the placement of government advertising in newspapers as a technique to control
 the press. Such advertising is a significant part of revenue for newspapers and mag-
 azines. In the past, the Government has withheld placing advertisements in publica-
 tions which have published articles deemed offensive. As a result of such pressure,
 the human rights group LTDH has been unable to find a publisher willing to print
 its communiques or annual report (also see Section 4).
 In addition, the Government exerts control over the media by issuing or withhold-
 ing credentials to journalists. It continued to deny accreditation to a journalist dis-
 missed from the government news agency, Tunis Afrique Presse (TAP), in 1994 for
 publishing an interview with an opposition politician in a foreign publication. The
 
 
 1270
 
 Government also provides official texts on major domestic and international events
 and has reprimanded publishers and editors for failing to publish these statements.
 All these factors induce a high degree of self-censorship in the media.
 The Government also showed intolerance of criticism in the foreign media. In Jan-
 uary the resident French Press Agency (AFP) correspondent left Tunisia after police
 confronted him in a parking lot and questioned him about sexually assaulting the
 woman with whom he was talking. The journalist maintained that the Government
 staged the incident because he had not adequately reported the Government's posi-
 tion in a dispute with the International Commission of Jurists. In February the
 Government permitted the French publications Le Monde and Liberation to renter
 the market. Both had been banned in 1994.
 Before distributing publications onto the market, printers and publishers are re-
 quired by law to deposit copies of the publication with the Chief Prosecutor
 (Procureur), the Ministry of Interior, the Secretary of State for Information, and the
 Ministry of Culture. Similarly, distributors must deposit publications printed abroad
 with the Chief Prosecutor and various ministries prior to distributing them onto the
 market. While publishers need not wait for an authorization of the publication's con-
 tents, they must obtain a receipt of deposit before distribution. On occasion such re-
 ceipts are reportedly withheld, sometimes indefinitely. Without such receipts, publi-
 cations may not be legally distributed. The Press Code stipulates fires and
 confiscations for failure to comply with these provisions.
 In November the LTDH did not deposit copies of its annual report for 1994 at
 all the required offices, maintaining the report is not for the general market. The
 Government disagrees with the LTDH's interpretation and has formally notified it
 that it may be prosecuted for the infraction (also see Section 4.).
 In July the National Assembly passed legislation regulating the purchase and in-
 stallation of satellite receiving dishes. However, the sale of dishes remained sus-
 pended pending the issuance of implementing regulations; these had not been pro-
 mulgated by year's end.
 In October Mohamed Moaada, president of the opposition party MDS, was ar-
 rested for allegedly accepting money from a Libyan citizen for a report containing
 national security information. That exchange allegedly took place one year before
 Moaada's arrest, which itself took place a day after Moanda wrote a letter to Presi-
 dent Ben AL, complaining about the lack of political freedom. Later in October,
 Khemais Chammari, an MDS colleague of Moaada and member of the Chamber of
 Deputies, was indicted for illegally disclosing information about the Moaada inves-
 tigation. The Chamber then voted to lift Chammari's immunity, which allows the
 State to prosecute him. At year's end, his case was under investigation. Although
 there is insufficient information to judge the validity of the charges against Moaada,
 some observers speculated that the two episodes were attempts by the Government
 to curb dissent.
 The Government owns and operates the Tunisian Radio and Television Establish-
 ment (ERTT). ERTT's coverage of government news is taken directly from the offi-
 cial news agency, TAP. There are several regional radio stations and one local tele-
 vision channel. Bilateral agreements with France and Italy permit Tunisians to re-
 ceive the French channel, France 2, and the Italian station Rai Uno.
 Like journalists, university professors practice a form of self-censorship, avoiding
 classroom criticism of the Government or statements supportive of the Islamist An-
 Nahda party. The presence of police on campuses also discourages dissent.
 b. Freedom of Peacefud Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly. Groups wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must
 obtain a permit from the Ministry of Interior. The authorities routinely approve
 such permits, except in cases involving proscribed organizations. However, some
 groups alleged that hotels and other facilities would often be pressured by the Gov-
 ernment into canceling previously made arrangements for meeting rooms.
 The human rights group LTDH continued to conduct activities, although it does
 not comply with the Law on Associations which requires that membership in asso-
 ciations must be open to all applicants. The LTDH prefers to control the admission
 of new members as a means of ensuring its independence. The local chapter of Am-
 nesty International was unable to arrange facilities for public meetings and received
 threatening visits from people it believed to be police agents. Despite this harass-
 ment, the chapter continued to conduct activities.
 The law stipulates that political parties must reject all forms of violence, includ-
 ing fanaticism, racism, and other types of discrimination. No political party may be
 based on religion, race, sex, or region, receive funds from a foreign party, or finan-
 cial aid from foreign governments or citizens. All political party members must be
 citizens for at least 5 years.
 
 
 1271
 The Government uses its authority to license political parties and nongovern-
 mental organizations as a means to control the political environment. Since 1994
 the Ministry of Interior, which registers parties, has declined to accept an applica-
 tion from the Democratic Forum for Labor and Liberties.
 There are seven legal political parties. The Maoist Tunisian Communist Workers
 Party (POCT) remains underground. In November President Ben Ali pardoned
 Hamma Haminami and Mohamed Kilani, two POCT leaders, who had been tried in
 absentia in 1992 for, inter alia, membership in an illegal party. Hammami, the
 former editor of POCT's defunct newspaper, was arrested in 1995 and was serving
 a 5-year, 6-month sentence at the time of the pardon. Kilani, also an editor for the
 party newspaper, was arrested in 1994 and was serving a 2-year sentence.
 The Government maintains that the Islamist An-Nahda Party is illegal because
 it is based on religion. The nominal head of An-Nahda, Rachid Ghannouchi, was
 granted political asylum in Britain in 1993. The courts sentenced several individuals
 in 1995 to prison for association with An-Nahda. These included Mohamed Ali
 Abrouk, a junior doctor, and Mohamed Naceur Jouini, an engineer. Both were sen-
 tenced in January to 2 years' imprisonment. Jouini received an additional year in
 prison for collecting funds for An-Nahda. Also in January, Younis Jouini, a soldier,
 was convicted by a military court in Le Kef for membership in An-Nahda. He was
 sentenced to 1 year in prison. In May a court sentenced Imed Ebdelli, a 29-year-
 old philosophy student at Tunis University, to 3 years in prison and 5 years of ad-
 ministrative surveillance for belonging to an "unauthorized association" (An-Nahda).
 Ali Baazaoui, a high school physical education teacher, was arrested in May for
 belonging to an unauthorized association. He was later sentenced to 3 years in pris-
 on and an additional 3 years of administrative control.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion, but the Government permits
 the practice of other religions. The Government regards the Baha'i faith as a hereti-
 cal sect of Islam and permits its adherents to practice their faith in private only.
 In July authorities deported Baha'i leader Rauchon Mustafa, a native Egyptian who
 had resided in Tunisia for more than 40 years, to London from whence he traveled
 to the United States. After pleas from his family and members of the Baha'i faith
 and others outside Tunisia, the Government reversed its decision and permitted
 Mustafa to return. The authorities maintain that Baha'is, like members of other re-
 ligions, are free to practice their faith without governmental interference or harass-
 ment.
 With 2,500 adherents, the Jewish community is the country's largest indigenous
 religious minority. The Government assures the Jewish community freedom of wor-
 ship, safeguards its security, and pays the salary of the Grand Rabbi. The small
 Christian community is composed mainly of foreigners. It is free to hold church
 services and operates a small number of schools.
 The Government views proselytizing as an act against "public order." Authorities
 ask foreigners suspected of proselytizing to depart the country and do not permit
 them to return. There were no reported cases of official action against persons sus-
 pected of proselytizing.
 The Government controls the mosques and pays the salaries of the prayer leaders.
 The 1988 Law on Mosques provides that only personnel appointed by the Govern-
 ment may lead activities in the mosques.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and people are free to
 change their place of residence or work at will.
 Human rig ts monitors complained that the Government arbitrarily withholds
 passports from citizens but in fewer instances than in previous years. Several such
 complaints from earlier years were settled. There is no arbitrary restriction on emi-
 gration or repatriation.
 The Government restored the passport of Moncef Marzouki, an opposition politi-
 cian who unsuccessfully sought to run for the presidency in 1994. Marzouki's pass-
 port was confiscated during his arrest in 1994 for allegedly spreading false informa-
 tion and defaming judicial authorities in an interview he gave to a Spanish news-
 paper. After recovering his passport, Marzouki traveled abroad and returned to Tu-
 nisia. However, in October the Government prohibited Marzouki from traveling
 abroad again, this time to the United States to attend a conference on democracy.
 Marzouki was subject to such a travel ban because as a public-sector employee, he
 must obtain government authorization before traveling abroad. Marzouki is a physi-
 cian and professor of public health but claims that he is no longer permitted to work
 at the hospital where he is a staff member.
 The Government does not accept refugees for permanent resettlement.
 
 
 1272
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides that the citizenry shall elect the President and mem-
 bers of the legislature for 5-year terms. However, the ability of citizens to change
 their government through democratic means has yet to be demonstrated. The ruling
 Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD), and its direct predecessor parties, have con-
 trolled the political arena since Tunisia gained independence in 1956. The RCD
 dominates the Cabinet, the Chamber of Deputies, regional and local governments.
 The President appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and the 23 governors. The
 President and the RCD dominate politics at the national, regional, and local levels.
 The Government and the RCD are closely integrated. the President of the Republic
 is also the President of the RCD, and the RCD's Secretary-General holds the rank
 of Minister of State.
 The 163-seat Chamber of Deputies does not function as an effective counterweight
 to the executive branch. The Electoral Code provides for a winner-take-all formula
 for 144 of its seats. The ruling RCD party won all those seats in the 1994 par-
 liamentary elections. Nineteen additional seats were reserved for unsuccessful can-
 didates. They were divided among four opposition parties after the 1994 election.
 Voting is by secret ballot. All legal parties are free to present candidates.
 In May the RCD won 4,084 of 4,090 seats in countrywide municipal elections. In
 large part the landslide was due to the RCD's effectiveness as a party and the oppo-
 sition's lack of popular support. However, opposition party leaders claimed the Gov-
 ernment manipulated voter registration lists and intimidated opposition candidates.
 Women are permitted to participate in politics. Eleven women are members of the
 Chamber of Deputies, and one is a Junior Minister (charged with Women's and
 Children's Affairs) in the Prime Minister's office. Nevertheless, women's presence in
 public office is disproportionately low; they hold few senior government posts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government recognizes several local human rights organizations, but subjects
 them to a variety of restrictions. The most active is the Tunisian Human Rights
 League (LTDH), an independent group. Although LTDH's refusal to permit open
 membership does not comply with the law governing associations, the group claims
 4,400 members in 41 chapters nationwide. It continues to hold meetings. In Novem-
 ber the League published its first annual report, covering events in 1994. Although
 the report was printed and distributed privately, the Government has threatened
 LTDH with prosecution for violating the press Law (see Section 2.a.). LTDH has
 been unable to find local newspapers willing to publish its communiques. The group
 has unsuccessfully sought to engage various government ministries in a human
 rights dialog. During the year, LTDH brought allegations of the mistreatment of
 prisoners to the attention of President Ben Ali. The President appointed a commis-
 sion to investigate the allegations but declined to include any LTDH representatives
 in it (see Section 1.c.).
 The Arab Institute of Human Rights, headquartered in Tunis, was founded in
 1989 by the LTDH, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, and the Union of
 Arab Lawyers. It is an information, rather than advocacy, organization. The Higher
 Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, a governmental body established
 by the President in 1991, presented its fourth annual report to him in September
 but did not make it public.
 Amnesty International (Al) protested the Government's harassment of its Tunisia
 chapter, claiming that the Government instigated the last-minute cancellations of
 facilities for public meetings, intercepted the chapter's mail, and sent agents to Ars
 offices to intimidate its staff.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens shall have equal rights and duties and
 be equal before the law. The Government generally observes this practice.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics to
 measure its extent. The Tunisian Association of Democratic Women operates the
 country's only counseling center for women who are victims of domestic violence.
 The center, located in Tunis, assists approximately 20 women per month. Instances
 of rape or assault committed by someone unknown to the victim are rare. Battered
 women first seek help from family members. Police intervention is often ineffective
 because police officers and the courts tend to regard domestic violence as a problem
 to be handled by family members.
 
 
 1273
 Although women still face discrimination in certain legal and social matters, the
 Government has made serious efforts to advance women's rights. The major focus
 in this regard in 1995 was the implementation of the 1993 changes in the Personal
 Status Code and in a 1994 law which enables divorced women to seek court orders
 to compel child support payments from their ex-husbands.
 There has been continued growth in the number of women in the medical, legal,
 and other professions. Women comprise an estimated 25 percent of the work force,
 a figure which probably underestimates their presene, as many women are em-
 ployed in the informal sector, as well as seasonally in agriculture. According to gov-
 ernent figures, women comprise 26 percent of the civil service, employed mainly
 in the fields of education, health, and social affairs at the middle or lower levels.
 Children.-ain November the Government promulgated a body of laws to constitute
 a ode for the protection of children. The cde is based primaiy on Canadian family
 and juvenile law and consolidates protections relating to children previously in-
 cluded in the Personal Status Code. The new law proscribes child abuse, abandon-
 ment, and sexual or economic exploitation. Penalties for convictions for abandon-
 ment and indecent assault on minors are severe. The new code also creates a presi-
 dential appointee ("delegue") for the protection of children, outlines judicial protec-
 tion for children, and defines the rights of delinquents under the juvenile law. The
 Government is committed to upholding these laws.
 People With Disabilities.-A law enacted in 1981 prohibits discrimination based
 on disabilities and mandates that disabled persons comprise at least 1 percent of
 public and private sector employees.
 All public buildings constructed since 1991 must be accssible to physically dis-
 abled persons. Many cities, including Tunis, have begun to install wheelchair access
 ramps on city sidewaks. There is a genera trend toward making public transpor-
 tation more accessible to disabled persons. The Government issues special cards to
 the disabled for benefits such as unrestricted parking, priority medical service, pref-
 erential seating on public transportation, and some consumer discounts
 Indigenous People.-The small Berber minority constitutes under 3 percent of the
 population. Some older Berbers have retained their native language but the younger
 generation has been assimilated into Tunisian culture through schooling and mar-
 riage. Berbers are free to participate in politics and express themselves culturally.
 Section 6. Wor-ter Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGiT)
 is the country's only labor federation and claims about 15 percent of the work force
 as members, including civil servants and employees of state-owned enterprises.
 There is no legal prohibition against the establishment of other labor federations.
 A union may be dissolvedi only by court order.
 The UGT and its member unions are legally independent of the Government and
 the ruling party but operate under regulations which restrict their freedom of ac-
 tion. The UG LFs membership includes persons associated with all political ten-
 dencies, although Islamists have been removed from union offices. The current
 UGiT leadership follows a policy of coration with the Government and its ec-
 nomic reform program. There are credible reports that the UGTT receives substan-
 tial government subsidies to supplement modest union dues and funding from the
 National Social Security Account.
 Unions, including civil servants organizations, have the right to strike, provided
 they give 10 days' advance notice and the UGTT approves of the strike. These re-
 strictions, howev oer erberved in practice. In recent years, the majority of
 strikes have been illegal because the UGT  did not approve them in advance. The
 Government does not prosecute workers involved in illegal strike activity. The law
 prohibits retribution against strikers, but some employers punish strikers, who are
 then forced to pursue costly and time-consuming legal remedies to protect their
 rights.
 ~Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels in which labor and manage-
 meat are equally represented. Tripartite regiona arbitration commissions settle in-
 dustrial disputes when conciliation fails.
 Unions are free to associate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and observed in practice. Wages and working
 conditions are set by negotiations between the UGGT member unions and employ-
 Approximately 47 collective bargaining arements set standards for industries in
 the private sector and cover 80 percent of the total private sector work force. The
 Government's role in these negotiations is minimal, consisting mainly of lending its
 
 
 1274
 god offices if talks appear to be stalled. However, the Government must approve,
 ut may not modify, the agreements.
 The UGTT also negotiates with the various ministries and state-run enterprises
 on behalf of public sector employees. The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by
 employers. The UGTT, however, is concerned abut increasing antiunion activity
 among private sector employers, especially the firing of union activists and the use
 of temporary workers to avoid unionization. In certain industries, such as textiles,
 temporary workers account for 80 percent of the work force. The Labor Code pro-
 tects temporary workers, hut enforcement is more difficult than in the case of per-
 manent workers. A committee hears cases of alleged unjustified firing of workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically pro-
 hibit compulsory labor, but there have been no reports of its practice in recent
 years. Tn Jlanuary the Government aboished the practice of sentencing convicts to
 "rehabilitation through work". That practice, which dated to the Penal Code of 1912,
 had been of concern to the International Labor Organization's Committee of Experts
 as a possible violation of ILO convention 29 on Forced Labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 in manufacturing is 15 years, and in agriculture 13 years. The Government requires
 children to attend school until age 16. Workers between the ages of 14 and 18 are
 prohibited from working from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Children over the age of 14 may
 work a maximum of 4.5 hours a day. The combination of school and work may not
 exceed 7 hours. Inspectors of the Ministry of Social Affairs examine the records of
 employees to verify that employers comply with the minimum age law. Nonetheless,
 young children often perform agricultural work in rural areas and work as vendors
 in urban areas.
 The UGTT has expressed concern that child labor, frequently disguised as appren-
 ticeship, still exists, principally in the handicraft industry. In other instances, young
 rural girls are sometimes placed as domestics in urban homes by their fathers who
 collect the children's wages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages, which are set y a commission of represent-
 atives from the Ministries of Social Affairs, Planning, Finance, and National Econ-
 omy. During the course of its deliberations, the commission consults with the UGIT
 and the Employers' Association. The President approves the commission's rec-
 ommendations. When supplemented by transportation and family allowances, the
 minimum wage covers only essential costs for a worker and family. Since May the
 minimum wage has been $164 (154.128 dinars) per month for a 48-hour workweek
 and $144 (135.024 dinars) per month for a 40-hour workweek.
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period. The workweek is 40 hours in the energy, transportation,
 petrochemical, and metallurgy industries.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards. They inspect
 most firms about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the minum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of
 the economy. Moreover, more than 240,000 workers are employed in the informal
 sector, which falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has responsibility for improving health and safety
 standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations covering such
 hazardous occupations as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction. Working
 conditions and standards tend to be better in firms that are export-oriented than
 in those producing for the domestic market. Reported workplace accidents during
 the first 6 montls of 1994 (latest data available) indicate a 0.9 percent decline in
 mishaps over the same period in 1993. However, the total number of workdays lost
 due to accidents during the same period was up 6.5 percent over 1993. Work-related
 deaths increased to 82 in the first 6 months of 1994, compared to 76 for the same
 period in 1993. Workers are free to remove themselves from dangerous situations
 without jeopardizing their employment, and they may take legal action against em-
 ployers who retaliate for exercising their right.
