 TUNISIA
 Tunisia, an Arab state in North Africa, is presided over by
 Habib Bourguiba, President for Life, who celebrated his 84th
 birthday in 1986. Although a parliamentary republic since
 1956, the Tunisian political system is dominated by the ruling
 Destourian (Constitutional) Socialist Party (PSD). Three
 opposition parties are legally recognized. The religiously
 oriented Islamic Tendency Movement (MTI), which is not among
 these, is tolerated by the Government. In 1986, however,
 leaders of the MTI were subjected to increased scrutiny by the
 security forces and an undetermined number of its members were
 systematically detained and interrogated.
 A well-organized, visible security apparatus carries out
 random identity checks, partly as a result of security
 dictates due to the presence of the Arab League and
 Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) headquarters in
 Tunis, but also in response to a history of terrorist acts
 attributable to the Libyan Government.
 The oil price collapse, a weak phosphate market, a disastrous
 harvest, and a decline in tourism revenues rocked the economy
 in 1986. Output and employment gains slowed to near zero.
 Nevertheless, per capita gross domestic product, at $1,100,
 remains among the highest in Africa. Structural problems and
 the external shocks just noted may well result in negative
 growth. Recognizing its long-term problems as well as the
 recent balance of payments crisis, the Government introduced a
 tough structural adjustment program in August 1986. The
 program includes such austerity measures as a 10 percent
 devaluation, hikes in the prices of staple products, and
 budget cuts that will force layoffs in the public enterprises.
 During the year the human rights situation in Tunisia
 underwent serious deterioration. The Government failed to
 carry out a promised "opening" of the political system to
 allow increased participation by opposition political
 groupings. Efforts to reform the legal system, which permits
 individuals to be held without trial, also came to naught. By
 the summer of 1986, all independent opposition newspapers had
 either been banned or forced to close for financial reasons.
 Former activists in Tunisia's largest trade union federation,
 the General Union of Tunisian Workers (UGTT), continued to be
 harassed during the year, following the Government'b
 suppression of the elected union leadership in late 1985. The
 Government initiated an "anticorruption" drive during the year
 and severa prominent Tunisian business figures were tried and
 convicted. Although due process was generally observed, some
 observers criticized the selectivity with which individuals
 were targeted for investigation and the severity of some
 sentences.
 In conjunction with a crackdown on the MTI, the Government
 actively pursued arrests and trials of other Islamic
 fundamentalist groups that are not tolerated. In April
 violence erupted on the university campuses in Tunis following
 an incident in which security forces shot an Islamic
 fundamentalist student leader to death, allegedly while he was
 fleeing apprehension. Many arrests were made and there were
 reports of police brutality. Three leaders of a self-
 proclaimed Islamic revolutionary movement were convicted of
 attempted murder, robbery, and armed assault and were executed
 in the late summer.
 
 
 1317 *
 TUNISIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings in 1986. However,
 an Islamic fundamentalist student leader was shot to death by
 security forces on April 18. Although the Government promised
 an investigation, none of those involved has been publicly
 charged or censured.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1986.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is reliable evidence that physical and psychological
 abuse of prisoners occasionally occurs. Isolatedcases of
 police brutality are reported by the Arabic language press and
 in communiques released by the Tunisian League of Human
 Rights, an independent group with branches throughout the
 country. There were no confirmed examples of officially
 ordered or approved torture in 1986. Conditions in Tunisian
 detention centers and prisons are poor and in some instances
 injurious to health. In the spring, family members of former
 General Union of Tunisian Workers leader Habib Achour claimed
 that he was subjected to severe prison conditions despite his
 age and chronic health problems. The Government responded to
 Achour's complaints by bringing in doctors and, on at least
 three occasions, hospitalizing him for treatment.
 A prisoner was beaten to death by prison guards in the civil
 prison in the coastal town of Mahdia in early spring. In the
 ensuing investigation, the guards involved were arrested and
 sentenced to long prison terms and a local physician who
 allegedly falsified the death certificate was barred from
 medical practice.
 Reports in 1986 continued to indicate that civil prisons were
 overcrowded and poorly supervised.
 Following violent confrontations bet;.een police and students
 in April at the university in Tunis, there were reports that
 policemen had entered dormitories and had beaten and abused
 male and female students.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrests of persons opposing the Government do occur, most
 frequently on charges of illegal political activity. In 1986
 persons espousing a return to Islamic religious values bore
 the brunt of arbitrary or secret detention. Some with
 leftist, pan-Arab, or pro-Libyan views ware also arrested.
 These persons are often subjected to long periods of
 preventive detention without trial and have been known to be
 arrested and released several times without being charged.
 During April 21-22 campus demonstrations at the university in
 Tunis, almost 1,000 students were detained. All students were
 released after 1 week but a small number had their academic
 waiver from national service removed and were expeditiously
 drafted.
 
 
 1318
 TUNISIA
 As part of the Government's move to take control of the UGTT
 labor federation, many union activists were detained. In June
 1986 the former UGTT leadership submitted to the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) a list of nearly 100 UGTT members who
 were allegedly being detained without charge.
 There is no legal limit on preventive detention. In early
 1986 the Government had under discussion, but did not adopt, a
 Tunisian Human Rights League-sponsored initiative to limit
 incommunicado holding of detainees and to require medical
 examinations according to a fixed schedule. The Tunisian
 Human Rights League claims that there are about 100 people in
 jail on political charges.
 In 1981 the ILO criticized Tunisia for its policy of forced
 labor in prisons. While Tunisia continues to use forced labor
 as a sentence, it reportedly resolved ILO concerns on this
 issue in 1983 in a comprehensive report. The ILO has
 continued to urge Tunisia to bring its legislation on
 rehabilitation work and civic service into conformity with the
 Convention on Forced Labor.
 Ex-Prime Minister Mohamed Mzali, who fled the country in
 September, subsequently had his lawyers file a petition with
 the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva. Mzali
 claimed that his family was being persecuted arbitrarily in
 order to punish him. Specifically, he complained that his
 sons were being punished in a manner out of proportion with
 the charges against them, that his wife was under house
 arrest, and that his son-in-law had been detained without
 charge   The Government disputed some of these allegations.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 No secret trials were held in 1986, and no cases were tried in
 special security courts. During 1986 the Government initiated
 what many observers termed a "selective" anticorruption
 drive. Bucinessmen and prominent citizens targeted in the
 investigations faced detention and travel restrictions,
 sometimes for long periods, before charges were brought. The
 sentences handed down in some of these cases, including the
 sentencing of a prominent bank president to 10 years hard
 labor for mismanagement, were often disproportionate to the
 established crime. The case of a group of self-proclaimed
 Islamic revolutionaries charged with bank robbery and
 attempted murder of a policeman during the spring resulted in
 three death sentences. The case was heard by a military
 tribunal rather than by a civilian court because one of the
 ringleaders of the group was on active military duty. The
 defendants claimed that they should be tried as political
 prisoners but the Tunisian Government maintained that they
 should be sentenced in accordance with their actual crimes.
 The severity of the sentences led some observers to ask
 whether the military tribunal had given the accused a fair
 trial. In all cases the defendants had access to legal
 counsel.
 The judiciary is relatively free but critics perceive a
 growing trend in the direction of government control and
 interference in judicial processes. The sentencing of a
 lawyer in June to a 6-month jail sentence on questionable
 charges of "misbehavior" before a judge is cited as one
 example of this trend. Lawyers for labor leader Habib Achour
 walked out during the hearing of his appeal of a 1-year
 
 
 1319
 TUNISIA
 sentence on March 22, claiming their client's right to due
 process was being ignored.
 The Government continues to hold an unknown number of
 prisoners on the basis of their political activity, but
 insists that they all have been charged and will face trial.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the individual and of the home are generally
 respected. However, the security police sometimes secure
 blanket rather than specific judicial authorization for the
 arrest of persons suspected of activities posing a security
 threat. Instances of the monitoring of correspondence and
 telephones are reported.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tunisian citizens feel free to criticize the Government in
 private and, in more restrained terms, in public. Personal
 criticism of President Bourguiba in the press is not allowed.
 A large segment of the press is privately owned.
 Tunisian law requires that the first printed copy of each
 edition of every national news publication be submitted to a
 censorship authority. This body has the power to censor
 (either partially or completely) any publication it receives.
 In some cases the Government will take the further step of
 bringing charges against the editor or publisher. During 1986
 the Government banned 5 opposition newspapers and magazines,
 each for a period of 6 months. Specific issues of all of
 these publications had been seized previously, particularly
 editions published following the U.S. air strikes against
 Libya in April. Weeklies belonging to two legal opposition
 parties were banned in the spring for 6-month periods. The
 ban effectively eliminated the papers from publishing during
 the electoral campaign for the National Assembly. Two other
 publications did not appear because of financial losses
 suffered during their period of suspension. Another, Errai,
 voluntarily suspended publication out of the conviction that,
 in the existing atmosphere, it faced inevitable suspension.
 Except for the independent weekly Realities, the publications
 were banned for either defamation or dissemination of false
 material. Realities was banned in June for an article that
 criticized government repression of the left-wing opposition.
 Its editor and one of its more prominent journalists were
 given suspended sentences and fined.
 Le Monde was banned for a short time in 1986, and several
 expatriate journalists were called into the Ministry of
 Interior for questioning following publication of certain of
 their reports. In one case, an American journalist was
 ordered to leave Tunisia, but was subsequently allowed to
 return.
 The Tunisian press is usually diverse and lively in its
 commentary on Tunisian politics and society. However, the
 Government's decision to ban several publications, along with
 closures due to financial losses, left Tunisia without its
 normal range of independent Arabic language publications in
 the latter half of 1986.
 
 
 1320
 TUNISIA
 Academic freedom is generally respected, and scholarly
 research is not subject to overt interference. Although the
 Government replaced all university deans, who had previously
 been elected, with its own appointees and removed elected
 student representatives from university councils, these
 actions were not taken to restrict what the schools were
 teaching, but rather to make the deans more responsive to the
 Government and to deal more effectively with student unrest.
 Islamic fundamentalist and leftist student groups on the
 university campuses are tolerated but are not officially
 recognized. Many Islamic fundamentalist student leaders were
 forced to leave the universities in 1986 in order to do
 national service.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although the Constitution guarantees freedom of assembly,
 government permission must be obtained to hold political
 meetings. Recognized political parties held meetings during
 the year. On one occasion in February the opposition parties
 were denied permission to hold a joint meeting. The Tunisian
 Human Rights League was denied permission to hold a meeting on
 February 22.
 In the course of a demonstration organized to protest the U.S.
 airstrikes against Libya, three members of the opposition,
 including the Democratic Socialist Movement's (MDS) leader
 Ahmed Mestiri, were detained on charges of illegal political
 assembly. Mestiri was sentenced to a 4-month prison sentence
 for his part in the demonstration, the length of the sentence
 effectively denying him eligibility for candidacy in the
 November elections. Because of his poor health, much of
 Mestiri's sentence was served under house arrest.
 The right to organize a union and to strike is guaranteed by
 the Constitution and most public sector workers are affiliated
 with an appropriate union. Many private sector workers,
 however, remain nonunionized. In the past, these
 constitutional guarantees contributed to the development and
 growth of a large, free trade union movement in Tunisia, based
 on the French model, and Tunisia traditionally has had one of
 the largest free trade union movements in the Arab world.
 Rising tensions between Tunisia and Libya, reflected in
 Libya's expulsion in 1985 of over 32,000 Tunisians, including
 20,000 Tunisian workers, added to labor tensions, prompting
 stronger go'vernment measures against labor activists. As
 economic and political difficulties mounted, the Government
 limited the freedom of union members in an effort to minimize
 labor unrest and its consequent economic and political impact.
 After the Government responded to a threat of strike actions
 in 1985 by placing Habib Achour, the UGTT leader, under house
 arrest, the Government moved to take control of the union.
 Achour was subsequently imprisoned in 1986 for mismanagement
 of union funds and remains in jail along with other union
 figures who are charged with various crimes. Government
 policies also restricted union meetings in the workplace
 during much of this period, although this prohibition was
 later relaxed.
 With the successful replacement of the UGTT executive board by
 party loyalists in April 1986, and the unification of the new,
 PSD-controlled UGTT leadership with the smaller National
 Federation of Tunisian Workers (UNTT) in September, the
 Government promised to renegotiate most wage contracts that
 
 
 1321
 TUNISIA
 had expired over the past 3 years during a government-enforced
 wage freeze. The Government has stipulated, however, that any
 new wage increases must be linked to productivity gains.
 These negotiations promise to be difficult and a return to a
 more liberal policy toward labor activism is currently
 unlikely.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although Islam is the state religion, the Constitution
 guarantees religious freedom. Proselytizing for religions
 other than Islam is prohibited. There is no religious
 discrimination in private commerce and employment, but
 government employment is generally reserved for Muslims. The
 small Jewish community worships freely and maintains
 indigenous organizations with official sanction. During
 periods of tension, however, synagogues and Jewish-owned shops
 have been subject to harassment. Following the raid on PLO
 headquarters on October 1, 1985, the Government took
 extraordinary measures to protect the Jewish community.
 Expatriate Christians freely attend church services. Under an
 agreement between the Vatican and the Tunisian Government,
 several Roman Catholic orders remain active.
 The Bahai's continue to face a ban, instituted in 1984, on
 their religious meetings but have not been the object of
 further restrictions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 Free movement within Tunisia is allowed, although citizens
 must carry identity cards. Passports for foreign travel are
 easily available but may be withheld, e.g., if a person is
 suspected of clandestine links to a foreign government. In
 1986 several labor leaders, opposition figures, and
 businessmen were prevented from leaving the country. In some
 cases passports were confiscated for indeterminate periods
 without any legal justification being offered. In August
 former Prime Minister Mzali was prohibited from leaving
 Tunisia. He subsequently fled the country clandestinely; he
 claimed that he had left the country legally since he was in
 posession of a valid passport.
 There is no restriction on emigration or repatriation,
 although foreign exchange restrictions and a substantial
 departure tax make travel more difficult.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 High government office is effectively restricted to members of
 the PSD.
 Parliamentary elections are required every 5 years. The ones
 on November 2 were boycotted by all opposition parties. The
 Democratic Socialist Movement withdrew over the refusal of the
 Government to release Ahmed Mestiri, the party's Secretary
 General, after he had been convicted of organizing an illegal
 demonstration, and over the Government's banning of the
 opposition press. The Communists and Baathists withdrew all
 their candidates in protest after Government officials
 disqualified some of them on procedural grounds. The Popular
 Unity Party withdrew, complaining of interference in its
 
 
 1322
 TUNISIA
 efforts to conduct its campaign. The ruling party thus
 gompeted in the election with opposition in only two electoral
 districts where independents had filed lists. The ruling
 party won every seat in the election.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 The Tunisian League of Human Rights continued to meet with
 high government officials (including the new Prime Minister,
 Rachid Sfar) during 1986 to discuss cases of detention and
 arrest. The League publishes a bulletin that details reported
 human rights abuses. It holds national meetings, for the most
 part without government interference. In a statement made
 following a September 7, 1986 meeting, the National Council of
 the Tunisian Human Rights League referred to the
 "deteriorating situation the country was going through",
 deploring "the accelerated rhythm of flagrant violation by
 authorities against individual and collective liberties in all
 sectors, especially since the bread riots of January 1984."
 The Government has shown a willingness to criticize human
 rights abuses in other countries and has forcefully condemned
 terrorism regardless of motivation or origin. However,
 efforts to obtain government permission to set up a local
 chapter of Amnesty International (to report only on human
 rights violations in other countries) met with official
 silence.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Legal equality between men and women is vigorously supported
 by the Government. Equal rights in the areas of divorce and
 child custody are, for example, guaranteed by legislation. A
 small number of women serve in the Government at all levels.
 There is one woman cabinet minister and there are at least
 five women jurists who have direct impact on cases they hear
 or review. Currently, the 136-member Chamber of Deputies has
 seven women members. New apportionment plans, however, will
 reduce the legislature's membership to 123. Nevertheless, the
 centralized nature of decisionmaking generally limits the
 influence of women at the national level. Women's access to
 education is guaranteed by law, and approximately 40 percent
 of the primary and secondary school enrollment is female.
 Despite the Government's efforts, traditional practices in
 many cases keep women, especially in the rural areas, from
 full attainment of their legal rights.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Shortly after independence, Tunisia adopted a labor code that
 provided for standards of work, hours of work, and a minimum
 wage. These conditions apply directly to some 60 percent of
 the labor force who work in government jobs, public sector
 companies, and in professions such as teaching. Another 20
 percent of the labor force who work in agriculture and the
 private sector are indirectly affected by these provisions.
 About 20 percent of the work force, principally domestics and
 migrant agricultural labor, are not covered by the labor code.
 The base minimum wage in the industrial sector is
 approximately $125 for a 40-hour week. In agriculture the
 
 
 1323
 TUNISIA
 base minimum wage is approximately $100 per week, although
 this only directly applies to some 3 percent of the
 agricultural work force. Employees who are covered under the
 minimum wage also by law receive other benefits, including
 social security, disability and health insurance,
 transportation and family allowances, and paid leave. The
 normal workweek is either 40 or 48 hours. The labor code also
 requires employers to pay overtime, a night work differential,
 and holiday pay. In the major urban areas, a minimum wage
 employee with a family of 4 will net between $160-$200 per
 month when allowances (nontaxable) are included. Child labor
 is prohibited prior to 16 years of age. Moreover, these
 provisions are widely enforced through an oversight program
 directed by the Social Affairs Ministry. *
 The Tunisian Ministry of Social Affairs has established a
 health and safety office to improve health and safety
 standards in the workplace. In many hazardous jobs--e.g.,
 mining, petroleum engineering, and construction--the
 Government has established new safety regulations and is
 enforcing more safety precautions.
 
 
 1324
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TUNISIA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        17.?     29.7     25.3
 LOANS ..............   ... 13.5      4.5      0.0
 GRANTS .............        4.2     25.2     25.3
 AAO......................      1.6     22.8     23.3
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     1.6     22.8     23.3
 (SEC.SUP.ASSST.)...         1.5     23.0     22.8
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       14.7      5.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 13.5     4.5      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     1.2      0.6      0.0
 TITLE I-TDTAL ............ .13.5        4.5      0.0
 REPAY. I S-LOANS .....       13.5      4.5      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        1.2      0.6      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.2      3.6      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.4      1.8      2.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        1.4      1.8      2.0
 PEACE CORPS.....         1.4      1.8      2.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............    .Oo        0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       111.6     66.6     65.5
 LOANS ..............   ... 92.0     50.0     25.8
 GRANTS ...............     19.6     16.6     39.7
 A.HAP GRANTS ..........       18.0     15.0     38.3
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       92.0     50.0     25.8
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        1.6      1.6      1.4
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,..       129.3     96.3     90.8
 LOANS ..............  .... 105.5    54.5     25.8
 GRANTS ................   23.8     41.8     65.0
 OT-ER US L7ANS                               ------0.0  7.9  0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      7.9      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL-AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   221.6    246.4     59..   1985.9.
 IBRO             135.1    141.0     27.7   1507.1
 IFC                1.0      2.3     13.4     78.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     70.1
 ID                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 %DB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 4FOB              84.7     93.0      0.0    201.1
 )NOP               0.8      1.1     b.0      49.7
 )TIER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     10.9
 :E:                0.0     9.0     18.5     68.5
 
 
 1325
