Tunisia
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Constitutional
Democratic Assembly, dominate political life in Tunisia. The government uses the
threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack down on peaceful
dissent. There are continuous and credible reports of torture and ill-treatment
being used to obtain statements from suspects in custody. Sentenced prisoners
also face deliberate ill-treatment.
In March President Ben Ali pardoned or conditionally released some 1,650 prisoners,
including 70 members of the banned Islamist party an-Nahdha. In November
the president pardoned or conditionally released about 50 more political prisoners,
most of them an-Nahdha members. Some were party leaders who had been
imprisoned since their mass trial in 1992 on dubious charges of plotting to topple
the state. However, the number of political prisoners remained above 350, as
authorities arrested scores of young men in sweeps around the country and
charged them under the 2003 anti-terror law. Authorities made life difficult for
released political prisoners, monitoring them closely, denying them passports
and most jobs, and threatening to re-arrest some who spoke out on human rights
or politics.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to every truly independent
human rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then
invoke the organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its activities. On July 21,
2006, police encircled the Tunis office of the non-recognized National Council on
Liberties in Tunisia and, as they had done many times before, prevented members
from meeting, using force against those who did not disperse quickly
enough. Police also blocked meetings by the non-recognized International
Association of Solidarity with Political Prisoners.
The independent Tunisian Human Rights League, a legally recognized group, continued
to face lawsuits filed by dissident members. The broader context shows
that these suits are part of a larger pattern of repression; the courts ruled systematically
in favor of these plaintiffs, providing a legal veneer for large-scale police operations to prevent most League meetings. On May 27 the police blocked the
League’s congress by turning back members from several cities as they sought to
reach the national headquarters. On May 18 police prevented a small memorial
service at the headquarters for veteran rights activist Adel Arfaoui. Authorities
blocked foreign grants to the League, including support from the European Union.
Police conspicuously trail most foreign human rights workers who visit the country.
On May 21 authorities expelled Yves Steiner of the Swiss section of Amnesty
International, a day after he criticized Tunisia’s rights record before Amnesty
members. Authorities stated that Steiner had “violated the laws of the country in
a way that disturbed the public order,” but provided no details.
The Tunisian Association of Magistrates remained under the control of a pro-government
leadership that authorities installed in 2005, after using dubious legal
maneuvers to oust a newly elected executive committee that had urged more
judicial independence.
In May 2006 parliament adopted a law requiring future lawyers to pass a training
program at a new institute that the justice minister said was necessary to prepare
them for an increasingly globalized environment. Lawyers protested that the law
undermined the independence of the profession by tightening state control over
the training and certification of lawyers.
Human rights defenders and dissidents are subject to heavy surveillance, arbitrary
travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in phone service, physical
assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of vandalism and theft, and
slander campaigns in the press. Lawyer Mohamed Abou continued to serve a
three-year sentence imposed in 2005, after he published harsh critiques of
President Ben Ali in online forums. Police harassed his wife Samia during her
prison visits and as she publicized her husband’s plight.
The Justice System
The judiciary lacks independence. Investigative judges often question defendants
without their lawyers present. Prosecutors and judges usually turn a blind eye to
torture allegations, even when the subject of formal complaints submitted by
lawyers. Trial judges convict defendants solely or predominantly on the basis of coerced confessions, or on the testimony of witnesses whom the defendant does
not have the opportunity to confront in court.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) continued its program of visiting
Tunisian prisons. However, authorities refuse to allow access by independent
human rights organizations. They refused to honor an explicit commitment
made in April 2005 to allow visits by Human Rights Watch on “its next visit” to
Tunisia, explaining that Tunisia was preoccupied with organizing the ICRC visits.
Media Freedom
None of the print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government policies,
apart from a few low-circulation independent magazines that are subject to
occasional confiscation. The private dailies are all loyalist, often slandering government
critics in a manner that is deemed too base for the official media. Tunisia
now has privately-owned radio and television stations, but here too private ownership
is not synonymous with editorial independence. The government blocks
certain political or human rights websites featuring critical coverage of Tunisia.
Counterterrorism Measures
Tunisian authorities claim that they have long been in the forefront of combating
terrorism and extremism. The 2003 Law in Support of “International Efforts to
Fight Terrorism and the Repression of Money-Laundering” contains a broad definition
of terrorism that could be used to prosecute persons for a peaceful exercise
of their right to dissent, and erodes defendants’ rights in terror cases.
Since 2005, the government has charged more than 200 mostly young
Tunisians—who were arrested in cities around the country, or who were extradited
by Algeria or other governments—with planning to join jihadist movements
abroad or planning terrorist activities. In many instances, plainclothes police carried
out these arrests without identifying themselves or providing the reason for
arrest, and families were unable to learn the persons’ whereabouts for days or
weeks. During their trials, these defendants overwhelmingly claimed the police
had extracted their statements under torture or threat of torture. The courts sentenced
many of these defendants to long prison terms on broad terrorism charges but, to Human Rights Watch’s knowledge, convicted none of committing a specific
act of violence or of possessing arms or explosives.
The presidential pardon in February 2006 freed six defendants in one of the bestknown
such cases, known as the “Zarzis” group, after they had served three
years of sentences ranging up to 19 years. The court had convicted them on the
basis of allegedly coerced confessions and also on evidence that they had downloaded
bomb-making instructions from the internet. In another internet-related
case, Ali Ramzi Bettibi continued to serve the four-year sentence he received in
2005 for cutting and pasting on an online forum a statement by an obscure group
threatening bomb attacks if President Ben Ali hosted a visit by the Israeli prime
minister.
Since 1991, there has been one deadly terrorist attack in Tunisia: an April 2002
truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of Djerba. Al-Qaeda claimed
responsibility for the attack.
Key International Actors
The United States enjoys good relations with Tunisia, while urging human rights
progress there more vocally than in most other countries in the region. The
embassy frequently sends diplomats to observe political trials and to meet civil
society activists.
While the US gives minimal financial aid to Tunisia, the Department of Defense
provides counterterrorism training and exchange programs for the military.
Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, after meeting with President Ben Ali in Tunis
on February 11, 2006, declared, “Tunisia has long been an important voice of
moderation and tolerance … and has played a key role in confronting extremists
not just within this country, but in the area as well.” Rumsfeld did not suggest
that Tunisia should stop using “extremism” to stifle all forms of non-violent opposition,
saying only that “political and economic freedom go hand in hand, and
each depends on the other for long-term stability.”
On March 1 the State Department spokesman welcomed the president’s pardon
of prisoners but urged Tunisia to “accelerate reforms that create a more open and
vibrant political space in which all parties, civil society organizations, and released prisoners can operate more freely.” The State Department Report on
Supporting Human Rights and Democracy for 2005-2006 said, “The Government
continued to invoke a variety of laws and regulations to obstruct implementation
of US and internationally funded reform projects and initiatives, including those
promoting media freedom and opinion in the political process.”
The EU-Tunisia Association Agreement continues to be in force, despite the government’s
human rights record and its blocking of EU grants to some NGOs. EU
officials occasionally criticized their partner’s rights record, while taking pains to
praise the state of bilateral relations overall. The EU presidency criticized the lastminute
refusal of Tunisia to host an international conference on employment and
the right to work, scheduled for September 8-9, calling it one of “a series of negative
signals which have been given by Tunisia in the area of human rights and
governance over the last few years.” The European Parliament on June 15, 2006,
adopted a resolution deploring the repression of human rights activists in
Tunisia.
France remained Tunisia’s leading trade partner and foreign investor, and
President Jacques Chirac remained a staunch supporter of President Ben Ali.
Public statements about human rights on the part of France were exceedingly rare
and cautious.