TLE@J@8
Tunisia experienced historic changes in 2011. Street protests triggered by the
self-immolation of Mohamed Bouazizi, a street vendor in Sidi Bouzid, on
December 17, 2010, spread from city to city. The protests persisted, despite
police using live ammunition against mostly peaceful demonstrators until
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country on January 14. The protests
were fuelled by long-simmering grievances against a government that had
relentlessly stifled dissent and meaningful pluralism, and whose repressive
laws suffocated Tunisians’ freedom of expression, association, and assembly.
Human rights advanced during the year, most significantly with the adoption of
the pluralist electoral law for choosing the Constituent Assembly; ratifying the
Rome Statute, and thereby becoming a member of the International Criminal
Court; the lifting of most of Tunisia’s reservations on the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; and adoption of a
new press code and decree laws on political parties and associations.
Tunisians were allowed to demonstrate, express themselves, and form parties
and associations to an extent unmatched since independence in 1956.
However, the consolidation of human rights protection in the post-Ben Ali era
was hampered by the police resorting to excessive force against continuing
protests, delays in adopting decisive reforms toward a more independent judiciary,
and challenges to freedom of expression that the interim government did
not properly address.
Key Political Developments
Two interim governments quickly succeeded one another after Ben Ali’s ouster
in January. After large-scale protests in Tunis, the capital, a third interim government
formed on March 7 that pledged to organize the free and transparent
election of a Constituent Assembly tasked with writing a new constitution.
Elections for the assembly occurred on October 23.
More than 106 parties were legalized in the wake of the uprising, including the
Islamist an-Nahdha party and the Tunisian Communist Workers Party, both of which had been illegal and the targets of repression during Ben Ali’s presidency.
Similarly, many associations considered illegal under Ben Ali, such as the
International Association in Support of Political Prisoners and the Tunisian
Association to Combat Torture, received their official authorization soon after
Ben Ali’s departure.
The interim government dissolved the Democratic Constitutional Rally, Ben Ali’s
ruling party, and announced the dismantling of the so-called political police,
whose ubiquitous plainclothes agents had monitored and harassed dissident
activists.
On February 19 the interim government adopted a general amnesty law for political
prisoners, which allowed for the release of the more than 500 remaining
prisoners being held for political offenses. Most of these had been convicted or
were facing charges under the counterterrorism law.
The interim government also ratified the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and joined the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which establishes monitoring mechanisms
to fight torture, as well as the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which requires the state to
abolish the death penalty.
Accountability for Past Crimes and Reform of the Judiciary
The interim government took some positive steps in order to investigate crimes
committed during the uprising and compensate those who were injured or who
lost family members. The first interim government established a national commission
to investigate abuses committed during the protests, which made public
its preliminary conclusions on the abuses committed between December 17,
2010, and the end of January.
The commission identified 240 civilians killed during the uprising in towns and
cities around the country, most of them by police gunfire. In addition, it found
that 1,464 were injured in the month-long protests, and scores of inmates perished
in prison mutinies and fires between January 13 and 16. On October 24 the government promulgated a decree-law on the reparation for the victims of
the uprising that provides for a monthly allocation and free access to public
medical care and free public transport for them and/or their families.
On September 14 the office of the military prosecutor announced the filing of
charges against Ben Ali, the two ministers of interior who held office at the time
of the uprising, and 40 other high officers within the state security apparatus
for committing intentional homicide during the uprising. At this writing no one
had been held accountable for most killings committed by security force members,
although several trials of policemen were underway in civilian and military
courts.
In the first of several trials initiated, the former president, his wife Leila
Trabelsi, members of their families, and close allies of the couple were convicted
of embezzlement and sentenced in absentia to 35 years in prison.
While the interim authorities improved the military justice system, most importantly
by adding the possibility of appellate review, they have been slow to put
in place long-needed reforms of the judiciary, which played a repressive role
under Ben Ali.
Freedom of Expression, Press, and Association
The arsenal of repression under the rule of Ben Ali included a wide range of
laws crafted and then abusively interpreted by courts to suppress the expression
of dissent. The High Commission for the Protection of the Objectives of the
Revolution Political Reform and Democratic Transition approved new laws that
were then promulgated by the acting president.
The decree-law on associations, promulgated on September 24, eliminates the
crime of “membership in” or “providing services to” an unrecognized organization,
a provision that had been used to imprison thousands of opposition party
activists. The decree-law on political parties eliminated an article stating that a
party may not base its principles, activities, and programs on a religion, language,
race, sex, or region, a provision used in the past to restrict the basis
upon which Tunisians could found parties.
Similarly, the new press code is significantly more liberal as it eliminates criminalization
of defamation against state institutions, and of “offending” the president
of the republic. However, it maintains defamation as a criminal offense,
although it eliminates prison terms as a punishment for it while preserving
fines. It also maintains the criminal offense of defaming religions “whose practice
is permitted” as well as the offense of “distributing false information,” a
concept that the Ben Ali government used to prosecute many dissidents and
human rights activists.
On occasion the interim government availed itself of these repressive provisions.
For example, on May 29 authorities detained high-ranking police officer
Samir Feriani on charges under the penal code of “harming the external security
of the state” and distributing information “likely to harm public order” because
he wrote a letter to the interior minister that accused current high-level ministry
officials of responsibility for killing protesters during the Tunisian revolution. He
also accused ministry officials of destroying classified documents showing collaboration
between the Ben Ali administration and Israel’s secret service.
The Tunis military court provisionally released Feriani on September 22, and
acquitted him one week later of the charge of harming the external security of
the state. However, the charge of distributing false information was still pending
at this writing.
The interim government failed at times to respond forcefully to assaults on free
speech. On October 9, hundreds of protesters rallied against the decision by
the private television station Nessma to broadcast the animated feature film
Persepolis, which tells the story of a girl living in post-revolution Iran. One
scene was perceived by some as violating the Islamic precept of prohibiting
images personifying God. Two days later a prosecutor in Tunis announced that
it would open an investigation in response to a complaint filed against the TV
owners on the basis of press and penal code articles criminalizing defamation
of religion and assaults on public decency.
On June 29 several dozen protesters forced their way into the screening in Tunis
of a film on atheism in Tunisia. Although a police station is located close to the  cinema and the organizers of the screening had already contacted the police to
ask for protection, the security forces remained idle in the face of the attack.
Women’s Rights
Tunisia, long viewed as the most progressive Arab country with respect to
women’s rights, marked additional advances in this field. The adoption of a
gender parity requirement in the Constituent Assembly electoral law required
political parties to alternate between males and females on each of their lists of
candidates. However, few parties put women in the first place on many of the
lists, with the result that only 49 women were elected to the Constituent
Assembly out of 217 seats.
On August 16 the Council of Ministers adopted a draft decree to lift Tunisia’s
reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women. However, the government maintained “a general declaration”
suggesting that it might not implement reforms that conflict with Islam.
The Tunisian personal status code outlaws polygamy and repudiation, the practice
by which a man can divorce his wife merely by declaring his decision to do
so. The code gives men and women equal rights to divorce and requires they go
through the courts to obtain a divorce. The code establishes 18 as the minimum
age for marriage for both sexes. A 1993 amendment to the law granted women
the right to pass their name and nationality to her children. However discrimination
still exists in matters of inheritance and child custody.
Abuses against Protesters
Following Bouazizi’s self-immolation, thousands of Tunisians took to the
streets to protest against the government. The protesters were mostly peaceful,
although some threw rocks and in some cases Molotov cocktails. They braved
the deadly force of the security forces, who killed more than 200 by firing into
crowds, with high numbers of deaths sustained in Tunis and the inland cities of
Kasserine, Thala, and Regueb.
Police violence against protesters continued after the ouster of Ben Ali, especially
on January 29, February 27 and 28, and again at the beginning of May,
when the police assaulted several demonstrators and bystanders, arbitrarily
arrested them, and subjected them to harsh treatment that may amount to torture.
This came as a disturbing reminder that, while Tunisians enjoy the right to
demonstrate to a far greater degree than in the past, the security apparatus
continues to rely on its violent methods of the past and has yet to implement
crowd control techniques aimed at minimizing the use of force.
Refugees and Migrants
Since late February 2011, in the wake of the Libyan uprising, Tunisia has been
confronted by a humanitarian crisis due to the influx of refugees and migrants
crossing the borders from Libya. Tunisia hosted at least 195,241 third-country
nationals as of June 30. Overall, the military authorities—aided by Tunisian civil
society, international organizations, and volunteers—made significant efforts to
respond to the humanitarian needs. However, in May several violent incidents
took place in the refugee camps near Ras Jedir that left at least six migrants
dead and parts of the camp destroyed by fire. The Tunisian military, which provided
security at the camp, failed to prevent the violence and may have taken
part in some attacks on camp residents.
Key International Actors
France has continued to be the closest European partner of Tunisia, although
the relations between the two countries suffered during the uprising, when the
French authorities showed reluctance to denounce the crackdown on the
demonstrators. In January the European Union decided to freeze the assets of
46 allies and relatives of Ben Ali and his wife.
The interim authorities welcomed the visits of the United Nations special rapporteurs
on torture and on counterterrorism and granted them access to detention
facilities, which the International Committee of the Red Cross continued to
visit on a regular basis. The interim authorities also legalized branch offices of
various international human rights organizations, including Human Rights
Watch, and allowed the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
to open an office in the country.