 TUNISIA
 Tunisia, an Arab state in North Africa, is presided over by
 Habib Bourguiba, President for Life, who celebrated his 83rd
 birthday in 1985. A parliamentary republic since 1956,
 Tunisia has a Constitution which contains guarantees of basic
 human rights. The political system is dominated by the ruling
 Destourian (Constitutional) Socialist Party (PSD). Three
 opposition parties are legally recognized. The religiously
 oriented Islamic Tendency Movement, although not among these,
 is tolerated by the Government, as are two or three small
 opposition organizations.
 A visible' security apparatus which carries out random identity
 checks is maintained by the Government, partly as a result of
 security dictates due to the presence of the Arab League and
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) headquarters in Tunis,
 but also in response to terrorist acts attributable to the
 Libyan Government.
 Despite a bumper grain harvest and improved tourist and export
 receipts, soft petroleum and phosphate prices and the Libyan
 expulsion of some 31,000 Tunisian workers and dependents
 combined to limit growth in 1985. Per capita gross domestic
 product for 1985 is estimated at $1,117, among the highest in
 Africa.
 The past year saw a slight improvement in Tunisia's human
 rights situation over 1984, which had been marred by the
 Government's reaction to the bread riots in January 1984. The
 key political events of 1985 which had a bearing on human
 rights were the municipal elections, boycotted by the
 opposition, in May; the dramatic deterioration of relations
 between Tunisia and Libya following Libya's decision to expel
 the Tunisian workers, leading to the severing of diplomatic
 ties at the end of September, as well as increased measures by
 security forces as the Government sought to counter possible
 Libyan subversion; and pressures on the main trade union
 movement. The Israeli raid on the headquarters of the PLO on
 October 1 led to tension throughout the country, especially in
 the Tunisian Jewish community. Tension between labor and
 government has posed problems, and continuing poor relations
 with Libya may bring further security measures. The upcoming
 legislative elections in November 1986 will also be an
 important focal point for Tunisian concerns.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings in 1985. There
 was, however, a letter-bomb campaign in Tunis in September,
 perpetrated by the Qadhafi regime, which resulted in one
 person seriously wounded and contributed to a break in
 diplomatic relations.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1985.
 
 
 1402
 TUNISIA
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is reliable evidence that physical and psychological
 abuse of prisoners occasionally occurs. Isolated cases of
 police brutality are reported by the Arabic-language press and
 in communiques released by the Tunisian League of Human
 Rights, an independent group with branches throughout the
 country. There were no confirmed examples of officially
 ordered or approved torture in 1985. In September the
 Paris-based Association for the Defense of Human Rights and
 Democratic Liberties in the Arab World placed Tunisia on a
 list of countries facing allegations of torture. Conditions
 in Tunisian detention centers and prisons are poor and in some
 instances injurious to health. In 1985 there were numerous
 reports that civil prisons had become overcrowded and
 seriously undersupervised.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrests of individuals opposing the Government do occur, most
 frequently on charges of illegal political activity, Those
 expressing extreme Islamic viewpoints are reported to bear the
 brunt of arbitrary or secret detention, although those with
 leftist, Pan-Arabist, or pro-Libyan views are also arrested.
 These persons are often subjected to long periods of
 preventive detention without ever coming to trial and have
 been known to be arrested and released several times without
 being charged.
 There is no legal limit on preventive detention but in July a
 new initiative was announced by the Tunisian League of Human
 Rights which apparently was being considered by the
 Government. The plan would limit initial incommunicado
 holding of a detainee to a period of 4 days with the
 possibility of a single 4-day extension. After each period
 the prisoner would have a medical examination. The proposed
 law would limit preventive detention to 6 months for
 misdemeanors and 1 year for felonies. No indication has been
 given as to whether the plan will be signed into law, but on
 November 1 the Prime Minister announced before Parliament that
 a law setting limitations to these practices would be
 introduced.
 In 1981 Tunisia was criticized by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) for its forced labor policies in prisons.
 While Tunisia continues to use forced labor as a sentence, it
 reportedly resolved ILO concerns on this issue in 1983 in a
 comprehensive report. The ILO has continued to urge Tunisia
 to bring its legislation on rehabilitation work and civic
 service into conformity with the Convention on Forced Labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 No secret trials were held in 1985, and there were no cases of
 trials in special security courts. In all cases, defendants
 had access to legal counsel. The judiciary is relatively free
 of government interference, but in the spring the Government
 suppressed Tunisia's Young Magistrates Association. Although
 the dispute was primarily over salaries and working
 conditions, the Association's demands also included greater
 judicial independence from the Government. The harsh
 government response demonstrated its unwillingness to tolerate
 opposition from within the judiciary.
 
 
 1403
 TUNISIA
 The Government has claimed that all untried political
 prisoners have been released, but continued releases and
 rearrests of Islamic fundamentalists and trade union members
 make actual numbers difficult to determine.
 Certain prominent politicians and others remain abroad to
 avoid trial or detention.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the individual and of the home are generally
 respected. However, the security police sometimes secure
 blanket rather than specific judicial authorization for the
 arrest of individuals suspected of activities posing a
 security threat. Isolated instances of the monitoring of
 corresponaence and telephones are reported.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tunisian citizens feel free to criticize the Government in
 private and, in more restrained terms, in public, but personal
 criticism of President Bourguiba is not allowed. This is also
 true for the press, which is diverse and lively in its
 commentary on Tunisian politics and society. A large segment
 of the press is privately owned.
 Tunisian law requires that the first printed copy of each
 edition of every national news publication be submitted to a
 censorship authority. This body has the power to censor
 (either partially or completely) any publication it receives.
 In some cases the Government will take the further step of
 bringing charges against the editor or publisher. During
 1985, the Government suspended publication or seized issues of
 at least eight publications; two independent publications
 failed due to financial losses during their suspension. The
 normal period of suspension is 3 to 6 months but depends upon
 the offending topic and varies with individual publications.
 One paper was suspended for a year for printing a harshly
 worded article criticizing Syria's President Assad. The
 opposition weekly Al Mostaqbal was banned for 6 months in
 December 1984 for an editorial criticizing the Government's
 lack of response to the burning of some regional opposition
 headquarters and accusing some governors of complicity.
 The Tunisian General Trade Union Federation's daily newspaper
 Achaab was banned for 6 months in July for an article which
 the Government said attacked the dignity of certain
 governors. In February the Government rescinded its 6-month
 suspension of the independent weekly Realites for an interview
 with an exiled Tunisian politician. On at least three
 occasions the Government seized issues of domestic
 publications. In addition, one foreign news publication,
 Jeune Afrique, was banned-from October 1984 to January 1985.
 The Government and the Destourian Socialist Party also
 pressured would-be advertisers to discourage placement of
 advertisements in opposition publications. In early November
 five journalists were arrested- in connection with a
 confrontation between the Government and the Tunisian General
 Trade Union Federation (UGTT). They were released shortly
 thereafter and all charges against them were dropped.
 
 
 1404
 TUNISIA
 Academic freedom is fully respected, and scholarly research is
 not subject to interference. However, dissent is muted by the
 fact that faculty salaries are paid by the Government.
 Islamic and leftist student groups are tolerated but are not
 officially recognized.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of assembly, but
 government permission must be obtained to hold political
 meetings. Recognized political parties met throughout the
 year. In early 1985, before the municipal elections, there
 were some incidents in which unknown persons broke up
 opposition rallies, usually outside Tunis, and some regional
 local opposition political party headquarters were burned.
 Ruling party activists were suspected of being responsible,
 although ruling party officials say these actions are not
 condoned. No charges have been brought, but the Government
 has expressed concern.
 During 1985 members of the opposition Socialist Progressive
 Movement (MSP), the Islamic Tendency Movement, the Islamic
 Liberation Party, and the Tunisian Communist Party were
 detained on charges of illegal political assembly. Fourteen.
 members of the MSP went to court on November 27 only to have
 their trial immediately postponed to July 1986. Members of
 the Islamic Tendency Movement were released in early October
 without standing trial. Islamic Liberation Party members are
 awaiting appeal.
 The right to organize a union and to strike is guaranteed by
 the Tunisian Constitution. All workers have a right to
 affiliate with a union. These constitutional guarantees have
 contributed to the development of a large free trade union
 movement in Tunisia--one of the most important free trade
 union movements in the Arab world. The Tunisian General Trade
 Union Federation (UGTT) is the largest labor body, with about
 300-350,000 members. A second federation, the National
 Federation of Tunisian Workers, was formed in 1984 by
 dissidents from the UGTT. The Labor Code also protects the
 right of collective bargaining. Collective conventions are
 negotiated between the Government, employers, and workers to
 establish wage rates in all industrial sectors. All major
 wage contracts are negotiated with the participation of
 .representatives from these three groups.
 The Government imposed a public sector wage freeze in 1984 and
 1985. The UGTT strongly opposed this policy and salary
 negotiations remained at an impasse, adding to internal social
 tensions. To combat these tensions the Government has
 followed a carrot and stick approach, alternately negotiating
 and settling with some unions and then, where strikes were
 still threatened, imposing temporary restrictions on specific
 union activity. Current restrictions include a ban on
 workplace meetings and a suspension of dues checkoff
 privileges for public sector employees. The period of rising
 tensions over Libya's expulsion of Tunisian workers further
 exacerbated government-UGTT relations when the labor union
 refused to halt strikes for 90 days in support of the
 Government. In reaction, the Government launched a media
 campaign to discredit the UGTT Secretary General and called on
 ruling party members within the union to take over the
 leadership of all OGTT locals.
 
 
 1405
 TUNISIA
 Apparently in an effort to forestall strikes at a time of
 increased tension with Libya, to force the union to yield on
 its call for wage hikes not tied to increased productivity,
 and to force the ouster of UGTT Secretary General Habib
 Achour, Tunisian security forces on October 31 occupied major
 trade union offices in Tunis and elsewhere throughout the
 country and arrested trade union members. Subsequent strikes
 in Gafsa, Gabes, and Sfax led to confrontations with the
 police. On November 10 Achour was placed under de facto house
 arrest. No court order accompanied the action. While many of
 the union officials and members who had been detained were
 released, police rounded up 30-40 Islamic leaders on the
 university campus and sent them to perform their required 1
 year military service with the Saharan Development Brigade.
 In a communique issued on December 5, Labor Minister
 Noureddine Hached and the UGTT Executive Board agreed that the
 position of the trade union would be normalized under the
 supervision of the UGTT Executive Board, that those union
 members who had continued under detention would be released,
 that those expelled from work for union activities would be
 reinstated, and that government-UGTT negotiations would
 resume. On the same day, the press reported that Achour had
 been fired as UGTT Secretary General and that Sadok Allouche
 had been elected to succeed him. After 7 weeks of house
 arrest Achour was convicted on January 1 of usurping union
 authority at a cooperative in Sfax and sentenced to 1 year in
 prison. At year's end, it was estimated that between 20 and
 25 trade unionists were still in jail.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although Islam is the state religion, the Constitution
 guarantees religious freedom. Proselytizing for religions
 other than Islam is prohibited. There is no religious
 discrimination in private commerce and employment, although
 government employment is generally reserved for Muslims. The
 Jewish community worships freely and maintains indigenous
 organizations with official protection. Synagogues and
 Jewish-owned shops have been subject, however, to attack
 during periods of tension. In one incident two Jews and one
 Muslim policeman were killed when a second policeman guarding
 a synagogue on the island of Djerba opened fire on passersby.
 Throughout the tense aftermath of the Israeli raid October 1
 on PLO headquarters outside Tunis, the Government took
 extraordinary measures to protect the Jewish community.
 Expatriate Christians freely attend church services. Under an
 agreement between the Vatican and the Tunisian Government,
 several Roman Catholic orders remain active. The Bahai's have
 been given government protection in the past but in November
 1984 the Government ordered them to cease all religious
 gatherings. Since that time the community has not been the
 object of any further restrictions, although the ban on its
 religious gatherings is still in effect.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Free movement within Tunisia is allowed although citizens must
 carry identity cards. Passports for foreign travel are easily
 available but may be withheld if an individual is suspected of
 clandestine links to a foreign government. There is no
 restriction on emigration or repatriation.
 
 
 1406
 TUNISIA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 High government office is effectively restricted to members of
 the Destourian Socialist Party (PSD).
 The municipal elections of May 1485 were boycotted by the
 legally recognized opposition parties which claimed that there
 were no guarantees for proper democratic elections. Although
 tolerated, Islamic fundamentalist political groups have not
 been allowed to be active politically, except to some extent
 on university campuses. Regional actions against opposition
 groups did occur before the elections although not apparently
 under direct orders from the PSD in Tunis. In March a gang
 violently broke up a meeting of the opposition Democratic
 Socialist Movement in Sbeitla and in April an opposition
 headquarters was burned in Le Kef.
 Voters were presented with a slate consisting solely of PSD
 candidates but had the possibility of returning blank
 ballots. The high official figures of voter participation
 (92.03 percent) do not tally with firsthand accounts of events
 at the polls.
 The Government reportedly issued an order that one-third of
 the candidates for the municipal elections should be women.
 This directive was largely met and large numbers of women were
 elected to municipal councils (although only two women were
 elected mayor).
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Tunisian League of Human Rights has met repeatedly with
 the highest government officials to discuss arrest and
 detention procedures. The League publishes a bulletin which
 details reported human rights abuses. It holds national
 meetings without hindrance. Tunisia also has shown a
 willingness to speak out to criticize human rights abuses in
 other countries and has forcefully condemned terrorism
 regardless of motivation or origin. Efforts to get government
 permission to set up a local chapter of Amnesty International
 (to report only on human rights violations in other countries)
 met, however, with silence and were eventually abandoned. In
 the section of its 1985 report dealing with Tunisia, Amnesty
 International noted its concern about the imprisonment of
 prisoners of conscience; the torture and ill-treatment of
 prisoners; and the death penalty. Freedom House calls Tunisia
 "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Tunisia's population of 7,259,000 is growing at an annual rate
 of 2.3 percent. Per capita gross domestic product is $1,117.
 There are, however, regional disparities and pockets of severe
 poverty.
 Tunisia's resources continue to be heavily devoted to
 education and to economic and social development. As a result
 of the Government's commitment to mass education for both
 sexes, the population is increasingly well-educated. School
 enrollment ratios are high: 109.01 per cent of the eligible
 age groups in 1982 were enrolled in primary school. Women
 
 
 1407
 TUNISIA
 have equal access to education by law and approximately 40
 percent of the primary/secondary school enrollment is female.
 Adult literacy in 1985 was 62 percent.
 Life expectancy is about 62 years and according to the World
 Bank infant mortality is 52.6 per 1,000 live births. The
 Government has an active program of family planning and birth
 control. The percentage of population with access to safe
 water in 1982 was 97 per cent for urban areas and 25 per cent
 in rural areas. Caloric supply as a percent of basic
 requirements is 116 percent.
 Shortly after independence, Tunisia adopted an enlightened
 labor code which provided for standards of work, hours of
 work, and a minimum wage. These conditions apply directly to
 some 60 percent of the labor force who work in government
 jobs, parastatal companies, and in professions such as
 teaching. Another 20 percent of the labor force who work in
 agriculture and the private sector are indirectly affected by
 these provisions. About 20 percent of the work force,
 principally domestics and migrant agricultural labor, are not
 covered by the labor code.
 The base minimum wage in the industrial sector is 96 Tunisian
 dinars (TD) (approximately $125) for a 40-hour week. In
 agriculture the base minimum wage is 76 TD (approximately
 $100) per week, although this only directly applies to some 3
 percent of the agricultural work force. Employees who are
 covered under the minimum wage also by law receive other
 benefits including social security, disability and health
 insurance, transportation and family allowances, and paid
 leave. The normal workweek is either 40 or 48 hours. The
 labor code also requires employers to pay overtime, a night
 work differential, and holiday pay. In the major urban areas
 a minimum wage employee with a family of four will net between
 120-150 TD (approximately $160-$200) per month when allowances
 (nontaxable) are included. Child labor is prohibited prior to
 16 years of age. Moreover, these provisions are widely
 enforced through an oversight program directed by the Labor
 Ministry.
 The Tunisian Ministry of Social Affairs has established a
 health and safety office to improve health and safety
 standards in the workplace. In many hazardous jobs--e.g.
 mining, petroleum engineering, and construction--the
 Government has established new safety regulations and is
 enforcing more safety precautions.
 Legal equality between men and women is vigorously supported
 by the Government. Equal rights in the areas of divorce and
 child custody are, for example, guaranteed by legislation. A
 small number of women serve in the Government at all levels;
 for example there are 2 women cabinet ministers out of 26,
 there are at least 5 women jurists who have direct impact on
 cases they hear or review, and there are 7 women in the
 132-member Chamber of Deputies. Nevertheless, the centralized
 nature of decisionmaking generally limits the influence of
 women at the national level. Despite the Government's
 efforts, traditional practices in many cases keep women,
 especially in the rural areas, from full attainment of their
 legal rights.
 
 
 1408
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TUNISIA
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        18.6     17.7     27.9
 LOANS ..............   ... 11.1     13.5      4.5
 GRANTS ................    7.5      4.2     23.4
 AAO....................       5.0      1.6     22.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    5.0      1.6     22.8
 (SEC.SUP.ASSST.),..         5.0     1.5     20.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......     12.6     14.7     5.1
 LOANS ..............   ... 11.1     13.5      4.5
 GRANTS ...............     1.5      1.2      0.6
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      11.1     13.5      4.5
 REPAY.  IN  S-LOANS.....      11.1     13.5      4.5
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       1.5      1.2     0.6
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.5      1.2      0.6
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         1.0      1.4     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.0      1.4      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        1.0      1.4     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.ML. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       102.0    111.6    66.6
 LOANS ..............   ... 87.0     92.0     50.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 15.0     19.6     16.6
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      13.8     18.0    15.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       87.0     92.0    50.0
 C.INTL MILEO.TRNG ....        1.2      1.6      1.6
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....           0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...       120.6    129.3     94.5
 LOANS ..............   ... 98.1    105.5     54.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 22.5     23.8     40.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   151.1    221.6    245.3   1925.3
 IBRO             148.8    135.1    141.0   1479.4
 IFC                0.0      1.0      2.3     65.1
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     70.1
 IDS                0.0      Odo      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0     84.7     93.0    201.1
 UNOP               0.8      0.8      0.0     48.7
 OTHER-UN           1.5      0.0      0.0     10.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      9.0     50.0
 
 
 1409
