Tunisia
President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Democratic
Constitutional Rally (RCD), dominate political life in Tunisia. The government uses
the threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack down on
peaceful dissent.
Ben Ali was elected to a fifth term on October 25, 2009, with an official tally of
89.6 percent of the vote, against three challengers. Laws designed to exclude outspoken
opponents, and acts of intimidation and censorship against those authorized
to challenge the incumbent, prevented the campaign from being a period of
serious debate and prevented the vote from being free and fair. In the legislative
elections held the same day the RCD won the popular vote and thus was awarded
75 percent of the seats, the other 25 percent being set aside for candidates of the
other parties.
Pre-Election Violations
Despite President Ben Ali’s proclamation that the October presidential and legislative
elections would be conducted in a democratic and transparent manner,
laws adopted by the RCD-dominated parliament disqualified two key potential
presidential candidates. The only outspoken one among the three authorized
contenders was Ahmed Brahim of the formerly communist et-Tajdid movement.
Brahim’s party saw authorities annul the nominations of 13 of 26 members running
for parliamentary seats, and block distribution of the issue of its newspaper
containing its electoral platform. The Ministry of Interior also demanded that
Brahim retract five points from his campaign manifesto, including those that criticized
the way the elections were being conducted and references to a prevailing
“mentality of one-party rule.”
Human rights lawyer Radhia Nasraoui and her husband Hamma Hammami, head
of the banned Communist Party of Tunisian Workers, were assaulted on
September 29 by plainclothes policemen at Carthage airport in Tunis. Hammami
had just returned from Paris, where he had given an interview to Al Jazeera television
in which he accused the Tunisian government of human rights violations and
urged a boycott of the elections.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to every truly independent
human rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then
invoke the organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its activities.
Human rights defenders and dissidents are subject to heavy surveillance, arbitrary
travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in phone service, physical
assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of vandalism and theft, and
slander campaigns in the press. Members of the unrecognized International
Association in Support of Political Prisoners (AISPP) are regular targets for harassment
by the security forces. In April 2009 Human Rights Watch spoke with former
political prisoners in meetings arranged by AISPP. Plainclothes police officers
closely monitored both Human Rights Watch researchers and the people they
interviewed, stopping some of the latter to check their IDs and question them
about the meetings.
On September 15, plainclothes police detained for nine hours human rights
defender and former political prisoner Abdallah Zouari in Hassi Djerbi. They interrogated
him about his media and human rights work in the past seven years,
threatening him if he did not stop criticizing the government, Zouari said. Just
weeks earlier, Zouari had completed seven years of post-prison town arrest in a
remote village far from his home in greater Tunis, including two years that the
authorities imposed by an oral order (without ever providing a legal basis) at the
conclusion of his original five-year sentence of “administrative control.”
Criminal Justice and Rule of Law
Although Tunisia’s constitution provides for an independent judiciary, the executive
branch strongly influences judicial decisions and controls the appointment,
tenure, and transfer of judges. In cases that have a political character, courts fail
to guarantee defendants a fair trial. Prosecutors and judges usually turn a blind
eye to torture allegations, even when defense lawyers formally demand an investigation.
Trial judges convict defendants solely or predominantly on the basis of
coerced confessions, or on the testimony of witnesses whom the defendant does
not have the opportunity to confront in court.
The International Committee of the Red Cross continued its program of visiting
Tunisian prisons. However, authorities have not allowed access by independent
human rights organizations. They continue to refuse to honor an explicit commitment
made in April 2005 to allow visits by Human Rights Watch, first by delaying
approval, then imposing conditions on the visits that would undermine the credibility
of the data obtained, and then by ignoring revised proposals for the visits
submitted by Human Rights Watch.
Tunisian law allows judges to sentence defendants both to prison terms and to
post-prison terms of “administrative control.” However, the authorities subject
ex-prisoners convicted for their suspected affiliation with Islamist movements to
a variety of restrictions that exceed what the law permits, such as giving them
oral instructions to present themselves regularly at police stations, denying them
passports without written justification, and pressuring employers to refrain from
hiring them.
Tunisian citizens often find no redress for government violations against them. For
example, the Ministry of Interior still refuses ex-prisoner Hocine Jelassi a passport
even though the administrative court ruled in his favor on the matter in 2007.
Media Freedom
None of the domestic print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government
policies, apart from a few low-circulation magazines such as al-Mawkif,
an opposition party outlet, that are subject to occasional confiscation. Tunisia has
privately-owned radio and television stations, but private ownership is not synonymous
with editorial independence. The government blocks access to certain
domestic and international political or human rights websites featuring critical
coverage of Tunisia.
On August 15, 2009, pro-government journalists ousted the board of the National
Syndicate of Tunisian Journalists (NSTJ) and replaced it with a new one controlled
by pro-government members. This action followed a smear campaign against the
previous board and its democratically elected president, after the NSTJ in May
had released a report critical of the government’s suppression of the media.
Authorities barred Florence Beaugé, the North Africa correspondent for Le Monde,
from entering the country on October 20, accusing her of having “always shown
blatant malevolence and a systematically hostile bias toward Tunisia.”
Counterterrorism Measures and Human Rights
Since 1991 there has been one deadly terrorist attack in Tunisia: an April 2002
truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of Djerba, for which al Qaeda
claimed responsibility. In addition, security forces have clashed once with armed
militants, in December 2006 and January 2007, outside the capital.
The 2003 Law in Support of “International Efforts to Fight Terrorism and the
Repression of Money Laundering” contains a broad definition of terrorism that the
United Nations Human Rights Committee criticized on March 28, 2008, for its
“lack of precision.” Authorities have charged many hundreds of men, and some
minors, under the law. Nearly all of the hundreds who were convicted and imprisoned
stood accused of planning to join jihadist groups abroad or inciting others
to join, rather than of having planned or committed specific acts of violence. In
July 2009 the Tunisian parliament adopted an amendment narrowing the law’s
definition of a terrorist act by restricting the extent to which “incitement to
hatred” would meet the definition.
Suspects arrested in the context of the counterterrorism law commonly face a
range of procedural abuses that includes the failure by authorities to notify their
kin promptly, in violation of Tunisian law, extension of pre-arraignment detention
beyond the legal six-day limit, and the refusal of judges and prosecutors to act on
requests for a medical examination.
Socioeconomic Unrest
At least 200 people were prosecuted in connection with socioeconomic protests
in 2008 in the depressed mining region surrounding the southern town of
Redhayef. Charges included “forming a criminal group with the aim of destroying
public and private property” and “armed rebellion and assault on officials during
the exercise of their duties.” In February 2009 an appeals court upheld the convictions
of Adnan Hajji, secretary general of the local branch of the General Union of Tunisian Workers, and 37 other trade unionists and protestors. On May 11 a
peaceful demonstration by relatives of the detainees calling for their release led
to the arrest of some 30 individuals, eight of whom were charged with minor
offenses and sentenced to up to one year in prison, according to Amnesty
International.
On November 4 some 68 prisoners held in connection with the 2008 protests
were conditionally released in a presidential pardon issued by Ben Ali to mark the
22nd anniversary of his coming to power. Approximately 50 people who were
tried in absentia continue to face charges related to the protests.
Key International Actors
France is Tunisia’s leading trade partner and its fourth largest foreign investor. In
April 2009 France concluded a nuclear energy cooperation deal and an €80 million
aid package for Tunisia. On March 22 French foreign minister Bernard
Kouchner acknowledged, “It’s true that there are human rights abuses in Tunisia,
journalists who are harassed, sometimes imprisoned, and a general policy of
firmness.” He then went on to praise Tunisia’s economic and social achievements,
notably regarding the status of women and the values of secularism. In
response to a spate of post-election arrests, Bernard Valero, spokesperson for the
French foreign ministry, declared on November 6, “We are concerned by the difficulties
faced by journalists and human rights defenders in Tunisia ... We have
conveyed our concerns to the Tunisian ambassador and raised them with our
European partners.”
The European Union-Tunisia Association Agreement continues to be in force,
despite the government’s human rights record and its blocking of EU grants to
some NGOs. More than 80 percent of Tunisia’s trade is conducted with Europe.
EU officials occasionally criticize their partner’s rights record, while praising its
economic performance and the state of bilateral relations overall. On July 3, 2009,
EU External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner criticized Tunisia for
shutting down Radio Kalima, a web-based radio station critical of the government,
which earlier in the year authorities had refused to license, seizing its
equipment and harassing its journalists.
United States Department of State spokesperson Ian Kelly on October 26 said the
US was “concerned” about the Tunisian elections, adding,”We are not aware that
permission was granted to any credible independent observers.... We’ll continue
to pursue bilateral cooperation in areas of mutual interest, and we’ll continue to
press for political reform and respect for human rights.”
At this writing Tunisia is negotiating a visit by the UN special rapporteur on
human rights while countering terrorism. It has not agreed to a long-standing
request for a visit by the special rapporteur on torture.