 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic in which the Constitution provides for a
 parlamentapy.democacy with separation of the executive,
 legislative, and-judicial powers. In practice, the President
 andh~is part-ydominate-decisionmaking at all levels. The
 President appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and all 23
 regional governors. The elected Chamber of Deputies had
 previously shown little independence, but some members have
 recently been more outspoken-challenging legislation-drafted
 by the.Govqernment and criticizing the restrictive.press-law.
 President Zine el Abidine Ben Ali ran unopposed in April 1989
 and was elected President, under the Constitution, for a term
 of 5 years. His ruling Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD)-
 party wQn al1141 seats in the Chamber of Deputies~in the 1989
 election and, because of an opposition boycott, was unopposed
 in the two parliamentary, by-elections that took- place in
 1990.- Despite the introductionof modified proportional
 representation for the June municipal elections, these
 elections were also boycotted-by the.opposition. -As in 1989,
 results of the 1990 elections continued to be influenced by
 the winner-take-all system of voting, the inability of many
 voters to register or to obtain voting cards, boycotting of
 elections by opposition parties,_and heavy-handed RCD
 tactics. The Islamist party An Nahda and the Tunisian
 Communist Workers Party (POCT), among others, continued to be
 denied legal status.
 Tunisia's internal security is maintained by civilian services
 which include a paramilitary national guard, backed by armed
 forces in times of crisis. After President Ben Ali assumed
 power in 1987, these services-initially tended to avoid
 repressive measures but they began to exert tighter control in
 1989. In 1990 there were increased reports of police
 harassment, arrests of opposition activists, arbitrary
 interference with the privacy of the home, torture, and denial
 of passports to nationals. Police stepped up their presence
 in urban areas and around universities and mosques, and their
 tactics in dealing with demonstrators, especially students and
 Islamists, became increasingly harsh. Islamists staged
 several unauthorized demonstrations during the fall, some of
 which turned violent. On one occasion demonstrators were
 reported to have attacked police vehicles with Molotov
 cocktails.
 The Government continued to pursue a structural adjustment
 program, begun 4 years ago, designed to make the economy more
 market oriented and efficient. The adjustment measures taken
 by the Government over the last 3 years contributed to a
 growth of exports equivalent to 14 percent of the gross
 domestic product, and Tunisia's external debt service fell
 from 28 percent of exports in 1986 to 22 percent in 1989. As
 part of the structural adjustment program, subsidies on staple
 foods are.being reduced. In 1990 this translated into an
 average 10-percent price increase in the cost of bread, milk,
 pasta, cooking oil, and other staples. Real incomes generally
 have not increased as much as the prices of staple foods, and
 some lower income families have experienced significant
 erosion of buying power.
 The human rights situation deteriorated in 1990. The
 Government continued to refuse to register the main opposition
 group, An Nahda, as a legal political party on the grounds
 that it violates the Tunisian law prohibiting religiously
 based political parties. In the face of persistent attempts
 
 
 1659
 
 TUNISIA
 by An Nahda supporters to organize, demonstrate, and otherwise
 publicize their views, the internal security services
 increasingly used harsh tactics, resulting in at least
 onedeath--a student shot by police at a demonstration in
 September--which the Government said was an accident. The
 Government established an office to receive and investigate
 claims of torture and replaced nearly the entire police force
 in one provincial city after residents complained of excessive
 brutality. Other areas of continuing concern include
 arbitrary arrest-and detention without trial, freedom of
 speech and of the press, freedom of assembly and association,
 politically motivated denial of passports, and the right of
 citizens to change their government. The independent Tunisian
 League for Human Rights continued to press the Government on
 these concerns. In November President Ben Ali announced the
 formation of a new human rights organization to advise public
 officials on human rights policies.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political killing in 1990, but there
 were some reports of deaths in suspicious circumstances. A
 student was shot and killed by a police officer during a
 demonstration at a mosque in September; the police claimed the
 shooting was an accident. The Justice Ministry immediately
 announced that it would conduct an investigation into the
 incident, but no report had been released by the end of the
 year. In April the Tunisian League for Human Rights [LTDH]
 requested an official investigation into three suspicious
 deaths of prisoners while in custody in police stations, The
 Government responded that all three had hanged themselves.
 Since most prisoners are kept in crowded cells with no access
 to belts, straps, or ropes, observers noted this claim with
 considerable skepticism-
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearance in 1990.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Despite legal prohibitions and government warnings against
 ill-treatment of detainees, there were increased reports of
 torture and brutal treatment by police in 1990, particularly
 of Islamist activists. In the first 9 months of the year, the
 LTDH referred 120 complaints of torture to the Ministry of
 Interior for investigation; the Ministry denied the
 allegations. In March local media reported that Raouf Gritli
 was beaten with a stick in a local police station; Amnesty
 International (AI) reported that medical examinations
 supported allegations of torture of Gritli and two others
 arrested after they demonstrated in support of alleged members
 of An Nahda who were on trial. In May police arrested 29
 persons, 5 of them Tunisian Jews, in Djerba and Tunis on
 charges of smuggling gold and foreign currency. Police
 reportedly beat some or all of the detainees; there were no
 known investigations of the mistreatment.
 
 
 1660
 TUNISIA
 The Government maintains an office where complaints of torture
 and abuse can be registered, and claims to investigate
 complaints of torture brought to its attention. In Siliana, a
 regional capital in central Tunisia where human rights and
 citizens groups reported that police had been excessively
 abusive, the Government replaced virtually the entire police
 force. There was no additional information indicating whether
 any officials had been punished or reprimanded. The
 Government informed the Committee Against Torture in April
 that it had investigated 16 allegations of torture from
 September 1988 to April 1990 and found 7 to be substantiated.
 It is not known if any prosecutions resulted. Under Tunisian
 law, the penalty for mistreatment of prisoners ranges from a -
 fine to a prison sentence, depending on the extent of injury
 suffered by the defendant. AI reported that it asked the
 Government for information on several cases in June but had
 not received a reply by the end of the year.
 Although the Ministry of the Interior approved in principle an
 LTDH request in 1990 to visit prisons, local prison
 authorities denied LTDH requests to visit specific prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Tunisian law, arrests can be made without a warrant.
 Under a law adopted in 1987, prearraignment detention is
 limited to no more than 10 days. The accused must be informed
 of the grounds for arrest before questioning. A detainee may
 request an examination by a medical doctor but may otherwise
 be held incommunicado. During prearraignment detention,
 detainees do not have the right to a lawyer. They do have the
 right to a lawyer at their arraignment, and the Government
 provides legal assistance to indigent, detainees. Pretrial
 detention is limited to 6 months, renewable by an arraignment
 judge for up to two additional 6-month periods in the case of
 felony ihdictments.
 There were many credible reports of arbitrary arrest and
 detention, particularly among the Islamist community.
 Thirteen Tunisian air traffic controllers arrested in July
 during a work slowdown were held without charge beyond the
 Government's ten day limit. Two were tried and sentenced to 6
 months in jail for possession of subversive (Islamist in this
 case) tracts; the rest were released. An Islamist lawyer and
 leader of the illegal Arab Nationalist (pro-Libyan) Party,
 Bechir Essid, was arrested in 1989 and held under preventive
 detention without trial for over a year (see also Section
 l.e.). Some 60 members of the police, army, and customs
 service suspected of conspiracy to destabilize or overthrow
 the Government were arrested and detained without charge in
 November. According to the independent press, the detainees
 were all Islamist sympathizers who may have been connected to
 the "security group" arrested in 1987 on similar charges. An
 Nahda denied any current connection with the group, although
 it stated that one of the detainees previously had been
 affiliated with An Nahda.
 There were no reports of government-imposed exile in 1990.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tunisia's court system is composed of the regular courts, with
 appellate and supreme courts, and the military tribunal. The
 Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence and
 states that the accused is guaranteed the "necessary
 
 
 1661
 
 TUNISIA
 conditions" (not specified in the Constitution) to defend him
 or herself, and these rights are generally respected in
 practice, except in political or national security cases. The
 regular court system is highly centralized under the Justice
 Ministry. Trials are open to the public, and both domestic
 and foreign observers are able to attend. Although President
 Ben Ali has publicly advocated a more independent judiciary,
 -the executive branch still retains control in naming,
 assigning, granting tenure, and transferring judges, making
 them susceptible to political pressure.
 The military tribunal is presided over by a civilian judge and
 three military officers and hears cases dealing with national
 security. Proceedings are conducted in secret and defendants
 do not have the right to counsel of their choice, although
 they do have legal representation. In October Mohammed Ali
 Mahjoubi, a former official of the Interior Ministry, was
 convicted of abuse of power by a military tribunal in a secret
 trial. Mahjoubi's attorneys complained to the LTDH that they
 had been excluded from the trial and that the court-appointed
 lawyers failed to provide a defense. The Tunisian Lawyers
 Association (TLA) called for an end to the military tribunal
 system and staged a brief general strike in November to
 protest this and other procedural irregularities and the
 arrest and trial of An Nahda leader Mohamed Zemzeni on charges
 of giving an unauthorized lecture in a mosque, which led to a
 demonstration. Zemzeni denied the charges, and the TLA
 protested that his trial occurred without counsel present.
 The Ministry of Justice promised to look into the TLA's
 complaints but had not responded by the end of the year.
 In October Bechir Essid, having been detained for more than a
 year, was sentenced to 4 years in prison on charges of
 distributing illegal tracts and forming an illegal party. The
 TLA charged that the judge violated the legal code and
 practice when he cleared the courtroom, including Essid's
 lawyers, before sentencing Essid. Their sentences were
 reduced on appeal. An Islamist professor, Moncef Ben Salem,
 was sentenced to 3 years in prison after being tried for
 defaming the President and spreading "disinformation" capable
 of disrupting public order.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Tunisian Constitution provides for the inviolability of
 the person as well as the inviolability of the home and
 privacy in correspondence, "except in exceptional cases
 defined by law." Police must have a search warrant, but this
 requirement is often ignored in cases in which the authorities
 consider that state security is involved.
 The Government further increased its surveillance of
 opposition groups in 1990, especially Islamists. LTDH and
 opposition party members reported that they were surveilled;
 Islamists claimed that their homes were surveilled and their
 visitors frequently detained for questioning by the
 authorities. Islamists also claimed that they were harassed
 in their homes and that their homes were searched without
 warrant. There were numerous reports of mail being opened,
 and the Government is believed to .record some telephone
 conversations. Islamists reported difficulty in obtaining and
 renewing business licenses; some Islamist professionals
 claimed that clients were harassed by police after visiting
 their offices.
 
 
 1662
 TUNISIA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tunisians discuss politics and sensitive issues in private
 with relative freedom, both among themselves and with
 foreigners, but less often in public. Many laws pertaining to
 subversion and defamation are based on broad internal and
 external security concerns, which are neither defined nor
 subject to judicial review. These laws are often invoked in
 cases involving opposition members, particularly for alleged
 possession or circulation of illegal political tracts. As
 noted, a number of opposition members were detained and
 convicted for publishing, distributing, or possessing illegal
 publications or tracts.
 Freedom of the press is sharply curtailed, and there is
 selective reporting and self-censorship by the official as
 well as the independent press. The press code prohibits
 defamation of a head of state, or a member of the Government,
 or a member of the diplomatic corps. There is no attempt to
 prove or disprove the defamation. If the defamed person is in
 one of the categories above, he may sue. The punishment is
 usually a stiff fine or seizure of the issue in question, or
 both. On December 14, the publisher of Tunis-Hebdo and one of
 his journalists were given a 2-month suspended sentence and a
 $550 fine for taking a "defamatory tone" in an article about
 the National Assembly. The article in question appeared on
 July 30 and criticized the Assembly in sarcastic terms for the
 absenteeism of deputies.
 The press code adopted in 1988 further requires the printer to
 deposit copies of all publications prepared in Tunisia with
 the Information, Interior, and Justice ministries prior to
 public release. The Interior Minister may order the seizure
 of all copies of a single issue of a publication if the
 Ministry deems the issue will "disturb public order." The
 ruling on a publication must be made within 3 days from the
 time it is submitted. Political tracts must also be submitted
 for approval. Since 1988 suspensi6n of publications has
 normally required the approval of a judge.
 In 1990 the Government moved repeatedly against the Islamist
 press, although it authorized the publication of Al Fajr, an
 Islamist weekly, and permitted the Communist Workers Party's
 paper to resume publishing. Prior to that, Al Fajr had also
 experienced difficulty finding a publisher since publishers
 were reluctant to put out what was presumed to be a radical
 publication of an illegal party.   Al Fajr was suspended for 3
 months for printing an article by Islamist leader Rached
 Ghannouchi which characterized the Government as undemocratic.
 The paper of the banned Communist Workers Party likewise
 suffered .a 3-month suspension; and in September the courts
 fined Al Fajr editor Hamadi Jebali and gave him a 6-month
 suspended sentence for publishing the same article. In April
 a member of the Al Fajr staff was arrested and interrogated by
 the authorities. Al Fajr is limited by the Government to
 printing 40,000 copies per week. Requests to increase the
 number of copies have been denied.
 There were multiple seizures of Al Mawqif, Al Watan (both
 legal opposition papers), Al Iaalan (an independent paper),
 and Al Badil (the POCT paper) for disturbing public order,
 defaming the Head of State, or for unstated reasons. The
 Government seized all copies of a November issue of Al Fajr
 
 
 1663
 TUNISIA
 without explanation. The independent press speculated that a
 communique in the November issue by a coalition of three
 parties, one of which is illegal, may have prompted the
 Government's action.
 Although the independent press provided detailed reports of
 police brutality against citizens protesting prior incidents
 of police brutality in Siliana, the official press offered
 only minimal coverage and did not report police violence. The
 Tunisian press offers a wide range of publications in Arabic
 and French. Foreign newspapers are available and not subject
 to government restrictions.
 The State controls Tunisian television, and its coverage of
 the Government is highly favorable. Continuing a trend begun
 in 1989 when opposition party leaders were able to make
 unprecedented appearances on television, the leaders of most
 recognized opposition parties appeared at least once on
 Tunisian television in 1990. In the spring, the state
 television station (RTT) broadcast for several weeks a Friday
 evening interview program. The secretaries general of most of
 the recognized political parties appeared and responded to
 lengthy questioning by a panel of journalists. Although
 public interest was high, the program was discontinued. The
 Italian state television channel RAI is available, as is a
 French state channel, Antenne 2. Following municipal
 elections in June, Antenne 2 presented criticism of the
 elections, transmission of which was blacked out for Tunisian
 viewers, as were several reports on the Persian Gulf crisis.
 b. Freedom of ,Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly, but
 associations and political parties must apply to the Interior
 Ministry for legal authorization to function. Any group
 wishing to hold a public meeting must apply to the Government
 3 days in advance for a permit to meet. The Government
 normally approves such permits, except in cases involving
 proscribed political parties.
 The law on parties stipulates that every political party must
 reject violence in all -forms, including fanaticism, racism,
 and other discrimination. No party may claim to represent a
 religion, race, sex, or region. No party may receive funds
 from a foreign party or material aid directly or indirectly
 from foreign countries or foreigners. All adherents to a
 party must have been Tunisian citizens for at least 5 years.
 The Government registered no new parties in 1990. There are
 seven legal parties. At least seven unrecognized parties,
 including An Nahda (Islamists) and the Communist Workers Party
 (POCT), both. of which claim large memberships, continue to
 aspire to recognition.
 The Interior Ministry claims there are more than 6,000
 nongovernmental associations legally operating in Tunisia.
 Under the law, recognized associations must apply for and
 receive permission in order to hold meetings, although the
 Government has been selective in enforcing this law. The
 independent press has reported regularly on the activities and
 viewpoints of An Nahda leaders and on the activities of other
 unrecognized parties, usually without reprisal.
 Members of proscribed political parties encounter serious
 restrictions. In June three members of the Islamic Liberation
 Party were sentenced to 2 months in prison for belonging to an
 
 
 1664
 TUNISIA
 illegal party. Seven An Nahda supporters were cqonvicted of
 organizing illegal demonstrations in September and sentenced
 to jail terms of 8 months to 1 year. At the end of December,
 as many as 200 members of the Islamist An Nahda movement were
 arrested, including two members of the movement's executive
 bureau. According to the Government, about 100 people have
 been charged with membership in a secret organization which
 planned to destabilize the regime by violent means and
 establish an Islamic state. Little information about the
 arrests or the group had been made public by the end of the
 year. The Government also revoked the military exemptions of
 500 Islamist students arrested during campus violence and
 demonstrations in February; all were immediately drafted into-
 military service but most had been released by May. Although
 the Government claims that all have been discharged, there
 were credible reports that 50 remain in the military.
 Student organizations continued to hold rallies, strikes, and
 elections, and police employed more violent tactics in dealing
 with large student demonstrations and strikes. In October the
 Ministry of Interior publicly warned against disrupting public
 order and stated it was prepared to deal "most rigorously"
 with acts of lawbreaking. This communique followed a series
 of small but relatively violent demonstrations in Tunis in
 protest against the September shooting of an Islamist youth
 and the detention of an Islamist leader. There were frequent,
 widespread, and occasionally violent student demonstrations on
 university campuses during the first quarter of 1990. Both
 Islamist and leftist students were involved. After several
 weeks of continuing unrest, the Government cracked down,
 dispersing demonstrators using tear gas and dogs, arresting
 suspected instigators, and canceling draft deferments for some
 students. Police, whose presence on campus remains a point of
 contention between the Government and students, were present
 on campus when the new academic year began in November.
 Studexits claim the President promised to remove police, but
 the Government denies having made such a promise.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion, but
 allows the free practice bf most other religions. However,
 since 1984 there has been a ban on Baha'i religious meetings
 because this faith is considered a heretical sect of Islam.
 Proselytizing for religions other than Islam is prohibited,
 although no specific 'sanctions are prescribed. The
 Constitution calls on all political parties to respect and
 defend Tunisia's Arab-Muslim identity, and the President, his
 parents, and grandparents must be Muslim.
 The Government controls the mosques and pays the salaries of
 the prayer leaders (imams). According to the 1988 law of the
 mosques, only government-appointed personnel may lead
 activities in the mosque, except with permission from the
 Prime Minister's office. The Government sponsors television
 talk shows in support of the Government's religious policy.
 Islamists claimed that imams continued to be removed from
 their jobs on the suspicion that they were promoting Islamist
 goals.
 Jews comprise t~e largest indigenous religious minority in
 Tunisia, with a population of about 2,000. The Government
 ,assures freedom of worship for the Jewish community and
 safeguards its safety. For example, after the Temple Mount
 incident in Jerusalem in Octobr in which Palestinians were
 
 
 1665
 TUNISIA
 killed, the Government placed heavy security around the main
 synagogue in Tunis. Tunisia's very small community of
 Christians is comprised principally of expatriates, who freely
 attend church services.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement in Tunisia, but all citizens must
 carry identity cards. The number of roadblocks, manned by
 armed members of the security forces (as well as by customs
 officials, especially near the borders with Libya and
 Algeria), increased in 1990. Tunisians have complained of
 being stopped arbitrarily and harassed at these roadblocks,
 which are set up ostensibly in response to the large foreign
 presence in Tunisia, including the headquarters of the
 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Arab League.
 The withholding of passports continued to be a source of
 concern. The LTDH reported that in the first 9 months of 1990
 it received over 300 complaints of passport denial (which it
 regularly registers with the Interior Ministry). The Ministry
 stated that passports were denied to Tunisians who were
 considered a threat to public order and to those involved in
 criminal cases in Tunisia or abroad. The LTDH does not accept
 that all of passport denials were based on these
 justifications; for example, Islamist leader Abdelfatah Mourou
 was not permitted to leave Tunisia in August to attend an
 Islamic conference in Rabat.
 There is no arbitrary restriction on emigration or
 repatriation. Approximately 400,000 Tunisians are working
 overseas. Tunisia does not accept refugees for permanent
 resettlement and is not a country of first asylum. There were
 no cases of forced repatriation. There are 52 refugees of
 resident status and 2,000-3,000 Palestinians.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Given the continuing restrictions on political activities and
 distortions in the election process, the right of citizens in
 Tunisia to change their government through democratic means
 remains in doubt. The largest opposition party (An Nahda)
 remains illegal; according to the Government, it violates the
 law prohibiting religiously oriented parties. An Nahda's
 candidates averaged 18 percent of the vote when running as
 independents in the 1989 legislative elections. The leader of
 the party, Rached Ghannauchi, is in self-imposed exile
 abroad. There is widespread belief that An Nahda receives
 funding from Saudi Arabia, in contravention of the law on
 parties, although An Nahda denies this.
 The Constitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with
 separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial
 powers. Until 1990, the all-RCD legislature had shown little
 independence. During the fall 1990 session, members began to
 exercise the authority vested in them by the Constitution.
 For example, the legislature subjected the Government's
 proposed budget to extensive scrutiny and rejected or amended
 a substantially larger number of measures submitted by the
 Government. The President appoints the Prime Minister, the
 Cabinet, and the 23 governors. The executive is dominated at
 the national, regional, and local levels by the President and
 
 
 1666
 TUNISIA
 his party, the RCD. Government and RCD mechanisms are hardly
 distinguishable; the President of the Republic is also the
 president of the party.
 In February the electoral code as it applies to municipal
 elections was revised from a winner-take-all majority system
 to a limited proportional system, and the municipal elections
 were postponed at the opposition's request. However, the
 opposition parties boycotted the June municipal elections,
 charging that continued RCD control of the apparatus of the
 State, nonrecognition of some political groups, bias in and
 lack of access to the media, and inadequate time for
 campaigning would skew the elections in favor of the ruling
 party.- Independent candidates won 34 out of 3,768 seats,
 winning control of one municipality. No opposition candidates
 ran in the October National Assembly by-elections; the two RCD
 candidates were elected. There were credible reports that
 many citizens were prevented, on various pretexts, from
 registering to vote. By the end of the year, the Government
 had not announced dates for elections to fill the 10 remaining
 Parliamentary vacancies.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several human rights organizations are active in Tunisia and
 are recognized by the Government. The LTDH is one of the
 oldest and most respected human rights organizations in the
 Arab world. In April the LTDH issued a communique
 criticizing, inter alia, increased violence by police,
 unjustified trials against participants in the demonstrations
 after the 1990 floods, withholding of passports, and failure
 to carry out the 1989 general amnesty. The Minister of
 Interior responded 2 days later to each complaint.
 At the request of President Ben Ali in 1989, the Arab
 Institute of Human Rights was founded. The Institute is a
 collaborative effort of the Tunisian League of Human Rights,
 the Arab Organization for Human Rights and the Union of Arab
 Lawyers. The Maghreb Human Rights League also has its office
 in Tunis.
 In November President Ben Ali announced the creation of a High
 Commission for Human Rights and Fundamental Liberties. The
 Commission will consolidate efforts to implement national and
 international human rights standards and will offer advice to
 public officials on human rights aspects of policy issues.
 While no members of the Commission had been named by year's
 end, President Ben.Ali said its composition would reflect the
 plurality of Tunisian opinion.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 While the 1956 Personal Status Code (PSC) establishes equal
 rights for men and women, in practice women continue to occupy
 a subordinate role in society. Under the PSC, daughters
 receive a smaller portion of the inheritance than sons. In
 practice, the husband is the head of the household; parental
 power and authority are in his hands; and the wife owes him
 obedience.
 
 
 1667
 TUNISIA
 Arranged marriages and marriages between cousins still occur.
 According to the 1984 census, 58 percent of females over the
 age of 10 were illiterate, compared with 34.6 percent of
 males.
 There is a gradual trend, however, toward greater
 opportunities for women. Women have equal rights in divorce
 and child custody cases, and polygamy is forbidden. Women
 have full legal status from the age of 20. Moreover, 90
 percent of the eligible female population have been enrolled
 in primary school since 1987 and secondary and university
 enrollment are currently over 40 percent female. The number
 of employed women continues to rise at a moderate pace. In
 1989 women comprised an estimated 20 percent of the work
 force, although they are not widely represented at the senior
 levels of Government.
 Violence against women occurs in Tunisia, but little is known
 about its extent. Women are protected under the Personal
 Status Code and the Tunisian Constitution. Abuse occurring
 within the family, such as wife beating, is seldom mentioned
 publicly owing to the value attached to privacy in this
 traditional society. There are no official statistics on the
 subject, and no support groups or shelters are known to
 exist. A battered woman is more likely to seek shelter with
 her extended family than at a shelter organized for this
 purpose.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Tunisia's Constitution stipulates the right to organize a
 union and to strike. The roughly 20 percent of Tunisia's work
 force that is unionized includes most public sector workers
 and those in large private establishments. Unions are
 independent of the Government, but operate under government
 regulations which have sharply restricted their freedom of
 activity in recent years.
 The General Union of Tunisian Workers (UGTT), which made
 significant, gains in 1989 toward reestablishing an active
 trade union role, made little further progress in 1990.
 Regulations prohibiting union meetings in the workplace were
 revoked during the year. The new rules only permit such
 meetings, however, if management agrees. The UGTT is seeking
 revocation of this condition. The UGTT is a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. There is no
 requirement that unions belong to the UGTT.
 The Tunisian Labor Code requires that strikes be approved by
 the UGTT's executive board, although it does not specify that
 such approval is needed before the strike is initiated. In
 addition, the Code permits the requisitioning of the work
 force by decree if a strike threatens a vital national
 interest. These limitations did not prevent numerous short
 strikes during 1990 in support of wage demands. The
 Government agreed to secondary schoolteachers' wage demands,
 but not to similar demands lodged by university and primary
 schoolteachers. An unsanctioned work slowdown by air traffic
 controllers in July led to the arrest of 13 union members (see
 Section l.d.).
 
 
 1668
 TUNISIA
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Tunisian Labor Code prohibits the firing of workers for
 union activity. Workers who feel they have been fired or
 otherwise discriminated against for legitimate unionism can
 appeal to the Social Affairs Ministry, which has been
 effective in remedying discrimination.
 Tunisian workers exercise the right to bargain collectively,
 but government approval of collective agreements is required.
 Most trade unions prefer to negotiate wages at the sectoral
 rather than shop level. Union leaders argue, however, that
 the abolition in 1983 of the automatic "check-off", requiring.
 payment of union dues whether workers are union members or
 not, has deprived the UGTT of a vital source of funds.
 There are no free trade zones. Workers in export firms have
 the same right to organize, bargain collectively, and strike
 as those in nonexport firms. The unionization rate is about
 the same even though export firms are more likely to be
 antiunion. The State pays the employer contribution to the
 social security system if the firm produces primarily for
 export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by law and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 For manufacturing, the minimum age for employment is 15 years;
 for agriculture it is 13. Inspectors from the Social Affairs
 Ministry check the records of employees to verify that the
 employer complies with the minimum age law. Despite this law,
 young children often perform agricultural work in rural areas
 and sell food and other items in urban areas. The UGTT has
 expressed concern that child labor--frequently disguised as an
 apprenticeship--has become increasingly widespread in recent
 years. Small enterprises in the informal sector reportedly
 violate the minimum age law frequently. Child labor is not a
 problem in export firms.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Tunisia has a labor code dating from independence in 1956 that
 sets standards, including a maximum 48-hour workweek and a
 minimum wage. Regional labor inspectors are responsible for
 enforcing standards. Most firms are inspected about once a
 year. However, in general the Government does not enforce the
 minimum wage law, particularly in the nonunionized sectors of
 the economy. Moreover, a considerable amount of labor takes
 place in the informal economy, and as such falls outside the
 purview of labor regulation.
 Employees covered by the minimum wage law are entitled to
 receive other benefits, including social security, disability
 and health insurance, transportation and family allowances,
 and paid leave. Some covered employees, however, are deprived
 of these benefits by-unscrupulous employers. The labor code
 requires .employers to pay overtime, a night work differential,
 and holiday pay. In the major urban areas, a minimum wage
 employee with a family of four nets between $170 and $210 per
 month when allowances are included. In agriculture the base
 wage is about $3.85 per day, although this directly applies to
 only 37 percent of the agricultural work force and does not
 
 
 1669
 TUNISIA
 cover migrant agricultural workers. Supplemented by the
 benefits listed above, the minimum wage is adequate to provide
 a decent living for workers and their families. Over the past
 several years, however, inflation has outstripped increases in
 the minimum wage, thereby eroding the standard of living.
 The Social Affairs Ministry has an office with responsibility
 for improving health and safety standards in the workplace.
 There are special government regulations covering many
 hazardous jobs--e.g., mining, petroleum engineering, and
 construction. These regulations are enforced more strictly in
 Tunis than in the rest of the country, where much work,
 especially in construction, is done in the informal sector.
 Working conditions and standards tend to be better in export
 firms than in nonexport firms.
 
 
 1670
