 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic in which the Constitution provides for a parliamentary de-
 mocracy with separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers. In prac-
 tice, the President and his party dominate decisionmaking at all levels. The Presi-
 dent appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and all 23 regional governors. His
 Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (RCD) holds all 141 seats in the Chamber of
 Deputies. The outlawed Islamist party, An-Nahda, was dealt a severe blow in 1992
 when 265 of its top members were sentenced to prison terms ranging from 1 year
 to life after being convicted by two military tribunals for plotting to assassinate the
 President and overthrow the Government.
 Tunisia's internal security is maintained by civilian services which include a para-
 military national guard, backed by armed forces in times of crisis. In 1992 there
 continued to be reports of harassment and arrests of opposition activists and their
 family members, arbitrary interference with the privacy of the home, and torture
 by the police and security apparatus. Police maintained a heavy presence in urban
 areas and at universities. According to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
 Agency, total military expenditures for 1989 were dollars 273 million. Military ex-
 penditures represent a small share of the national budget and have not been a sig-
 nificant public issue.
 Tunisia has a mixed economy composed principally of revenues from tourism, tex-
 tile and clothing exports, worker remittances, agricultural products, and crude pe-
 troleum. It is in the sixth year of a structural adjustment program designed to make
 the economy more market oriented, reduce staple food subsidies, and increase the
 role of the private sector. The average annual real growth rate has been 4.2 percent
 over the last 5 years, with 8.6 percent in 1992. Inflation has been held to an average
 annual rate of about 7.5 percent; the rate in 1992 was 6 percent. Despite the cre-
 ation of 51,000 new jobs in 1992, unemployment has remained at approximately 15
 percent.
 Although the Government undertook serious initiatives in the human rights area,
 significant restrictions remained in effect in 1992. The Government, for the most
 part, had completed a crackdown begun in 1991 on the outlawed Islamist party, An-
 ahda. However, persons suspected of involvement with An-Nahda and their amily
 members continued to face widespread harassment, the press remained hesitant to
 criticize the Government, reports of police torture and mistreatment continued, and
 new legislation led to the closure of the Tunisian League for Human Rights. Inter-
 
 
 1096
 ference with the right to privacy and the ability of citizens to change their govern-
 ment also remainedsignicant problems.
 The Islamists arrested in 1991 were either released or convicted by civil and mili-
 tary courts. Many of those convicted received heavy sentences. Although the trials
 were open to international observers and family members, questions remained as
 to the inde pendence of the courts, whether the guilty verdicts were adequately sup-
 ported by the evidence, and whether proper legal procedures were followed. The
 Chairman of the Tunisian Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic Free-
 doms, appointed by President Ben Au, issued a second report regarding compliance
 with the recommendations in his 1991 report. He reported that police and govern-
 mental officials were receiving more human rights-reated trainng and were being
 held accountable for their actions. The Government also further opened the media
 to opposition party views.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Repet for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There was one report of a death in
 police custody. Mouldi Omar reportedly died in January following his arrest on De-
 cmber 15, 1991. The Government claims he died of natural causes afer being
 transferred from prison to a hospital for treatment. The Government aed to reex-
 amine the circumstances of the death of Faisal Barakat, who died in October 1991.
 Notwithstanding eyewitness accounts and an independent autopsy attributing the
 death to systematic beating and torture, the Government had claimed that Barakat
 died in a road accident. By year's end, the Government had yet to release any infor-
 mation on the progress of the investigation.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or De ading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Tunisian law forbids ill-treatment of detaineesGoowever, there continued to be cred-
 ible reports that security forces mistreated detainees, particularly Islamists sus-
 pected of antigovernment activities. There also were continuing allegations of tor-
 ture. The slapping and beating of suspects is believed to remain widespread. Many
 of the defendants in the two slamist trials made credible claims that their confes-
 sions had been extracted through torture, such as beatings and water immersion
 following their arrests in 1991. A committee of doctors apointed by the courts failed
 to substantiate these charges. The charges were rejectery the judges although vid-
 eotapes of some confessions revealed signs of abuse, and some defendants had to be
 physically assisted to enter the courtroom. Members of the opposition who live
 abroad and some human rights oups charged that use of torture continued. The
 Government announced in  ate 1992 that the Chairman of the Higher Committee
 for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms would be authorized to visit prisons without
 notifying officials in advance.
 The Government denied that torture was or ever has been practiced as a matter
 of state policy but admitted that unsanctioned abuses had occurred. In an effort to
 halt such abuses, human rights training was given to police, who are now required
 to sign a statement attesting to their awareness of Tunisian and international
 human rights standasnd their commitment to abide by them. Officers were pro-
 vided with a manual including the texts of many human rights documents, human
 rights directives were posted in police stations, and the Minister of Justice publicly
 stated that any police officer gilty of human rights abuses would be punished. In
 January three national guardsmen were sntenced to poi years' imprisonment and
 a fourth to 6 months or beating an accused thief, and in December four other
 guardsmen were sentenced to 15 to 20 years' imprisonment for their involvement
 in the beating death of another theft suspect. A report issued in July by the Chair-
 man of the Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms indicated that
 55 officers had been found guilty of various abuses and that 50 cases remained
 pending. The Government, however, declined to announce publicly the names of
 sons found guilty of misconduct or to indicate the nature of any punishment that
 may have been meted out. It was thus not possible to determine whether the past
 practice of according impunity to police officials had been reversed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under Tunisian law, arrests may be
 made without a warrant. Under a law adopted in 1987, prearraignment detention
 is limited to no more than 10 days. Attorneys, human rights activists, and former
 detainees charge that this limit is frequently circumvented simply by delaying reg-
 istration of the arrestee. The accused must be informed of the grounds for arrest
 before questioning. A detainee may request an examination by a medical doctor but
 may otherwise be held incommunicado. During prearraignment detention, detainees
 do not have the right to a lawyer. They do have a right to a lawyer at their arraign-
 
 
 1097
 ment, and the Government provides legal representation to indigents. In certain in-
 stances, such as cases involving national security or felony indictments, pretrial de-
 tention may be for 6 months, renewable for up to two additional 6-month periods.
 Within 10 days of arrest, the examining magistrate in a preliminary hearing is sup-
 posed to decide whether to invoke pretrial detention. While the law provides for bl,
 inpractice it is very rarely granted.
 Under Tunisian law, a detainee may be questioned in a police station but should
 be returned to jail each night. During the two Islamist trials, many defendants
 claimed that the law limiting incommunicado detention had been routinely violated
 and arrest records falsified following their arrests in 1991. All their requests for re-
 lease pending trial were denied.
 Tunisian law specifies that no citizen shall be exiled from the country, and there
 were no reports of government-imposed exile in 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Tunisia's court system is composed of regular
 (civil and criminal) courts, with appellate and supreme courts and a Military Tribu-
 nal. The Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence and states that ac-
 cused persons will be accorded "necessary guarantees" (not further specified in the
 Constitution) for their defense. Although the court system is overloaded, in normal
 criminal cases the rights of the accused are generally respected. There were also
 continuing complaints in 1992 that the rights of those accused of involvement in the
 alleged plot to overthrow the Government-or even less serious crimes of a political
 or security nature-had not been adequately protected.
 The regular court system is highly centralized under the Justice Ministry. Civil-
 ian trials are usually open to the public, and both domestic and foreign observers
 are permitted to attend. An elected Supreme Council of the Magistrature, represent-
 ing the judges, nominally decides matters of transfer and judicial discipline. How-
 ever, in practice, the executive branch retains control in naming, assigning, granting
 tenure to, and transferring judges, thus making them susceptible to influence in po-
 litically sensitive cases.
 The Military Tribunal is presided over by a civilian judge with military rank and
 four military judges. In addition to hearing cases involving the military, the Tribu-
 nal also may hear cases against civilians when national      t is deemed to be
 involved, although this right was challenged, unsuccessfully, by lawyers defending
 Islamists in the 1992 trials. The proceedings in this court are normally conducted
 in secret and, although defendants theoretically have the right to counsel of their
 choice, in practice the latter are frequently denied access to the proceedings. Defend-
 ants who cannot afford legal representation are represented by unpaid attorneys ap-
 pointed by the lawyers' association. As with the civilian courts, decisions of the Mili-
 tary Tribunal may be appealed to the country's highest court.
 During 1992 two military tribunals presided over the cases of 279 Islamists ac-
 cused of plotting to assassinate the President and overthrow the Government. These
 proceedings were open to family members, the local and international press, observ-
 ers from international human rights organizations, and members of the diplomatic
 corps. The defendants were represented by attorneys of their choice, and those who
 could no. afford to pay were represented by attorneys appointed by the lawyers' as-
 sociation Of the 279 defendants, 265 were found guilty and sentenced to prison
 terms ranging from one year to life. The proceedings produed serious doubts as to
 whether the verdicts hadobeen supported by the evidence. Evidence was not linked
 to specific defendants and consisted primarily of uncorroborated confessions that de-
 fendants later repudiated as having been extracted under torture. Questions remain
 as to whether proper procedures were followed and whether the court acted inde-
 pendently of political considerations. The defendants unsuccessfully appealed the
 verdicts in both proceedings.,
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The Tu-
 nisian Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person and the home, as well
 as privacy in correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." Police
 must have a search warrant, but this requirement is sometimes ignored in cases in
 which the authorities consider that state security is involved or in which a "flagrant
 crime" is deemed to have been committed. Tunisian law specifies that, barring ex-
 ceptional circumstances, arrests are to be made between 6 a.m. and 8 p.m.
 In 1992 the Government continued to surveil Islamists and others believed to as-
 sociate with them. Islamists complained that their homes and offices were watched,
 their visitors were often detained for questioning, and their homes were entered and
 searched without warrants. There were continuing reports of mail being opened and
 telephone conversations monitored. The Government is believed to record some tele-
 phone conversations.
 
 
 1098
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-These rights remain controlled, but a limited
 opening of the press to opposition views was evident in late 1992. The press in-
 creased coverage of op sition party activities, and three opposition publications re-
 sumed publication with the assistance of government subsidies. Tunisians discuss
 politics and sensitive issues in private with relative freedom, both among them-
 selves and with foreigners, but do so less in public. Some laws pertaining to subver-
 sion and defamation are based on broad internal and external security concerns,
 which are neither defined nor subject to judicial review. These laws have been in-
 voked in cases involving opposition members, particularly for alleged possession or
 circulation of illegal political tracts or correspondence. Such charges were filed
 against many of the defendants in the two Islamist trials.
 Freedom of the press was curtailed, in part by restrictive laws and practices and
 in part by self-censorship and fear of sanctions. The Press Code prohibits defama-
 tion of the Head of State, a member of the Government, or an agency of the Govern-
 ment. In the past, charges of libel and spreading false information have been the
 two main bases for suits against the media, although no such charges were filed in
 1992. Journalists were at times called to the Ministry of the Interior after publish-
 ing articles critical of the Government.
 Prepublication censorship under the 1988 Press Code, which is still valid, requires
 the printer to deposit copies of all publications prepared in Tunisia with the Sec-
 retary of State for Information and the Interior and Justice Ministries prior to pub-
 lic release. The Interior Minister may order seizure of all copies of a single issue
 of a publication if the Ministry judges that the issue would disturb public order."
 A ruling on the publication must be made within 3 days from the time of submis-
 sion. Political tracts must also be submitted for approval. In 1991 the Government
 announced the President's decision not to enforce prepublication censorship (al-
 though in fact it retained the right to do so). Publications are no longer routinely
 censored at the printing plant. However, the possibility of seizure without com-
 pensation after publication significantly increases the financial risk to publishers.
 In 1992 the Government seized copies of several issues of French newspapers which
 carried reports on the French Government's conviction in absentia of the President's
 brother on money-laundering charges. The Government also barred from distribu-
 tion an edition of a French newspaper that carried an article critical of the Ben Ali
 Government.
 The Government controls television and radio, and its coverage of government ac-
 tivities and policies was consistently favorable in 1992. The regular newscasts of the
 French state channel, France 2, were blocked in December 1992 after the French
 network broadcast a story about the criminal charges against the President's broth-
 er. The Government claimed France 2's journalistic ethics do not conform to Tuni-
 sian standards. The Italian state television channel Rai Uno was available to all
 viewers. Satellite dishes are available to those who can afford them.
 In September the Government announced major reforms in the information sector,
 including a directive calling for official media coverage of opposition activities and
 the formation of a multiparty Higher Communications Council. The Council, which
 is composed of 10 members of the media appointed by the President, serves as an
 advisory body to make recommendations concerning possible amendments to the
 1988 Press Code. Immediately following announcement of these actions, coverage of
 opposition parties in the media increased.
 While there are no official limitations on academic freedom, professors practiced
 a form of self-censorship, avoiding classroom discussions that were either critical of
 the Government or supportive of An-Nahda. Police presence on campus was heavy.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but any group wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or
 march must apply to the Government for a permit 3 days in advance. The Govern-
 ment normally approves such permits, except in cases involving proscribed political
 parties or associations.
 The law on political parties stipulates that ever political party must reject all
 forms of violence, including fanaticism, racism, an  other discrimination. No party
 may claim to represent a religion, race, sex, or region. No party may receive funds
 from a foreign party or material aid directly or indirectly from foreign countries or
 foreigners. A I party members must have been Tunisian citizens for at least 5 years.
 There are seven legal parties; no new parties were registered by the Government
 in 1992. There are also several unrecognized parties, including the Islamist An-
 Nahda Party and the communist Workers Party, which claim large memberships
 and aspire to recognition. An-Nahda is ineligible for recognition under current laws
 because it is a party that claims to represent a religion.
 
 
 1099
 In March the Government amended the law on associations making it illegal for
 an officer of a political party to serve as an officer of a private 'general" association
 and also for such an association to reject membership applications. The result of this
 amendment was the closure in June of the Tunisian League for Human Rights, one
 of the oldest and most respected human rights organizations in Africa and the Mid-
 dle East (see also Section 4).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion,
 but allows the free practice of most other religions. Since 1984 there has been a ban
 on Bahai religious activities because the Government considers this faith to be a
 heretical sect of Islam.
 Proselytizing for religions other than Islam is prohibited, although no specific
 sanctions are prescribed. The Constitution calls on all political parties to respect
 and defend Tunisia's Arab-Muslim identity. The President as well as the parents
 and grandparents of the President must be Muslim.
 The Government controls the -mosques and pays the salaries of the prayer leaders.
 According to the 1988 law on mosques, only government-appointed personnel may
 lead activities in the mosques, except with the permission from the Prime Minister's
 office.
 Jews comprise the largest indigenous religious minority, with a population of
 about 3,000. The Government assures freedom of worship for the Jewish commu-
 nity, safeguards its safety, and pays the salary of the Grand Rabbi of the commu-
 nity. Tunisia's very small community of Christians is comprised mainly of foreign
 nationals, who freely attend church services.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is freedom of movement within Tunisia, and people are free to
 change at will their place of residence or work.
 The Government withheld passports in certain cases, and Islamists continued to
 complain of difficulties in obtaimng international travel documents. The Govern-
 ment stated it denies passports only to persons with unsettled legal problems at
 home or abroad and to those persons who are likely to use them for other than tour-
 ist purposes.
 There is no arbitrary restriction on emigration or repatriation. Approximately
 350,000 Tunisians are working overseas. Tunisia does not accept refugees for per-
 manent resettlement and is not a country of first asylum. There were no cases of
 forced repatriation. There remain 52 refugees with resident status and 2,000 to
 3,000 Palestinians residing in Tunisia.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The ability of the citizens of Tunisia to change their government through demo-
 cratic means has yet to be demonstrated. The ruling RCD and its direct predecessor
 parties have controlled the political arena since Tunisia's independence. The largest
 opposition party, the outlawed Islamist An-Nahda party, received 18 percent of the
 vote in the legislative elections in 1989, when its candidates were permitted by the
 Government to run as independents. However, the party remains illegal on the
 grounds that it violates the law prohibiting religion-based parties, and it is in dis-
 array following the conviction in 1992 of nearly all its leaders for plotting to over-
 throw the Government. Rachid Ghannouchi, the nominal head of the party who has
 been living in self-imposed exile abroad, was sentenced in absentia to life in prison
 and has sought political asylum in Great Britain.
 The Constitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with separation of the
 executive, legislative, and judicial powers. The all-RCD legislature remains subordi-
 nate to the executive branch, although Chamber of Deputies' members in the last
 2 years have begun to exercise some independence. The President appoints the
 Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and the 23 governors. The executive is dominated at
 the national, regional, and local levels by the President and his party. Government
 and RCD mechanisms are hardly distinguishable; the President of the Republic is
 also the president of the party.
 The Tunisian electoral code, applied to legislative elections, continued to provide
 for a winner-take-all majority system. As a result, the dominant RCD was alloted
 all parliamentary seats after winning 80 percent of the popular vote in the last par-
 liamentary elections in 1989. At the end of 1992, the President asked the Chamber
 of Deputies to adopt a modified proportional representation system before the next
 elections, scheduled for March 1994. Elections or the Presidency and the Chamber
 of Deputies are held every 5 years. All legal parties are free to present candidates.
 Voting is by secret ballot for the party of choice.
 
 
 1100
 There is a very small Berber minority which constitutes about 3 percent of the
 population. There have been no complaints by them that they have been prevented
 from participating in Tunisia's political process or denied free cultural expression.
 Although there are few women in top level political or government positions, in
 1992 the President appointed three women to high-level government positions and
 one to a high position in the RCD. There are six female members of the Chamber
 of Deputies, and a woman holds the position of second vice president of the Cham-
 ber. In municipal councils, 11 percent of the members are women. Ten percent of
 the members of the Economic and Social Council are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights organizations are active in Tunisia and are recognized by
 the Government, but they are subject to a variety of restrictions. The Tunisian
 League for Human Rights was forced to suspend operations in June for refusing to
 comply with government amendments to the associations law (see discussion in Sec-
 tion 2.b.). Prior to the League's closure, its president was taken to the Ministry of
 the Interior for interrogation after he spoke with several Western journalists about
 the human rights situation in Tunisia. Several other League leaders were sum-
 moned to police stations for questioning in June.
 Amnesty International (Al) also operates an office in Tunisia. In early 1992 all
 copies of its 1991 annual report were seized from its office prior to distribution after
 the Government claimed the proper administrative steps concerning importation of
 the report had not been complied with. Al had never been required to take such
 steps in previous years. Al was permitted to distribute its 1992 report. The Arab
 Institute of Human Rights, founded in 1989, is a collaborative effort of the Tunisian
 League for Human Rights, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, and the Union
 of Arab Lawyers. The Maghreb Human Rights League also has its office in Tunis.
 There are no other domestic human rights groups that report on the internal Tuni-
 sian situation.
 AI officials, including its Secretary General, visited Tunisia in July and met with
 government officials, including the President. High-level representatives of the Law-
 yers Committee for Human Rights visited the country in June and also met with
 high-level officials. In June the Foreign Minister met with officials of Middle East
 Watch in New York. Daniel Jacoby of the International Federation of Human Rights
 Leagues met with President Ben Ali in September, and Adama Diang, Secretary
 General of the International Commission of Jurists, also visited in 1992. AI, the
 Lawyers Committee, and other international human rights groups sent observers to
 the two mass trials of Islamists conducted by military tribunals. One visiting group
 of human rights observers asserted that they were followed and stopped several
 times by the authorities during their tour of the country and that people with whom
 they spoke were later questioned by police.
 In July the Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, formed by
 President Ben Ali in 1991, released a second report to follow up recommendations
 made in its 1991 report. While it found the situation to be improving and cited ad-
 vances in the training and accountability of police and other governmental officials
 in the field of human rights, it did not-except in a few instances-provide proof
 that officers actually have been held accountable for specific abuses. The President
 created offices to coordinate human rights concerns in the Ministries of Interior,
 Justice, Social Affairs, and Foreign Affairs and an administrative mediator position
 to handle citizen complaints against government officials.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Polygamy is forbidden, and women have equal rights in divorce and child custody
 cases. In many areas, however, women do not enjoy the same rights as men. The
 1956 Personal Status Code (PSC), which established equal rights for men and
 women in some fields, stipulates that the husband is the head of the family and
 that his wife owes him obedience. The PSC also gives daughters a smaller portion
 of an inheritance than sons receive.
 In 1992 the President appointed a commission to recommend measures to expand
 the legal rights of women and children. The commission recommended changes in
 the PSC and labor and nationality laws which have broad support and are expected
 to win easy approval in the Chamber of Deputies.
 According to the 1989 census, 48.1 percent of females over the age of 10 were illit-
 erate, compared with 26.3 percent of males. There is a significant trend, however,
 toward greater educational and professional opportunities for women, and the num-
 ber of women in the medical, legal, and other professions continues to grow steadily.
 Seventy-six percent of the eligible female population were enrolled in primary school
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1101
 as of 1989, and secondary and university enrollments were over 40 perent female.
 In 1992 women comprised an estimated 25 percent of the work force, a 6 percent
 increase over the figure for 1989. This figure probably understates their presence,
 as many women were employed in the informal sector and seasonally in agriculture.
 According to figures released in 1992, 21 percent of civil service employees were
 women, predominantly found in the fields or education, health, and social affairs at
 the lower or middle levels.
 Violence against women occurs in Tunisia, but little information is available about
 the extent. Because of the traditional nature of Tunisian society, formal complaints
 are rarely made. The Commission on Women's Rights reports that cases of physical
 violence against women are numerous, but there are no official statistics on the sub-
 ject, and no support groups or shelters are known to exist. A battered woman was
 still most likely to seek shelter with her extended family. The Commission rec-
 ommended measures to protect women who make formal complaints of abuse. In
 August the media began breaking the society's silence on this issue, printing front-
 page articles on the topic of spousal abuse and the abuse of women in the home
 generally.
 There are several active women's rights groups in Tunisia, the most influential
 being the National Union of Tunisian Women.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Tunisian Constitution and the Labor Code stip.
 ulate the right of workers to form unions. The Central Labor Federation, the Tuni-
 sian General Federation of Labor (UGTr), claims about 15 percent of the work force
 as members, including civil servants and employees of state-owned enterprises. The
 UGTT and its member unions are legally independent of the Government, the ruling
 party, and other political forces but operate under government regulations which
 have to some extent restricted their freedom of action. The UGT's membership and
 officers include ersons associated with all political tendencies, whether legally rec-
 ognized or not. The current leadership, however, follows a policy of cooperating with
 the Government, and there are credible reports that the UGll receives substantial
 regular payments from the Government.
 Dissolution of a union requires action by the courts. There is no requirement for
 a single trade union structure; the fact that Tunisia has a single central labor orga-
 nization (the UGTT) is a result of historical circumstances, not government action.
 However, the Government has decreed that UGTT member federations are the labor
 negotiators for collective bargaining agreements that cover 80 percent of the private
 sector work force, whether unionized or not (see Section 6.b.).
 Unions (including civil servants) have the right to strike, provided 10 days' ad-
 vance notice is given and the UGT approves. The 1991 report of the International
 Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) cited the government-man-
 dated UGTT approval of strikes as being inconsistent with ILO Convention 87 on
 freedom of association. These restrictions are rarely enforced. In recent years, the
 majority of strikes were not approved in advance and technically were illegal. In the
 first 6 months of 1992, there were 36 legal strikes and 237 illegal strikes. The Gov-
 ernment did not prosecute workers involved in illegal strike activit
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels on which labor and man-
 agement are equally represented. If conciliation fails, arbitration may be pursued
 provided both sides agree on an arbitrator. The need for agreement, however, has
 meant that the latter mechanism is rarely used. Nearly all strikes in 1992 were set-
 tled through conciliation.
 Unions in Tunisia are free to join federations and international bodies. The UGCT
 is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and various
 re f..on al  g ro u pin g s.                         -  h   i h   o o g n z   n
 eigh.t to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and practiced throughout the country. Wages
 and working conditions in Tunisia are set through negotiation by the UGTT member
 federations and employer representatives of approximately 45 collective bargaining
 agreements, which set standards applicable to entire economic sectors. The UG4
 is by law the labor negotiator for these agreements, which cover 80 ercent of the
 private sector work force, whether unionized or not. The Government a role in con-
 cluding these agreements is minimal. It has, however, lent its good offices whenever
 talks appeared to be stalled. The Government must approve the collective bargain-
 ing agreements (although it cannot modify them) and publish them in the official
 journal before these agreements acquire legal validity. No agreement between a
 union and an individual firm may be concluded unless there already exists an agree-
 ment applicable to that firm's economic sector.
 
 
 1102
 
 Antiunion discrimination by employers against union members and orgaizers is
 prohibited by law and there are mechanisms for resolving such complaints. How-
 ever, the UG     5has complained about what it claims are increasingly vigorous
 antiunion activities by private sector employers, particularly employers use of tem-
 porary workers as a pretext to avoid unions, which in certain factories, especially
 in the textile sector, account for up to 80 percent of the work force. The Labor Code
 extends the same worker rights protection to temporary as to permanent workers,
 but its enforcement in the case of the former is much more difficult.
 There are no export processing zones, although their establishment was author-
 ized by a 1992 law. Workers in export firms have the same rights to organize, bar-
 gain collectively, and strike as those in nonexport firms. The unionization rate is
 about the same, even though export firms are more likely to be antiunion. The State
 pays the employer contribution to the social security system if the firm produces pri-
 marily for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is not specifi-
 cally prohibited bylocal law, but there have been no reports of its practice in recent
 years. The COE, however, noted in its 1991 report that certain provisions of Tuni-
 sian law, particularly relating to Tunisian workers jailed for illegal strikes, con-
 travene ILO conventions on forced labor. There were no reports in 1992 that any
 workers were jailed for participating in illegal strikes.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-For manufacturing, the minimum
 age for employment is 15 years; in agriculture it is 13. Tunisian children are re-
 quired to attend school until age 16. Inspectors from the Social Affairs Ministry
 check the records of employees to verify that the employer complies with the mini-
 mum age law. Despite this law, young children often perform agricultural work in
 rural areas and sell food and other items in urban areas. Small enterprises in the
 informal sector (which employs approximately 20 percent of the work force) report-
 edly violate the minimum age law frequently. Child labor-frequently disguised as
 apprenticeship-still exists, principally in the traditional craft sectors such as ce-
 ramics and stone carving. The ILO recommends that Tunisia bring child labor law
 and practice into conformity with its international obligations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages. An increase in both the agricultural and in-
 dustrial minimum wage in 1992 only matched the rise in the cost of living. Even
 supplemented by transportation and family allowances, the minimum wage is barely
 adequate to provide a decent living for a worker and his family; it is even less ade-
 quate in the aftermath of August 1992 price increases for some staple food items.
 Negotiations for new union-management agreements in the public and private sec-
 tors began in late 1992.
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period. The workweek is 40 hours for those employed in the en-
 ergy, transportation, petrochemical, and metallurgy sectors. Regional labor inspec-
 tors are responsible for enforcing standards. Most firms are inspected about once
 every 2 years. However, in general the Government encounters difficulty in enforc-
 ing the minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of the economy.
 Moreover, a considerable amount of labor takes place in the informal sector and
 falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Social Affairs Ministry has an office with responsibility for improving health
 and safety standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations
 covering many hazardous jobs-e g   mining, petroleum engineering, and construc-
 tion. These regulations are enforced more strctly in Tunis than in the rest of the
 country, where much work, especal in construction, is performed in the informal
 sector. Working conditions an standarda tend to be better in firms that are export-
 oriented than In those producing for the domestic market. A new Labor Code on
 work-related accidents and illnesses was enacted in 1992.
