 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic dominated by a single political party. President Zine el-
 Abidine Ben All and his Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD) continue to control
 the government, including the legislature and the judiciary, and to deny opposition
 ups the opportunity to play a siguificant role. The President appoints the Prime
 Minister Cabinet, and 23 governors. Four opposition parties hold 19 of the 163
 seats in Parliament.
 The police share responsibility for internal security with a paramilitary national
 guard. The police operate in the capital and a few other cities. In outlying areas,
 their policing duties are shared with, or ceded to, the national guard. Both forces
 are under the control of the Minister of Interior and the President. The security
 forces continued to be responsible for serious human rights abuses.
 Tunisia has made substantial progress towards establishing a market economy
 based on agriculture, petroleum, textiles, manufactured exports, and tourism. The
 year 1996 marked the end of a 3-year drought and a consequent improvement in
 the rate of growth, estimated at 6 percent. The per capita gross national product
 for 1995 was approximately $1,900. Sixty percent of Tunisians are in the middle
 class and enjoy a high standard of living. Remittances from workers abroad also are
 an important source of revenue.
 The Government's human rights performance did not improve, and it continued
 to commit some serious abuses. The ability of citizens to change their government
 has yet to be demonstrated. Members of the security forces reportedly tortured and
 beat prisoners and detainees. Security forces also monitor the activities of govern-
 ment critics and at times harass them, their relatives, and their associates. Prison
 conditions reportedly ranged from spartan to poor, and prolongedpretrial detention
 is a problem. The judiciary is subject to executive influence, and due process rights
 in trials of a political nature are not always observed. The Government generally
 did not respond effectively to allegations of human rights abuses, often not divulging
 the results of investigations. It demonstrated a pattern of intolerance of public criti-
 cism, and continued to stifle freedoms of speech, press, and association. Because of
 government pressure, newspapers did not carry press releases of the leading human
 rights group. The Government continued to use control of advertising revenue as a
 means to discourage newspapers and magazines from publishing material that it
 deemed undesirable. The Government frequently seized editions of foreign news-
 papers containing articles it considered objectionable, and it restricted ownership of
 
 
 1386
 satellite dishes and access to the Internet. The Government also restricted the free-
 dom of movement of government critics.
 The convictions of two opposition party leaders and that of a human rights lawyer
 were regarded by human rights observers as government attempts to suppress polit-
 ical dissent. In response to international criticism, the Government granted parole
 to all three in December and released them from prison. Membership both in the
 Islamist movement known as An-Nahda and the Tunisian Communist Workers
 Party is prohibited, and the Government sentenced several persons to prison for
 their association with these groups. The President made an unprecedented visit to
 prisons and authorized the National High Commissioner for Human Rights to make
 unannounced prison inspections.
 As part of its efforts to advance the rights of women and children, the Govern-
 ment passed a body of legislation pertainin to community property, family allow-
 ances, child support, and survivors benefits. Nonetheless, legal and societal discrimi-
 nation against women continues to exist.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 Investigations of the deaths in detention of Abderraouf Laaribi and Abdelwahed
 Abdelzi, who died in 1991, are no longer being pursued.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Penal Code prohibits the use of torture, and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment. Nonetheless, security services allegedly employed various
 means of torture to coerce confessions from detainees. Five students arrested in Au-
 gust for membership in an illegal organization claimed to have been tortured during
 heir 6-day detention. The forms of torture allegedly used included electric shok,
 submersion of the head in water, beatings with hands, sticks, and police batons, and
 food and sleep deprivation. Jalel Ayachi, a former detainee, filed   complaint against
 the Government or his loss of hearing in one ear, the alleged result of a plice beat-
 ing. Police and prison authorities also reportedly mistreat prisoners by heating
 them. There were reports that Radhia Aouididi was tortured following her Novem-
 ber 8 arrest.
 A German citizen reported being severely beaten while serving his prison sen-
 tence, losing several teeth as a result, after complaining about prison food and mak-
 ing critical remarks. The authorities are investigating his complaints.
 Human rights advocates maintain that charges of torture and mistreatment are
 difficult to substantiate, since government authorities often deny medical examoina-
 tions until evidence of abuse has disappeared. The Government maintained that it
 investigates all complaints of torture and mistreatment fied with the prosecutor's
 office and noted that alleged victims sometimes publicly accused authorities of acts
 of abuse without taking the steps required to initiate an investigation. Absent a for-
 meal complaint, the Government may open an administrative investigation but is un-
 likely to make the results public. According to defense attorneys and human rights
 advocates, prison conditions ranged from spartan to poor. Overcrowding is common,
 with as many as 30 to 50 prisoners sharing a common cll, often sharing beds.
 Human rights advocates report that prisoners receive inadequate medical care and
 are unable to obtain either medical evaluations to determine special needs or treat-
 ment for injuries or illness. Healthy prisoners are sometimets onfined with ill in-
 mates. There were credible reports that conditions and prisons rules are more strin-
 gent for political prisoners than for the general prison population and thtthe au-
 thorities limit the quantity and variety of food that families can bring to supplement
 prison fare. One credible report alleged the existence of special cell blocks and pris-
 ons for political prisoners. Political prisoners may be held in solitary confinement
 for months on end. Convicted opposition Movement of Democratic Socialists (MDS)
 party president Mohamed Moaada was held in solitary confinement since his 1995
 arrest until his release in December.
 The Government does not permit international organizations or independent
 human rights organizations to inspect or monitor prison conditions. In August the
 President visited certain prisons and subsequently authorized the National High
 Commissioner for Human Rights to make unannounced prison inspections. The
 High Commissioner made his first such inpections on October 12 and announced to
 the press that prisoners in the two facilities he had visited lived relatively well and
 received adequate medical care.
 
 
 1387
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law authorizes the police to make
 arrests without warrants in the cases of suspected felons or crimes in progress. The
 Government may hold a suspect incommunicado for 10 days following arrest. De-
 tainees have the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest before questioning
 and may request a medical examination. They do not have a right to legal represen-
 tation during prearraignment detention. Attorneys, human rights monitors, and
 former detainees maintain that the authorities illegally extend the 10-day limit by
 falsifying the date of arrest. There are reports that authorities held Radhia
 Aouididi, arrested on November 8, incommunicado for a period exceeding the 10-day
 legal limit.
 Detainees have a right to be represented by counsel during arraignment. The Gov-
 ernment provides legal representation for indigents. At arraignment, the examining
 magistrate may decide to release the accused or to remand him to pretrial deten-
 tion. Since 1993 the law has allowed for release of accused persons on bail or on
 the personal surety of a third party. This provision is little-known and rarely in-
 yoked. During the year the Government publicized its support of release-on-bail as
 a means of reducing or eliminating prison stays. In cases involving crimes for which
 the sentence may exceed 5 years, or which involve national security, pretrial deten-
 tion may last an initial period of 6 months and may be extended by court order for
 2 additional 4-month periods. During this period, the court conducts an investiga-
 tion, hears arguments, and accepts evidence and motions of both parties.
 A case proceeds from investigation to the Criminal Court of Appeals, which sets
 a trial date. There is no legal limit to the length of time the court may hold a case
 over for trial; nor is there a legal imperative to a speedy hearing. Complaints of pro-
 longed detention awaiting trial were common, and President en Ali publicly en-
 couraged judges to make ber use of release on bail and suspended sentences.
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political detainees.
 The law prohibits exile, and the Government observes the prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The judiciary is part of the Ministry of Justice
 and therefore not independent of the executive branch, which appoints, assigns,
 grants tenure to, and transfers judges. In addition, the President is head of the Su-
 preme Council of Judges. This situation renders judges susceptible to pressure in
 plitically sensitive cases.
 The court system comprises the regular civil and criminal courts, including the
 courts of fivrst instance, the courts of appeal, and the Court of Cassation, the nation's
 highest court, as well as the military triunals within the Defense Ministry. Trials
 in the regular courts of first instance and appeals are open to the public.
 The Code of Procedure is patterned aftr the French legal system. By law, the
 accused has the right to be present at trial, represented by counsel, question wit-
 nesses, and appeal verdicts. However, in practice, judges do not always observe
 these rights. F or example, defense attorneys representing Mohamed Moaada, an op-
 position leader convicted of treason (see Section 2.a.), were unable to question the
 poseution's principal witness, who had been released from prison and allowed to
 return to Libya prior to Moaada's trial. The law permits trial in absentia of fugitives
 from the law. Both the accused and the prosecutor may appeal decisions of the lower
 courts. The Court of Cassation, which considers arguments on points of law, as op-
 posed to the facts of a case, is the final arbiter. Trials in the courts of first instance
 and in the courts of appeals are open to the public.
 The presiding judge or panel of judges dominates a trial, and defense attorneys
 have little opportunity to participate substantively. Defense lawyers contend that
 the courts often fail to grant them adequate notice of trial dates or allow them time
 to prepare their cases. ,ome also reported that judges have begun to restrict access
 to evidence and court records, requiring in some cases, for example, that all attor-
 neys of record examine the court itle on one appointed day, in judges chambers, and
 prohibiting copying of material documents he aso complained that the judges
 sometimes refused to allow them to call witnesses on their clients' behalf or to ques-
 tion key government witnesses.
 In July the Government convicted opposition MDS Party Deputy Khemais
 Chammari of divulging information from the grand jury investigatiaon of Mohamed
 Moaada. Chammari's attorneys denounced the trial, prtesting that they had re-
 cived inadequate notice of the review before the Court of Cassation and inadequate
 access to court records, including the final judgment of the Criminal Court of Ap-
 peals, and that the Court illegally restricted attorney-client visits. In the last week
 ore the hearing, the Court provided the defense attorneys access to the records
 and to their client but refused a continuance of the case and upheld the conviction.
 At the end of December, both Chammari and Moaada were granted parole and re-
 leased from prison.
 
 
 1388
 
 In January Nejib Hosni, a lawyer who had defended clients accused of political
 offenses, was convicted and sentenced to8 years in prison for forging the name of
 a terminally-ill client on a land transaction. Defense attorneys asserted that the
 judge's wide discretionary authority allowed him to ignore critical eyewitness and
 expert testimony, thus denying Hosni a fair trial. In October Hosni was acquitted
 of the charges of passing arms to Islamists and, in December, released fromprison
 on parole. At the same time, the Government paroled and released MohamedHedi
 Sassi, convicted of having distributed tracts of the illegal Tunisian Communist
 Workers Party.
 Military tribunals try cases involving military personnel and civilians accused of
 national security crimes. The tribunal consists of a civilian judge from the Supreme
 Court and four military judges. Defendants may appeal the tribunal's verdicts to the
 Supreme Court.
 There is no reliable information on the number of political prisoners. However,
 Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International report that there may be hun-
 dreds of political prisoners, convicted and imprisoned for membership in the
 Islamist group An-Nahda and the Communist Workers Party, for disseminating in-
 formation of these banned organizations, and for aiding relatives of convicted mem-
 bers.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person and the home and for the
 privacy of correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." The law re-
 quires that the police have warrants to conduct searches, but police sometimes ig-
 nore the requirement if authorities consider that state security is at stake or that
 a crime is in progress. Authorities can invoke state security interests to justify tele-
 phone surveillance. There were also reports of Government interception of facsimile
 and computer-transmitted communications. The law does not explicitly authorize
 these activities, although the Government stated that the Code of Criminal Proce-
 dure implicitly gives investigating magistrates such authority. The security services
 monitor the activities of political critics, and sometimes harass, follow, question, and
 otherwise intimidate their relatives and associates. Many political activists experi-
 ence frequent and sometimes extended interruptions of residential and business
 telephone and facsimile services. The security services question citizens seen talking
 with foreign visitors or residents, such as visiting international human rights mon-
 itors. One organization reported government interference with the delivery of its
 mail. Police presence is heavy throughout the country. The Government prohibits
 the receipt of some foreign publications (see Section 2.a.). Traffic officers routinely
 stop motorists to examine their personal identification and vehicular documents.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, expression, and the press. In practice, however, the Government limits ex-
 ercise of these freedoms. The President convoked newspaper editors in August and
 affirmed the right of freedom of the press, "as long as it is properly used."
 In February Mohamed Moaada, then president of the opposition MDS party, was
 convicted of treason for allegedly selling information relating to national security to
 a Libyan citizen. He was sentenced to serve 11 years in prison. The arrest (for an
 act that had allegedly transpired a year before) took place the day after Moaada had
 written a letter to President Ben Ali complaining of the lack of political freedoms.
 In May Khemais Chammari, an MDS colleague of Moaada and member of the
 Chamber of Deputies, was arrested following a 7-month investigation for having di-
 vulged information about the grand jury investigating Moaada. Chammari's arrest
 took place the day after the Director of the Arab Institute for Human Rights had
 been detained at the airport, allegedly in possession of documents written by
 Chammari. Observers believed that the Government proceeded with the prosecution
 because of Chammari's outspoken criticism of the Government. Convicted and sen-
 tenced to 5 years' imprisonment, Chammari was released on parole at the end of
 the year.
 Indications of continuing press restrictions were evident throughout the year. The
 confiscation of two journalists' passports prevented them from attending a regional
 seminar on promoting an independent Arab press. The Government also refused to
 renew the passport of Salah Bechir, a Tunisian journalist residing in France. The
 law permits such denials in cases where "the good reputation of Tunisia" might be
 tarmshed. The Government also exerts control over the media by issuing or with-
 holding credentials to journalists. It continued to deny accreditation to a journalist
 dismissed from the government news agency, Tunis Afrique Presse (TAP), in 1994
 for publishing an interview with an opposition politician in a foreign publication.
 
 
 1389
 Authorities used the placement of government advertising, a significant source of
 revenue for newspapers and magazines, as a means of controlling the press. There
 were reports that the Government withheld advertising orders in publications that
 published articles that the Government deemed offensive. As a result of such pres-
 sure, the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH) was unable to find a publisher
 for its annual report, and newspapers did not print its press releases. On one
 ocassion, however, local television did report an LTDH press release praising the
 Government. The Government monitored the activities and speech of human rights
 activists traveling abroad and interrogated individuals upon their return to Tunisia.
 The Press Code contains broad provisions prohibiting subversion and defamation,
 neither of which is clearly defined. The Government prevents distribution of editions
 of foreign newspapers and magazines that contain articles critical of Tunisia-edi-
 tions oILe Monde and Al Hayat, for example, were blocked 8 to 10 times a month-
 and has reportedly advised universities against subscribing to Le Monde. The au-
 thorities prosecuted citizens during the year on charges of istributing tracts-dur-
 ing the elections of 1994 and, later, in 1995-critical of the Government and, in par-
 ticular, the absence of democratic freedoms and pluralism. While clandestine organi-
 zations publish several underground newspapers, their contributors risked trial for
 dissemination of false information. The Government provides official texts on major
 domestic and international events and has reprimanded publishers and editors for
 failing to publish these statements. These factors induce a high degree of self-cen-
 sorship in the media.
 In July the World Assocation of Newspapers (WAN) suspended the Tunisian
 Newspaper Association for falling to fight against press repression and noted "nu-
 merous instances * * * of jailing and harassment of journlits the banning of for-
 eign publications and broadcasts, and the withdrawal of passports from Tunisian
 journalistst                                                         t
 Before mardeting publications, printers and publishers are required by law to de-
 posit copies with the Chief Prosecutor (Procureur), the Ministiy of Interior, the Sec-
 retary of State for Information, and the Ministry of Culture. Similarly, distributors
 must deposit copies of publications printed abroad with the Chief Prosecutor and
 various ministries prior to distributing them. While publishers need not wait for an
 authorization, they must obtain a receipt of deposit before distribution. On occasion
 such receipts are reportedly withheld, sometimes indefinitely. Without a receipt,
 publications may not be legally distributd. The Press Code stipulates fines and
 confiscations for failure to comply with these provisions. The Government canceled
 at the last minute a conference dealing with human rights issues, to have been co-
 sponsored by several activist organizations, allegedly because of the objectionable
 content of some of the conference materials submitted for government review (see
 Section 4).
 In July 1995, the National Assembly passed legislation regulating the purchase
 and installation of satellite receiving dishes. WThile the Government continued to ac-
 cept applications for permits to own a satellite dish, it issued few, if any, licenses.
 The black market reportedly supplies most of the stock of dishes.
 The Government owns and operates the Tunisian Radio and Television Establish-
 ment (ERTT). ERTT's coverage of government news is taken directly from the offi-
 cial news agency, TAP. There are several regional radio stations an one local tele-
 vision channel. Bilateral agreements with France and Italy permit Tunisians to re-
 reive the French channel France 2 and the Italian Rai Uno.
 Like journalists, university professors oen practice a form of self-censorship,
 avoiding classroom criticism of the Govemnt or statements supportive of the
 Islamist An-Nahda movement. The presence of police on campuses also discourages
 dissent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly. Groups wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must
 obtain a permit from the Ministry of Interior. The authorities routinely approve
 such permits, except in cases involving proscribed organizations.
 In Apri the Tunisian Association of Democratic Women s~onsored a national con-
 ference celebrating the international observance of Women a Day (April 8.) It was
 the first time in 2 years that the grup was able to hold a meeting in a public place.
 The Human Rights League (LTDH) celebrated its 19th anniversary also in a public
 gathering place.
 .The Government restricts freedom of association. The law bars membership in po-
 litical parties organized by religion, race, or region. On these grounds, the Govern-
 ment prosecutes members in the Islamist movement An-Nahda. It also bans organi-
 zations that threaten disruption of the public order and prosecutes members of the
 Communist Workers Party. In May the Government withdrew authorization for a
 conference that was to be jointly held by several nongovernmental organizations in-
 
 
 1390
 cluding the Human Rights League, allegedly because of conference handouts that
 the Government found objectionable. In Novemer it canceled a League educational
 program on the law concerning arrest and detention.
 COn the basis of a procedural error and without ruling on the merits of the case,
 a court annulled a 1992 Ministry of Interior ruling that the LTDH was in violation
 of rules governing associations because it refused to open its membership to all ap-
 plicants. The LTDH sought to control the process of enrolling new members as a
 means of ensuring its independence.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Ilam is the state religion, but the Government permits
 the practice of other religions. The Government controls mosques and pays the sala-
 ries of the prayer leaders. The 1988 Law on Mosques provides that only personnel
 apointed by the Government may lead activities in the mosques.
 TeGovernment regards the Baha'i faith as a heretical sect of Islam and permits
 its adherents to practice their faith only in private. With 1,300 adherents, the Jew-
 ish community is the country's largest indigenous religious minority. The Govern-
 ment assures the Jewish community freedom of worship and pays the salary of the
 Grand Rabbi. The Christian community, estimated at about 2,000, is composed
 mainly of foreigners. It freely holds church services and operates a small number
 of schools.
 The Government views proselytizing as an act against "public order." Authorities
 ask foreigners suspected of proselytizing to depart the country and do not permit
 them to return. There were no reported cases of official action against persons sus-
 pected of proselytizing.
 In a gesture toward tolerance and ecumenism, Tunisia hosted a visit in April by
 the Pope.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights. People are free to change
 their place of residence or work at will. In practice, the Government restricts the
 freedom of movement and foreign travel of those critical of the administration.
 Human rights monitors complained that the Government arbitrarily withholds
 passports from citizens. The Government again confiscated the passport of Moncef
 Marzouki, an oposition politician who unsuccessfully sought to run for the Presi-
 dency in 1994. the Government had restored his travel documents in 1995 following
 a previous confiscation in 1994. A member of the LTDH was prevented from travel-
 ing abroad as part of a human rights delegation. The director of a human rights
 research institute on his way to a conference overseas was arrested and detained
 for 4 days for allegedly having on his person objectionable documents (see Section
 2.a.). The Government confiscated the passport of Hamma Hammami, former editor
 of the Communist Workers Party newspaper, when he attempted to attend an inter-
 national symposium on torture.
 Political activists reported that their movements were closely monitored and that
 they were sometimes harassed by security services personnel. Moncef Ben Salem,
 a former university professor who served a 3-year prison term for defaming the Goy-
 ernment, sad that he was prevented from leaving the limits of the southern city
 of Sfax where he resides.
 The Government has signed the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
 frees, d the 1967 Protocol, and cooerates with the offi ofof the United Nations
 SCommissioner of Refugees          CR in assisting refugees. The Government
 acknowledged UNHCR determination of refugee status which was accorded to P-
 proximately 150 persons during the year. Approximately 150 cases (300 to 400 in-
 viduals) await determination by the UNHCR. There is no pattern of abuse of refu-
 ees in Tunisia. Although a few refugees were deported during the year, none was
 forcedoto return to countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides that the citizenry shall elect the President and mem-
 bers of the legislature for 5-year terms. However, the ability of citizens to change
 their government through democratic means has yet to be demonstrated. The ruling
 RCD pa r   and its direct predecessor parties have controlled the political arena
 since Tunisia gained indedpendce in 1956. The party dominates the Cabinet, the
 Chamber of Deputies, an regional and local governments. The President appoints
 the Cabinet and the 23 governors. The Government and the party are closely inte-
 grated: The President of the republic is also the President of the party, and the par-
 ty's Secretary General holds the rank of Minister of State.
 The 163-seat Chamber of Deputiees   not function as an effective counterweight
 to the executive branch. The Electoral Code provides for a winner-take-all formula
 for 144 of its seats. The ruling party won all seats in the 1994 parliamentary elec-
 
 
 1391
 tions. Nineteen additional seats were reserved for unsuccessful candidates and were
 divided among four opposition parties after the 1994 elections. Election is by secret
 ballot. All legal parties are free to present candidates. Candidates for president,
 however, must receive the endorsement of 30 sitting deputies to launch a campaign.
 In 1995 the ruling party won 4,084 of 4,090 seats in countrywide municipal elec-
 tions. In December the Government held special elections to fill two seats, one of
 which had been vacated by convicted MDS deputy Khemais Chammari. After the
 RCD declined to enter a candidate for Chammari's seat in order to ensure that the
 popsition retained the seat, the candidate of the opposition Unity Party won the
 election. The RCD retained control of the second seat. National presidential and leg-
 islative elections are next scheduled for 1999.
 The most vocal and active of the opposition parties, the Movement of Democratic
 Socialists, suffered a split in its ranks following the convictions and imprisonment
 of party president Moaada and party vice-president Chammari. The Government de-
 nied reports that it financed the faction that favored cooperation with the Govern-
 ment and that it manipulated the press to portray this group as legitimate. News-
 papers rarely carried stories about or press releases of the other faction. Because
 of MDS financial difficulties, it was unable to pay its rent and was evicted from its
 headquarters.
 Women participate in politics. Eleven of the 163 members of the Chamber of Dep-
 uties are women. In addition one women is the junior Minister for Women's and
 Children's Affairs in the Prime Minister's office. Nevertheless, women's presence in
 public office is disproportionately low, and they hold few senior government posts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are human rights offices in certain ministries, and a governmental body,
 the Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, that address and
 sometimes resolve human rights complaints. The Committee's last publicly distrib-
 uted report covered the 1993-1994 period.
 The Tunisian Human Rights League is the most active independent advocacy or-
 ganization, with branches in many parts of the country. The organization receives
 and researches complaints, and protests individual and systemic abuses. The Gov-
 ernment places significant obstacles in the way of its effective operation, however.
 League members and other human rights activists report government harassment,
 interrogation, property loss or damage, unauthorizedhome entry, and denial of
 passports. The LTDH continues to be unable to find local newspapers willing to pub-
 ish ommuniques issued by the League that are critical of the Government.
 The Arab Institute for Human Rights, headquartered in Tunis, was founded in
 1989 by the LTDH, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, and the Union of
 Arab Lawyers. It is an information, rather than advocacy, organization.
 Amnesty International (AI) continued to maintain a Tunisian chapter. Its Tunis
 offie, however, suffered repeated loss of telephone and facsimile service. In August
 a Tunisian staff member from Al's London headquarters was arrested when enter-
 ing the country for a family vacation. Authorities allegedly detained him incommu-
 nicado for a week and interrogated him. The Government continued to deny entry
 to a London-based Al researcher responsible for Tunisian affairs, claiming that she
 has an anti-Tunisia bias. It did permit the International President of AI to visit on
 an occasion coinciding with the visit of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human
 Ri hts.
 R  JuTne Al released its annual report for 1995, containinga section critical of Tu-
 nisia. Also in June, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs' Human Rights Section published
 a booklet entitled "Reflections on Human Rights in Tunisia" in which it dismissed
 most criticisms of its human rights record by suggesting that the authors were
 members of organizations infiltrated by religious and political extremists.
 The Government denied entry to the head of the International Federation for
 Human Rights. The Government allowed a few foreign human rights researchers
 entry. One reported being followed regularly. Another's computer data disks, notes,
 and documents were stolen from his hotel roon. A third was interrogated at the air-
 port for 2 hours upon arrival. Resident foreign human rights monitors found it in-
 reasingly difficult to arrange meetings with some government human rights offi-
 ers, Wen the Government did grant meetings, officials often delayed, sometimes
 indefinitely, responding to questions about human rights. The Government canceled
 at the last minute a conference dealing with human rights issues, to have been co-
 sponsored by several activist organizations, �allegedly because of the objectionable
 content of some of the conference materials submitted for government review.
 In May the European Union (EU) passed a resolution criticizing Tunisia's human
 rights policies and practices. In concluding its Euro-Mediterranean Trade Agree-
 
 
 1392
 ment with Tunisia, the EU also linked respect for human rights and democratic
 principles to economic cooperation. The Government agreed to allow periodic mon-
 itoring of the human rights situation and to engage in ongoing discussions on
 human rights with its European partners.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens shall have equal rights and responsibil-
 ities and be equal under the law. The Government generally observes this practice.
 Legal or social discrimination is not prevalent.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics to
 measure its extent. The Tunisian Association of Democratic Women operates the
 country's only counseling center for women who are victims of domestic violence.
 The center, located in Tunis, assists approximately 20 women per month. Instances
 of rape or assault by someone unknown to the victim are rare. Battered women first
 seek -help from family members. Police intervention is often ineffective because po-
 lice officers and the courts tend to regard domestic violence as a problem to be han-
 dled by the family. Nonetheless, there are stiff penalties for spouse abuse, double
 that for normal battery. Both the fine and imprisonment for battery or violence com-
 mitted by a spouse or family member are double those for the same crimes commit-
 ted by an individual not related to the victim.
 Women enjoy substantial rights, and the Government has made serious efforts to
 advance women's rights. However, women still face legal and societal discrimination
 in certain social and economic areas and in emplyment. Most property acquired
 during marriage, including property acquired solely, is held in the name of the hus-
 band. Inheritance laws, based on Shari'a (Islamic) law and tradition, discriminate
 against women.
 Overseeing programs concerning women's issues is the Junior Ministry for Women
 and the Family. It maintains effective links with women's professional associations
 and with the government-supported Women's Union and Women's Research Center.
 Passage in Apr of a body of legislation on women's rights appeared to represent
 significant progress. The legislation authorized joint application for loans and en-
 couraged discussion prior to marriage of the possibility of joint ownership of prop-
 erty acquired during the marriage and inclusion in the marriage contract of relevant
 language. While the new laws are technically in effect, since passage there has been
 little public attention paid to the legislation and no public discussion. Some women's
 advocates believe that more traditional segments of society urged the Government
 not to publicize and promote the new laws. There were also new p rvisions regard-
 ing family allowance, alimony, child support, and survivors' benefits that especially
 benefit households headed by women.
 Women in increasing numbers are entering the work force, employed particularly
 in the textile industry, manufacturing, health,  agricultural sectors. According
 to government statistics for 1995, women constituted 22 percent of the work force.
 Excluding the agricultural sector, they accounted for 44 percent. There are an esti-
 mated 1,500 businesses headed by women. Women represent 25 percent of the civil
 service, employed primarily in the fields of health, education, and social affairs at
 the middle or lower levels. Approximately 43 percent of the university students en-
 rolled in the 1995-96 academic year were women. On the other hand, while the rate
 of illiteracy has dropped markedly in both rural and urban areas, the rate of female
 illiteracy in all categories is at least double that of men. Among 10- to 14-year olds,
 5.5 percent of urban girls are illiterate, compared with 2.2 percent of urban boys;
 and 27 percent of rural girls, compared with less than 7 percent of rural boys.
 Several active nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) focus, in whole or in part,
 on women's advocacy, or research women's issues, and a cadre of attorneys rep-
 resent women in domestic cases. Media attention focuses on women's eonomic and
 academic accomplishments and usually omits reference to culturally sensitive is-
 ssChildren.-The Government demonstrates a strong commitment to public edu-
 cation, which is compulsory until the age of 16. Primary school enrollment for the
 1996-97 scholastic year was roughly the same as the preceding year; secondary
 school enrollment showed an 8 percent increase over last year. The Government of-
 fers a maternal and child health program, providing prenatal and postnatal serv-
 ices. It also sponsors an immunization program targeting preschool-aged children.
 In 1995 the Government promulgatedlaws to constitute a code for the protection
 of children. The code proscribes child abuse, abandonment, and sexual or economic
 exploitateti  n    es for onvictions for abandonment and assault on minors are
 severe. There is a Ministry for Children and Youths and a presidential delegate to
 safeguard the rights and welfare of children.
 
 
 1393
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination based on disability
 and mandates that at least 1 percent of the public and private sector jobs be re-
 served for the disabled.
 All public buildings constructed since 1991 must be accessible to physically dis-
 abled persons. Many cities, including the capital, have begun to install wheelchair
 access ramps on city sidewalks. There is a general trend toward making public
 transportation more accessible to disabled persons. The Government issues special
 cards to the disabled for benefits such as unrestricted parking, priority medical serv-
 ices, preferential seating on public transportation, and consumer discounts.
 Indigenous People.-The small Berber minority constitutes less than 2 percent of
 the population. Some older Berbers have retained their native language, but the
 younger generation has been assimilated into Tunisian culture through schooling
 and marriage. Berbers are free to participate in politics and to express themselves
 culturally.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTf)
 is the country's only labor federation and claims about 15 percent of the work force
 as members, including civil servants and employees of state-owned enterprises.
 There is no legal prohibition against the establishment of other labor federations.
 A union may be dissolved only by court order.
 The UGTT1 and its member unions are legally independent of the Government and
 the ruling party but operate under regulations that restrict their freedom of action.
 The UGT's membership includes persons associated with all political tendencies,
 although Islamists have been removed from union offices. The current UGTT leader-
 ship follows a policy of cooperation with the Government and its economic reform
 program. There are credible reports that the UGTT receives substantial government
 subsidies to supplement modest union dues and funding from the National Social
 Security Account.
 Unions, including those representing civil servants, have the right to strike, pro-
 vided they give 10 days' advance notice and the UGTIT approves of the strike. These
 restrictions, however, are rarely observed in practice. In recent years, the majority
 of strikes have been illegal because the UG   had not approved them in advance.
 The Government does not prosecute workers involved in illegal strike activity. The
 law rohibits retribution against strikers, but some employers punish strikers, who
 are then forced to pursue costly and time-consuming legal remedies to protect their
 rights.
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels in which labor and manage-
 ment are equally represented. Tripartite regional arbitration commissions settle in-
 dustrial disputes when conciliation fails.
 Unions are free to associate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and observed in practice. Wages and working
 conditions are set by triennial negotiations between the UGTT member unions and
 employers.
 Forty-seven collective bargaining agreements set standards for industries in the
 private sector and cover 80 percent of the total private sector work force. The Gov-
 ernment's role in these negotiations is minimal, consisting mainly of lending its
 good offices if talks appear to be stalled. However, the Government must approve,
 utmay not modify, the agreements.
 The UGT1 also negotiates wages and work conditions of civil servants and em-
 ployees of state-owned enterprises.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. The UGTT, however, is
 concerned about antiunion activity among private sector employers, especially the
 firing of union activists and the use of temporary workers to avoid unionization. In
 certain industries, such as textiles and construction, temporary workers account for
 a large majority of the work force. The Labor Code protects temporary workers, but
 enforcement is more difficult than in the case of permanent workers. A committee,
 chaired by an officer from the Labor Inspectorate of the Office of the Inspector Gen-
 eral of the Ministry of Social Affairs, includes a labor representative and an employ-
 ers' association representative; it approves all worker dismissals.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Tunisia abolished compulsory
 labor in 1989. The practice of sentencing convicts to "rehabilitation through work,"
 which had been of concern to the International Labor Organization's (ILO) Commit-
 tee of Experts as a possible violation of ILO Convention 29 on forced labor, ended
 in 1995.
 
 
 1394
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-An August revision of the Labor
 Code raised the minimum age for employment in manufacturing from 15 to 16
 years. The minimum age for light work in agriculture and some other nonindustrial
 sectors is 13 years. The Government requires children to attend school until the age
 of 16. Workers between the ages of 14 and 18 must have 12 hours of rest a day,
 which include the hours between 10 pm and 6 amn. Children between the ages of
 14 and 16 may work no more than 2 hours a day. The time that they spend in
 school and work may not exceed 7 hours per day. Ispetors of the Ministry of So-
 cial Affairs examine the records of employees to verify that employers comply with
 the minimum age law. Nonetheless, young children often perform agricultural work
 in rural areas and work as vendors in urban areas.
 The UG 1 has expressed concern that child labor continues to exist disguised as
 apprenticeship, particularly in the handicraoe industry, and in the cases of young
 grls whose families place them as household domestics in order to collect their
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages, which are set1y a commission of represent-
 atives from the Ministries of Social Affairs, Planning, Finance, and National Econ-
 omy in consultation with the UGTT and the employers' association. The President
 approves the commission's recommendations. When supplemented by transportation
 and family allowances, the minimum wage covers only essential costs for a worker
 and family. The minimum wage schedue was adjusted twice during the year, in
 May and September. The industrial minimum wage is $168.59 (161.696 dinars) per
 month for a 48-hour workweek and $147e1 (141.664 dinars) per month for a 40-
 hour workweek. The agricultural minimum wage is $5.17 (4.960 dinars) per day.
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period. The standard workweek is 40 hours in the energy, trans-
 portation, petrochemical, and metallurgy industries.
 Regional laboer inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards. They inspect
 most firms about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the minimum wage law, picariclrly in nonunionized setors of
 the economy. Moreover, more than 240,000 workers are employed in the informal
 sector, which falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has responsibility for enforcing health and safety
 standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations coveringsuch
 hazardous occupations as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction. Working
 conditions and standards tend to be better in firms that are export-oriented than
 in those producing exclusively for the domestic market. Workers are free to remove
 themselves from dangerous situations without jeopardizing their employment, and
 they may take legal action against employers who retaliate against them for exercis-
 ing this right.
