 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic in which the Constitution provides for a
 parliamentary democracy with separation of the executive,
 legislative, and judicial powers. In practice, the President
 and his party dominate decisionmaking at all levels. The
 President appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and all 23
 regional governors. His Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD)
 party holds all 141 seats in the Chamber of Deputies.
 Opposition parties boycotted the spring 1991 byelections and
 the October byelections, in both cases criticizing the lack of
 press freedom and access to government-controlled media and the
 ruling party's monopoly over the administration. The illegal
 Islamist party An Nahda suffered further setbacks in 1991. In
 February Islamists attacked an RCD office in Bab Souika
 (Tunis), killing one guard and injuring another. As a result,
 the Secretary General of An Nahda and three dther members of
 its Executive Bureau suspended their involvement with An Nahda
 in protest. In May the Government announced the arrest of 238
 persons in connection with an alleged plot by An Nahda to
 overthrow the Government. In September the Government
 disclosed that it had foiled a plan by the plotters to
 assassinate the President and other senior officials.
 Tunisia's internal security is maintained by civilian services
 which include a paramilitary national guard, backed by armed
 forces in times of crisis. In 1991 there jere increased
 reports of harassment and arrests of opposition activists,
 arbitrary interference with the privacy of the home, and
 torture by the police and security apparatus. Police
 maintained a heavy presence in urban areas and at
 universities., Their tactics in dealing with demonstrators and
 opposition forces, especially Islamists, were at times severe,
 particularly in response to student rioting.
 Tunisia has a mixed economy which is dependent on oil,
 agriculture, tourism, and remittances from workers abroad. The
 Government continues to pursue a structural adjustient program
 begun 5 years ago, designed to make the econogiy more market
 oriented, reduce staple food subsidies, and increase the role
 of the private sector. As a result, Tunisian merchandise
 exports increased by' 0.9'percent between 1989 and 1990, and by
 just under 10 percent between 1990 and 1991. There was,
 however, some erosion of the buying pover of some'lower income
 families. Despite high rates of economic growth, there are not
 enough new jobs being created ta keep pace with the level of
 new labor fqrce entrants, thereby worsening an already serious
 unemployment problem.
 The human rights situation deteliorated in 1991. Responding to
 the alleged coup plot and Bab Souika attack, the regime cracked
 down on Islamists. Up to 4,000 IsIamigts were arrested, many
 of them without warrants; most were released, but h numer were
 held in incommunicado detention, tortured', and denied acess to
 lawyers and doctors. Seven Islamists died'under tuspicious
 circumstances while in official custody. Thereafter, ,the
 President created the position of Human Rights Counselor to th&
 President and established in June a Committee of Inquiry to
 look into these abuses. The Government made public the
 Committee's conclusions,, which noted that abuses had occurred
 in violation of state policy. TheCommittee also recbmmended a
 number of measures, including more vigorous dissemination of
 state policy on human rights with assurances that abusers would
 be punished. However, the only specific action made public was
 the sentencing in June of a police constable and two assistants
 to prison for 5 years each for abuse of power in the death in
 
 
 1616
 TUNISIA
 1987 of a youth in their custody. Other significant human
 rights problems included interference with the right to privacy
 and restrictions on freedom of the press, the ability of
 citizens to change their government, and women's rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no confirmed reports of political killings in 1991,.
 but there were reports of deaths of persons under suspicious
 circumstances while in official custody. Among these cases was
 that of Abderraouf Laaribi, a member of the An Nahda
 consultative council reportedly arrested on May 3 and held
 incommunicado until his death on or about May 26. On May 27
 the Government notified his family that he had died of a heart
 attack. His family was permitted to view only his face while
 under surveillance of government officials. His body was
 interred hours later, still under government surveillance. Six
 other persons were reported to have died in detention, under
 circumstances which suggest that they may have been tortured.
 The Presidential Committee of Inquiry was to investigate the
 circumstances surrounding these deaths and report to the
 President, but no further information about them has been
 released.
 After unrest on campuses and at secondary schools throughout
 the spring, police in May pursued rioters who were throwing
 Molotov cocktails and stones on the main University of Tunis
 campus, reportedly killing five people. Police sources
 reported that the deaths were accidental, although some
 observers judged that the police used-excessive force in
 responding to the demonstrators.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no-confirmed reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Tunisian law forbids ill-treatment of detainees, and the
 Ministry of Interior in 1991 denied that it had found any
 instances of torture. Nevertheless, there were increased
 numbers of credible reports of torture and brutal treatment of
 detainees, particularly of Islamists, in connection with the
 investigation of alleged antigovernment plots. Beatings,
 especially on the feet. and immersion of the head in water for
 a prolonged period reportedly are commonly used forms of
 torture. Defense lawyers pointed out that some examining
 magistrates have noted on the official records that the bodies
 of some-detainees have shown signs of violence and have ordered
 medical exams.
 Under Tunisian law, the penalty for mistreatment of prisoners
 ranges from a fine to a prison sentence, depending on the
 extent of injury'suffered by the defendant. The victim's
 family must initiate prosecution. The Government seldom
 investigates and punishes police excesses, although in June a
 police commissioner and two assistants were each sentenced to 5
 years in prison for abuse of power in connection with the 1987
 death of a youth while in their custody.
 
 
 1617
 TUNISIA
 In response to domestic and international criticism, the
 President in June established a Committee of Inquiry to look
 into allegations of human rights violations. In media
 interviews in October, the Chairman of the Committee,
 commenting on the report he had submitted to the President,
 noted that several excesses had been committed "in flagrant
 contradiction with the President's policy" and called for
 punishment of those responsible. Discussing changes in law
 which he supports, he said the most urgent issue is that those
 detained have access to an attorney and that their families be
 notified as soon as they are arrested. He said that the
 Minister of Interior had informed him that punitive action had
 been taken against an unspecified number of members of the
 security forces guilty of human rights abuses. There were in
 fact, at year's end, growing signs of government willingness to
 try and--if the defendants are convicted--to punish human
 rights abusers. For example, the Interior Minister reported
 that there are three cases pending before the courts of
 policemen being tried for use of violence resulting in death.
 Also, in early January 1992, three National Guardsmen were
 sentenced by the court in Sousse to 1 1/2 years' imprisonment
 and a fourth to 6 months for beating an accused thief.
 The Committee of Inquiry visited various prisons and detention
 centers in connection with its investigation, and the Ministry
 of Interior also approved visits to prisons in Tunis and
 Bizerte by a local human rights group.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Tunisian law, arrests may be made without a warrant.
 Unde a law adopted in 1987, prearraignment detention is
 limited to no more than 10 days. Attorneys, human rights
 activists and former detainees charge that this limit is
 frequently circumvented simply by delaying registration of the
 arrestee. The accused must be informed of the grounds for
 arrest before questioning. A detainee may request an
 examination by a medical doctor but may otherwise be held
 incommunicado. During prearraignment detention, detainees do
 not have the right to a lawyer. They do have the right to a
 lawyer at their arraignment, and the Government provides legal
 representation to indigents, In certain instances, such as
 cases involving national security, pretrial detention may be
 for 6 months; it is renewable by an arraignment judge for up to
 two additional 6-month periods in the case of felony
 indictments or in cases involving national security. The
 examining magistrate at the preliminary hearing, which is
 supposed to occur within 10 days of arrest, decides whether to
 invoke preventive detention. There is no system of bail in
 Tunisia.
 Beginning in the fall of 1990 and continuing through 1991, as.
 many as 4,000 Tunisian Islamists were arrested in connection
 with alleged Islamist plots against the Government. An
 unspecified number were reportedly abducted from their homes at
 night, in violation of Tunisian law, without warrants, and by
 security forces who did not identify themselves as such. Some
 of these persons were released after being interrogated. After
 holding others in incommunicado detention for several months,
 the Ministry of Interior in May released the names of 238
 suspects in detention. Approximately 100 military officers
 were among this first group of alleged conspirators. The
 majority of the detainees were held in violation of the 10-day
 prearraignment detention limit, afid many were held
 
 
 1618
 TUNISIA
 incommunicado for several months. Most of the prisoners
 suspected of participating in the original plot were held for
 more than 100 days without any contact with lawyers or
 families. Under Tunisian-law, a detainee may be questioned in
 a detention center but should be returned to his prison each
 night;-in practice, detainees have been held incommunicado in
 detention centers for weeks.
 Tunisian law specifies that no citizen shall be exiled from the
 country, and there were no reports of government-imposed exile
 in 1991.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tunisia's court system is composed of regular (civil and
 criminal) courts, with appellate and supreme courts, and a
 Military Tribunal. The Constitution provides for the
 presumption of innocence and states that the accused will be
 accorded "necessary guarantees" (not further specified in the
 Constitution) for his defense. Although the court system is
 overloaded, in normal criminal cases the rights of the accused
 are generally respected. There were frequent complaints during
 1991, however, that the rights of those accused of involvement
 in the alleged plot to overthrow the Government--or even of
 less serious offenses of a political or security nature--were
 not respected. The regular court system is highly centralized
 under the Justice Ministry. Civilian trials are usually open
 to the public, and both domestic and foreign observers are
 permitted to attend. The executive branch retains control in
 naming, assigning, granting tenure, and transferring judges,
 making them susceptible to political pressure.
 The Military Tribunal is presided over by a civilian judge with
 military rank and four military judges. In addition to hearing
 cases involving the military, the Tribunal hears cases against
 civilians when national security is deemed to be involved.
 Proceedings are conducted in secret and although defendants in
 theory have the right to counsel of their choice, in practice
 the latter are frequently denied access to the proceedings and
 government-appointed attorneys are provided. Those accused of
 taking part in the alleged conspiracy against the Government
 will be tried in the Military Tribunal, but some government
 officials have said that the trial will be open to the public.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Tunisian Constitution provides for the inviolability of the
 person as well as of the home and privacy in correspondence,
 "except in exceptional cases defined by law." Police must have
 a search warrant, but this requirement is often ignored in
 cases in which the authorities consider that state security is
 involved or in which a "flagrant crime" has been committed.
 The Government continued in 1991 its increased surveillance of
 Islamists and others believed to associate with them. The
 homes and offices of Islamists continued to be watched, their
 visitors were often detained for questioning by the
 authorities, and their homes were entered and searched without
 warrants.
 Although Tunisian law specifies that, except in exceptional
 circumstances, arrests are to be made between 6 a.m. and 8
 p.m., there were numerous complaints of violation of this
 stipulation.
 
 
 1619-
 TUNISIA
 There were numerous reports of mail being opened and telephone
 conversations-monitored, and the Government is believed to
 record some telephone conversations.
 Islamists continue to report difficulty in obtaining and
 renewing business licenses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:'
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tunisians discuss politics and sensitive issues in private with
 relative freedom, both among themselves and with foreigners,
 but less often in public. Many laws pertaining to subversion
 -and defamation are based on broad internal and external
 security concerns, which are neither defined nor subject to
 judicial review. These laws are often invoked in cases
 involving opposition members, particularly for alleged
 possession or circulation of illegal political tracts or
 correspondence. In 1991 a number of opposition members were
 detained and convicted for writing, publishing, distributing,
 or possessing publications or tracts considered defamatory or
 to contain false information.
 Freedom of the press is sharply curtailed, in part by
 restrictive laws and practices and in part by self-censorship
 and fear of sanctions. The press code prohibits defamation of
 a head of state, a member of the Government, or an agency of
 the Government. Charges of libel and spreading false
 information are the two main bases for suits against the
 media. Punishment is usually a fine, although imprisonment and
 sometimes seizure or suspension of an issue also occur. The
 publisher of the popular weekly Le Maghreb wab prosecuted for
 defaming ministers and was sentenced to 15 months in prison,
 reduced upon appeal to 10 months; a lawyer was sentenced to 6
 months in prison for writing an article calling for abolition
 of the Military Tribunal; and the publisher of a weekly
 magazine received a short sentence for "publication of false
 informatiofi and defamation of government officials."
 Prepublication censorship under the 1988 press code, which is
 still valid, requires the printer to deposit copies of all
 publications prepared in Tunisia with the Information,
 Interior, and Justice Ministries prior to public release. The
 Interior Minister may order seizure of all copies of a single
 issue of a publication if the Ministry deems the issue would
 "disturb public order." The ruling on a publication has to be
 made within 3 days from the time of submission. Political
 tracts must also be submitted for approval. In June the
 Secretary of State for Information announced the President's
 decision not to enforce prepublication censorship. The
 Government did retain the right to d6 so, however.
 Prepublication censorship was actively enforced before this
 change in policy, and especially during the Gulf War.
 Publications are now no longer routinely censored at the
 printing plant. However, the possibility of seizure without
 compensation after publication significantly increases the
 financial risk to publishers. For example, the Islamist weekly
 Al Fajr was seized at the printer on January 4, reportedly
 because it contained lists of An Nahda members arrested in
 December 1990, and the Government closed its offices in
 February without explanation. The Government also suspended
 for 6 months Al Badil, a publication of the Tunisian Communist
 Workers Party, on the charge of defamation, and seized issues
 
 
 1620
 TUNISIA
 of foreign publications that contained pieces critical of the
 President or were considered to favor opponents of the
 Government.
 Human rights organizations and some associations and opposition
 parties have criticized the lack of press freedom. The
 Tunisian League for Human Rights (LTDH) issued a communique in
 June criticizing the lack of press freedom and all local papers
 refused to publish it; the League noted that this was the first
 time that all of the media had refused to print one of its
 communiques. The RCD-controlled printer told the publisher of
 Le Maghreb he could no longer print the publication, citing
 "technical reasons." The opposition Popular Unity Party (PUP)
 resumed publishing its weekly newspaper Al Wahda in December.
 The PbP benefited from a $31,500 government subsidy, also
 available to other legal opposition parties, to support the
 publication of its newspaper. No other opposition party,
 however, has started or resumed publication of a newspaper,
 which is a condition for receiving the subsidy.
 The State controls television and radio, and its coverage of
 the Government is highly favorable. Opposition party leaders
 this year criticized their lack of access to the media;
 maintaining that they had less access to them in 1991 than in
 the past. The Italian state television channel RAI UNO is
 available to all viewers, as is a French state channel, Antenne
 2.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly, but any
 group wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must
 apply to the Government for a permit 3 days in advance. The
 Government normally approves such permits, except in cases
 involving proscribed political parties or associations.
 However, opposition political parties complained of government
 harassment of their meetings, especially in areas outside
 Tunis,
 The law on parties stipulates that every political party must
 reject violence in all forms, including fanaticism, racism, and
 other discrimination. No party may claim to represent a
 religion, race, sex, or region. No party may receive funds
 from a foreign party or material aid directly or indirectly
 from foreign countries or foreigners. All party members must
 'have been Tunisian citizens for at least 5 years. The
 Government registered no new parties in 1991. There are seven
 legal parties. At least seven unrecognized parties, including
 An Nahda (Islamists) and the Communist Workers Party (POCT),
 both of which claim large memberships, continue to aspire to
 recognition. In 1991, due to massive arrests and'internal
 problems, An Nahda made no mention of applying for legal status.
 In the spring, the Islamist Student Union (UGTE) was suspended
 and then. in July dissolved by-the court after police claimed to
 have found Molotov cocktails and other instruments of violence
 hidden in gathering places used by the UGTE.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion, but
 allows the free practice of most other religions. However,
 since 1984 there has been a ban on Baha'i religious activities
 because this faith is considered a heretical sect of Islam.
 
 
 1621
 TUNISIA
 Proselytizing for religions other than Islam is prohibited,
 although no specific sanctions are prescribed. The
 Constitution calls on all political parties to respect and
 defend Tunisia's Arab-Muslim identity, and the President as
 well as the parents and grandparents of the President must be
 Muslim.
 The Government controls the mosques arid pays the salaries of
 the prayer leaders (imams). According to the 1988 Law of the
 Mosques, only government-appointed personnel may lead
 activities in the mosque, except with permission from the Prime
 Minister's office. Islamists continued to claim that imams are
 being removed from their jobs if it is suspected that they are
 sympathetic to Islamists or are promoting their goals.
 Jews comprise the largest indigenous religious minority, with a
 population of about 3,000. The Government assures freedom of
 worship for the Jewish community, safeguards its safety; and-.
 pays the salary of the Grand Rabbi of the community. During
 the Gulf War, the. Governmentprovided extra protection for
 synagogues, with heavy security around the main synagogue in
 Tunis. Tunisia's very small community of Christians is
 comprised principally of expatriates, who freely attend church
 services.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement in Tunisia, but the number of
 roadblocks, manned by armed members of the security forces (as
 well as by customs officials, especially near the borders:with-
 Libya and Algeria), appeared to have increased again in 1991.,
 Tunisians complain of being stopped arbitrarily and harassed at
 these roadblocks, which are found, from time to time, in all
 parts of Tunisia. Previously the Government justified their
 existence on the basis of the large foreign presence in
 Tunisia, including the headquarters of the Palestine Liberation
 Organization (PLO) and the Arab League. In 1991 the Government
 said that the heavy police presence and roadblocks were
 intended to intercept Islamists transporting weapons, political
 tracts, or fugitives.
 The withholding of passports continued to be a source of
 concern. A local human rights group reported that in the first
 9 months of 1991 it received, as in the previous year, over 300
 complaints of passport denial, which it regularly registers
 with the Interior Ministry. Islamists report particular
 difficulties in getting passports. The Government claims it
 denies passports only to persons with unsettled legal problems
 at home or abroad and to those who are not likely to use them
 for tourist purposes.
 There is no arbitrary restriction on emigration or
 repatriation. Approximately 350,000 Tunisians are working
 overseas. Tudi'sia does not accept refugees for permanent
 resettlement and is not a country of first asylum. There were
 no cases of forced repatriation. There are 52 refugees with
 resident status and 2,000-3,000 Palestinians residing in
 Tunisia.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Given continuing restrictions on political activities, the
 limitations on opposition access to the media, and distortions
 
 
 1622
 TUNISIA
 in the election process, the ability of citizens in Tunisia to
 change their government through democratic means has yet to be
 demonstrated. The ruling RCD has controlled the.political
 arena for many years. The largdst opposition party, An Nahda,
 which received 18 percent of the vote in the 1989 legislative
 elections, has fallen into disarray due to the arrest of many
 of its leaders and allegations of terrorist activities within
 the organization. According to the Government, An Nahda, as it
 was constituted, violated the law prohibiting religiously based
 parties. Rachid Ghannouchi, the nominal head of the party, is
 in self-imposed exile abroad. It is widely believed in
 government circles that An Nahda receives support from foreign
 countries, again in contravention of the law on parties, but A i
 Nahda denies this.
 The Constitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with
 separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers.
 Until 1990,'the all-RCD legislature had shown little
 independence. Chamber of Deputies members began to exercise
 greater authority during the 1990 fall session and continuing
 through 1991. The deputies rejected or amended a substantially
 larger number of measures submitted to them by the Government.
 All committee debates, however, are in closed sessions and
 receive little media coverage. The President appoints the
 Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and the 23 governors. The
 executive is dominated at the national, regional, and local
 levels by the President and his party, the RCD. Government and
 RCD mechanisms are hardly distinguishable; the President of the
 Republic is also the president of the party.
 The Tunisian electoral code, as it applies to legislative
 elections, provides for a winner-take-all majority system, so
 that the dominant RCD has been allotted all parliamentary seats
 despite winning only 80 percent of the popular vote in the last
 parliamentary elections in 1989.
 Women are only nominally represented-at the senior levels of
 the Government, the Chamber of Deputies and the ruling party.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several human rights organizations are active in Tunisia and
 are recognized by the Government. The Tunisian League for
 Human Rights (LTDH) is one of the oldest and most respected
 human rights organizations in the Arab world. In June it
 issued a communique condemning recent violence and calling for
 respect for human rights and individual liberties and for the
 democratic process. The League announced it was looking into
 the suspicious deaths of 2 Islamists and called attention to
 the rights of defendants, especially the right of families to
 know their whereabouts. It also called for an end to
 information and press censorship. In December it issued two
 communiques which again criticized continuing abuses,
 particularly deaths of persons in official custody.
 At the end of 1990, President Ben Ali proposed a High
 Commission for Human Rights and Fundamental Liberties to
 consolidate efforts to implement national and international
 human rights standards and to offer advice to public officials
 on human rights aspects of policy issues. In April he named
 members to this Commission, which is headed by a respected
 human rights leader. The Commission subsequently formed a
 
 
 1623
 TUNISIA
 Committee of Inquiry to look into human rights complaints,
 prison conditions, and the suspicious deaths of several
 detainees. The Committee's full report had not been released
 by the end of the year, but the Chairman noted in interviews
 with- the media in October that there had been unspecified
 abuses and called for punishment- of those responsible (see
 Section l.c.). In June, in response to mounting international
 and internal criticism of human rights violations in Tunisia,
 the President established the position of Counselor to the
 President for Human Rights.
 Amnesty International (AI) officials visited Tunisia in
 February for meetings with government officials. The
 Government at that time told AI that there were no instances of
 torture in Tunisia. The Arab Institute of Human Rights,
 founded in 1989 is a collaborative effort of the Tunisian
 League for Human Rights, the Arab Organization for Human
 Rights, and the Union of Arab Lawyers. The Maghreb Human
 Rights League also has its office in Tunis.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The 1956 Personal Status Code (PSC) establishes equal rights
 for men and women in some fields. In others, however, women do
 not enjoy the same rights as men. Women have equal rights in
 divorce and child custody cases, and polygamy is forbidden.
 The PSC stipulates, however, that the husband is the head of
 the family, and that his wife owes him obedience. In addition,
 the Code gives daughters a smaller inheritance portion than
 sons.
 According to the 1989 census, 48.1 percent of females over the
 age of 10 were-illiterate, compared with 26.3 percent of males.
 There is a gradual trend, however, toward greater educational
 and professional opportunities for women; the number of women
 in the medical, legal, and other professions is growing
 steadily. Seventy-six percent of the eligible female
 population were-enrolled in primary school as of 1989 and
 secondary and university enrollment are currently over 40
 percent female. In 1989 women comprised an estimated 20
 percent of the work force. This figure probably understates
 the presence of women in the work force,-as many, women are
 employed in the informal sector and seasonally in agriculture.
 The overall number of employed women continues to rise at a
 moderate pace.
 Violence against women occurs in Tunisia, but little is known
 about the extent. Abuse occurring within the family, such as
 wife beating, is seldom mentioned publicly owing to the value
 attached to privacy in this traditional society.- There are no
 official statistics on the subject, and no support groups or
 shelters are known to exist. A battered woman is more likely
 to seek shelter with her extended family than from a government
 social services agency.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Tunisian Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The central labor federation,
 the Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTT), claims about
 15 percent of the work force as members, including civil
 servants and employees of state-owned enterprises. The UGTT
 
 
 1624
 TUNISIA
 and its member wnions are legally independent of the
 Government, the ruling party, and other political forces but
 operate under government regulations which have to some extent
 restricted their freedom of action in recent years. The UGTT's
 membership and officers include persons associated with all
 political tendencies, whether legally recognized or not. The
 current leadership, however, follows a policy of cooperating
 with the Government, and there are credible reports that the
 UGTT receives substantial regular payments from it.
 Dissolution of a union requires action by the courts. There is
 no requirement for a single trade union structure; the fact
 that Tunisia has a single labor central (the UGTT) is a result.
 of historical circumstances, not government action. However,
 the Government has decreed that UGTT member federations are the
 labor negotiators for collective bargaining agreements that
 cover 80 percent of the private sector work force, whether
 unionized or not (see Section 6.b.).
 Unions (including civil servants) have the right to strike,
 provided 10 days' advance notice is given and the UGTT
 approves. The 1991 report of the International Labor
 organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) cited the
 required UGTT approval of strikes as being inconsistent with
 ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association. These
 restrictions are rarely observed in practice, however. During
 the first 6 months of 1991, the Ministry of Social Affairs
 recorded 222 strikes-(more than 80 percent directed against
 private sector firms), of which 90 percent failed to provide
 the required notice and were therefore illegal. As far as is
 known, none of the illegal strikes resulted in government
 action against the strike leaders.
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels, on
 which labor and management are equally represented. If
 conciliation fails, arbitration may be pursued provided both
 sides agree on an arbitrator. The need for agreement, however,
 has meant that the latter mechanism is rarely used. Nearly all
 strikes in 1991 were settled through conciliation.
 Unions in Tunisia are free to join federations and
 international bodies, and the UGTT is a member of the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively is protected by
 law and practiced throughout the country. Wages and working
 conditions in Tunisia are set through the negotiation by the
 UGTT member federations and employer representatives of
 approximately 45 collective bargaining agreements which set
 standards applicable to entire econbmic sectors. The UGTT is
 by law the labor negotiator for these agreements, which cover
 80 percent of the private sector work force, whether unionized
 or not. - The Government's role in concluding these agreements
 is minimal. It has, however, lent its good offices if talks
 appear to be stalled. The Government must approve the
 collective bargaining agreements (though it cannot modify them)
 and publish them in the official journal before these
 agreements acquire legal validity. No agreement between a
 union and an individual firm may be concluded unless there
 already exists an agreement applicable to that firm's economic
 sector.
 
 
 1625
 T-NISIA
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against
 union members and organizers and establishes mechanisms for
 resolving such complaints. However, the UGTT has complained
 about what it claims are increasingly vigorous antiunion
 activities by private sector employers, particularly employers'
 use of temporary workers as a pretext to avoid unions, which in
 certain factories, especially in the textile sector, account
 for up to 80 percent of the work force. The Labor Code extends
 the same worker rights protection to temporary as to permanent
 workers, but its enforcement in the case of the former is more
 difficult.
 There are no export processing zones. Workers in export firms
 have the same right to organize, bargain collectively, and
 strike as those in nonexport firms. The unionization rate is
 about the same even though export firms are more likely to be
 antiunion. The state pays the employer contribution to the
 social security system if the firm produces primarily for
 export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is not specifically prohibited by local law,
 but there have been no reports of its practice in recent
 years. The COE, however, noted in its 1991 report that certain
 provisions of Tunisian law, particularly relating to Tunisian
 workers jailed for illegal strikes, contravene ILO conventions
 on forced labor. There were no reports in 1991, however, that
 any workers were jailed for participating in illegal strikes.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 For manufacturing the minimum age for employment is 15 years;
 in agriculture it is 13. Inspectors from the Social Affairs
 Ministry check the records of employees to verify that the
 employer complies with the minimum age law. bespite this law,
 young children often perform agricultural work in rural areas
 and sell food and other items in urban areas. Small
 enterprises in the informal sector reportedly violate the
 minimum age law frequently. The UGTT has expressed concern
 that child labor--frequently disguised as apprenticeship--has
 become more widespread in recent years.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Tunisia's Labor Code sets standards, including a maximum
 48-hour workweek and a range of administratively determined
 minimum wages. Even supplemented by transportation and family
 allowances, the minimum wage is less and less adequate to
 provide a decent living for a worker and his family, because of
 recent price increases for staple food items.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing
 standards. Most firms are inspected about once a year.
 However, in general the Government does not enforce the minimum
 wage law, particularly in the nonunionized sectors of the
 economy. Moreover, a considerable amount of labor takes place
 in the informal sector and falls outside the purview of labor
 legislation.
 The Social Affairs Ministry has an office with responsibility
 for improving health and safety standards in the workplace.
 There are special government regulations covering many
 hazardous jobs--e.g., mining, pettoleum engineering, and
 
 
 1626
 TUNISIA
 construction. These regulations are enforced more strictly in
 Tunis than in the rest of the country, where much work,
 especially in construction, is performed in the informal
 sector. Working conditions and'standards tend to be better in
 firms which are export-oriented than in those producing for the
 domestic market.
 
 
 1627
