 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic in which the Constitution provides for a parliamentary de-
 mocracy with separation of the executive, legislative, and judicial powers. Injprac-
 tice, the President and his party dominate decisionmaking at all levels. The Presi-
 dent appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet., and the 23 regional governors. His
 Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (RCD) holds all 141 seats in the Chamber of
 Deputies. The banned Islamist party, An-Nahda, was dealt a severe blow in 1992
 when 265 of its senior members were sentenced to prison terms for plotting to as-
 sassinate the President and overthrow the Government. Arrests of Islamists and
 some extreme leftists continued in 1993.
 Tunisia's internal security is maintained by civilian services which include a para-
 military national guard. These services continued to be responsible for widespread
 human rights abuses including torture, although not on the scale of previous years.
 Police presence while not as oppressive as in 1991 or 1992, remained heavy in
 urban areas anA on university campuses.
 Tunisia has a mixed economy dependent principally on revenues from agricultural
 products, tourism, petroleum, textile, clothinq and other manufactured exports and
 remittances from workers abroad. It is now in the 7th year of a structural adjust-
 ment program designed to make the economy more market oriented, reduce staple
 food subsidies, and increase the role of the private sector. Average annual real
 growth over the past 6 years has been approximately 4.9 percent, but unemploy-
 ment has been high and now stands at about 13 percent.
 In 1993 Tunisia enacted a number of legal reforms to enhance the protection of
 human rights. Nevertheless, many of the reforms have not yet been translated into
 real improvement, and many basic rights continued to be restricted. The Govern-
 ment continued to seek out and arrest suspected members of the banned Islamist
 party, An-Nahda, and the banned Communist Workers' Party (POCT) and to harass
 their relatives and persons suspected of involvement with their organizations. The
 prosecution of leading members of organizations critical of the Government, as well
 as the Government's harsh reaction to the circulation of a petition protesting human
 rights abuses had a chilling effect on freedom of speech. Despite amendments to
 the Press Code, press freedom also remained restricted. Other significant problems
 include: incommunicado detention, police abuse of detainees, the Government's re-
 fusal to publish detailed and specific information on the punishment of abusers, in-
 terference with the right to privacy, and the inability of citizens to change their gov-
 ernment. Amendments to the Personal Status Code, including an amendment grant-
 ing women the right to transmit Tunisian nationality even when married to a for-
 eigner and living abroad, further enhanced women's rights in 1993. A new electoral
 co de will ensure limited opposition representation in the Chamber of Deputies to be
 selected in March 1994 elections. The legal length of pretrial detention was reduced,
 forced prison labor was abolished, and some prisoners detained for membership in
 an illegal organization were pardoned.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killing. The Government did not release any information cocerning the
 progress of its investigation into the death of Faisal Barakat or the judicial inves-
 tigation into the deaths "under suspicious circumstances" of six others named in the
 1992 Driss Report.
 b. Disappearance.--One case of disappearance came to light in 1993. Relatives
 and coworkers of Kamel Ben Ali Matmati reported he was taken by police from his
 place of work in late 1991 and has not been seen since. Family members believe
 he was taken to the Cabes police station, tortured, and died in custody. Responding
 to inquiries, the Government stated that Matmati was convicted in absentia in May
 1992 and remains a fugitive.
 
 75-469   0-94--42
 
 
 1294
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Tunisian law forbids ill-treatment of detainees. However, there continued to be cred-
 ible reports that security forces sometimes mistreated detainees, particularly
 Islamists and extreme leftists suspected of antievernment activities. The beating
 of detainees is believed to remain widespread. Many of the defendants in Islamist
 trials alleged their confessions were extracted through torture. Human rights mon-
 itors in Tunisia, including those appointed by the Government, and oppositionists
 abroad generally agree that the practice of torture persists but not on a systematic
 and regular basis as was alleged during widespread roundups of Islamists in late
 1991 and early 1992.
 Amnesty International (AI) reported in June that women relatives of imprisoned
 Islamists were harassed, tortured, and sexually abused in substantial numbers by
 security forces. The Government immediately denounced the report as false, as did
 several opposition parties and government-affiliated women's groups.
 The Government denies that t.rture is practiced as a matter of state policy, but
 acknowledges that unsanctioned abuses have occurred. However, it continued to
 refuse to identify offending officers by name and provide information on sentences
 imposed causing human rghts monitors to question its professed desire to put an
 end to abuses. In early 1993, the press reported that nine police and national guard
 officers were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of 6 months to 6 years in
 cases that date back several years. Government officials claimed that other officers
 have been punished as well. A 1992 report by Presidential Human Rights Commis-
 sioner Rashid Driss reported that 116 police officers had been implicated in 105
 cases of abuse and that 55 officers were subject to disciplinary procedures. The Gov-
 ernment released no further information on those cases.
 As part of a campain, initiated in 1992, to halt such abuses, the Government pro-
 vides special human rights training for police, who are now required to sign a state-
 ment that they are aware of Tunisian and international human rights standards
 and will abide by them. Police officers are provided with a manual including the
 texts of human rights documents, and human rights directives are posted in police
 stations. In December the Justice Minister added a two-semester human rights
 training course on the scope and applicability of international treaties and conven-
 tions to the curriculum of the Magistrates' Institute, which trains all judges and
 prosecutors. The Interior Minister in December also distributed human rights train-
 ing material to nonpolice personnel.
 Inrson conditions were generally adequate and did not threaten life or health.
 Human Rights Commissioner Driss was given authority to conduct unannounced
 prison inspections and reported that conditions were improving, though very few
 visits actually were made. In July the President ordered the abolition of forced labor
 for prison inmates as punishment for misconduct.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under Tunisian law, arrests may be
 made without a warrant in cases of felonies or crimes-in-progress. These arrests
 must be reported immediately to the court, which determines if a detainee should
 be held or released. Under a law adopted in 1987, prearraignment detention is lim-
 ited to no more than 10 days (4 days initially, followed by an additional 4, and then
 an additional 2 if authorized by the prosecutor). Attorneys, human rights monitors
 (including those appointed by the Government), and former detainees charged that
 this limit was frequently circumvented simply by delaying registration of the ar-
 restee. International human rights groups report falsification of arrest records is
 widespread. Legally, an accused person must be informed of the grounds for arrest
 before questioning. A detainee may request an examination by a medical doctor but
 may otherwise be held incommunicado.
 During prearraignment detention, detainees do not have the right to a lawyer.
 They do have a right to a lawyer at their arraignment, and the Government pro-
 vides legal representation to indigents. In certain instances, such as cases involving
 national security or felony indictments, pretrial detention may be for 6 months, re-
 newable by an arraignment judge for up to two additional 4-month periods. Prior
 to penal code reforms enacted in November, preventive detention for a total of 18
 months was allowed (an initial period of 6 months, renewable for two 6-month peri-
 ods). The examining magistrate at the preliminary hearing, which is supposed to
 occur within 10 days of arrest, decides whether to invoke pretrial detention. While
 the law provides for bail, in practice it is very rarely granted. In May and June,
 trials were held for at least 76 Islamist defendants who had been in custody since
 December 1991.
 Tunisian law specifies that no citizen shall be exiled from the country, and there
 were no reports of government-imposed exile in 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Tunisia's court system, modeled on the French
 system, is composed of regular (civil and criminal) courts, with appellate and su-
 
 
 1295
 
 ome courts, and a Military Tribunal. A state security court was abolished in 1987.
 e Constitution provides for the presumption of innocence and states that the ac-
 cused will be accorded "necessary guarantees" (not further specified in the Constitu-
 tion) for his defense.
 The regular court system is highly centralized under the Justice Ministry. An
 elected Supreme Council of the Msgistrature, representing the judges, decides on
 matters of transfer and judicial discipline. However, in practice, the executive
 branch retains control in naming assigning, granting tenure, and transferring
 judges, thus making them susceptible to pressure in politically sensitive cases.
 Police, prosecutors, and judges work closely together, and trials, rather than an
 adversarial proceeding, are dominated by the presiding judge. Defendants have the
 righttobe present and to be representedby counsel at  blic expense if necessary.
 Witnesses may be confronted. However, the role of the defense attorney in such ex-
 aminations is usually minimal. Although the court system is overloaded, in normal
 criminal cases the rights of the accused are generally respected. There were again
 complaints in 1993, h owever, that the rights of those accused of involvement in
 cases of a political or security nature were not always observed or that their lawyers
 were given insufficient t to prepare for trial.
 Civ8lian trials are theoretically open to the public and both domestic and foreign
 observers are permitted to attend. However, access to trials involving Islamists or
 lefists is strictlyr controlled. Family members and other interested parties must
 seek advance police approval to attend such trials.
 The Military Tribunal is presided over by a civilian judge from the Court of can-
 sation (the highest court) and four military judges. In addition to hearing cases in-
 volving the military, the Tribunal also may hear cases against civilians when na-
 tional security is deemed to be involved. As with the civilian courts, decisions of the
 Military Tribunal may be appealed to the Court of Cassation, the country's highest
 court, which, however, limits its review to matters of law and procedure, not facts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Famiy, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitutionprvides for the inviolability of the persn and the home and privacy
 in correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." Police must have
 a search warrant, but this requirement is sometimes ignored in eases in which the
 authorities consider that state security is involved or in which a "flagrant crime"
 is deemed to have been committed. Tunisian law specifies that, except in exceptional
 circumstances, arrests are to be made between 6 a.m. and 8 p.m.
 The authorities continued to surveil Islamists, leftists, and others believed to as-
 sociate with them, detaining their visitors for questioning and searching their
 homes without warrants. Several human rights monitors ando positionists accused
 the Government of harassment through acts of vandalism, theft, and burglary dur-
 ng the year.
 There were reports of mail being opened and telephone conversations monitored,
 and the Government is believed to record some telephone conversations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, expression, and the press In practice however, these freedoms are limited.
 Tunisians are reluctant to discuss politics and sensitive issues in public. The Press
 Code includes limitations on subversion and defamation based on broad internal
 and external security concerns, which are neither defined nor subject to judicial re-
 view. These laws have been used against opposition members, particularly for al-
 leged possession o            of illega politica tracts or correspondence. Such
 charges were filed aginst some defendants in Islamist and leftist trials.
 InFebruary the Government reacted harshly to the circulation of a petition criti-
 cal of its human rights record. The organizer was jailed for 2 weeks, a foreign na-
 tional was dismissed from his government job and threatened with deportation, and
 the remaining 16 signers were called in by the police for interrogation. In contrast,
 the Government took no action in April against over 200 signers after another peti-
 tion critical of its policies was published. In 1993 a student leader was arrested on
 drug charges, the head of a journalists' association was prosecuted on bad check
 charges, and a journalist who wrote an article deemed critical of the Government
 for a French publication faced formal disciplinary proceedings at work. Questions
 remain regarding the validity of these charges, and these actions have had a chilling
 effect on freedom of speech and the press.
 Freedom of the press is limited both by restrictive laws and practices and by self-
 censorship arising from a fear of government sanctions. Amendments to the Press
 Code in 1993 suggested that restrictions were being eased. Nevertheless, many of
 the changes so far have been largely cosmetic, and press freedom remained con-
 trolled. The Press Code prohibits defamation of government officials. The 1993
 
 
 1296
 amendments make proof that the published material in question is true a valid de-
 fense against a libel charge brought by a minister or a deputy, as long as it is relat-
 ed to their official duties. Proof is still not a valid defense, however, in cases of libel
 brought by the President. In the past, charges of libel and spreading false informa-
 tion have been the two main bases for suits against the media. No new charges were
 riled in 1993.
 In 1993 the Press Code also was amended to expand the defmition of libel to in-
 clude the expression of opinions based on racism or religious extremism. Journalists
 express concern that the vague language of the amendment gives the Government
 another tool that can be used against the press.
 In practice, the Government exerted considerable control over the editorial con-
 tent of newspapers, providing extensive advance guidance on important issues and
 reprimanding editors when guidelines were crossed, further encouraging self-censor-
 ship. There was, however, some increase in press coverage of the activities of opposi-
 tion parties, and several opposition party newspapers resumed publication with the
 help of government subsidies.
 Government advertising and subscriptions, an important source of revenue for
 some newspapers, is one of the means used to exert pressure on the press. In Janu-
 ary the Government withdrew its advertising and canceled all its subscriptions to
 a weekly news magazine, urging private subscribers and advertisers to do the same,
 after the magazine published an article that was deemed to cast Tunisia in a nega-
 tive light. In July, after the Journal appealed to the President, the Government re-
 sumedbuying some advertising on a very limited basis but, at year's end, had yet
 to renew its subscriptions.
 Prepublication censorship under the 1988 Press Code, which is still valid, requires
 the printer to deposit copies of all publications prepared in Tunisia with the Sec-
 retary of State for Information and the Interior and Justice Ministries prior to pub-
 lic release. The Interior Minister may order seizure of all copies of a single issue
 of a publication if the Ministry deems the issue would "disturb public order." The
 ruling on the publication has to be made within 3 days from the time of submission
 and may be appealed to an administrative court. Political tracts must also be sub-
 mitted for approval. In 1991 the Government announced the President's decision not
 to enforce prepublication censorship, but it has retained the right to do so.
 Although publications are no longer routinely censored prior to publication, the
 possibility of seizure without compensation after publication significantly increases
 the financial risk to publishers. In 1993 there was a reduction in the censorship of
 foreign newspapers, although the Government at times delayed circulation of papers
 containing negative articles for 1 or 2 days, lessening the demand for them and thus
 their readership. The Government also banned the sale of a French magazine con-
 taining an article, written by two Tunisians, considered critical of the Government.
 The Government controls television and radio, and media coverage of the Govern-
 ment is consistently favorable. The Italian state television channel Rai Uno is avail-
 able to viewers in much of the country, as is a French state channel, France 2, on
 which Tunisian news was substituted for French news. Some French newscasts
 were resumed in July after having been replaced with local programs since Decem-
 ber 1992. Licenses or satellite dishes are freely granted, an more than 10,000
 homes and multifamily dwellings had them in 1993.
 While there are no official limitations on academic freedom, professors often prac-
 ticed a form of self-censorship, avoiding classroom discussions that were either criti-
 cal of the Government or supportive of An-Nahda. Police presence on campus was
 heavy at times. However, the police did not interfere when small-scale student
 strikes were held in March to protest academic reforms. The president of the Tuni-
 sian General Student Association was later arrested and convicted on a drug charge.
 While some described the charge as "trumped up," the Government claimed it was
 unrelated to his political role. After appeals on his behalf, the court permitted him
 to remain free pending his appeal, which had not been heard by year's end.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but any group wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or
 march must apply to the Government for a permit 3 days in advance. The Govern-
 ment normally approves such permits, except in cases involving proscribed political
 parties or associations.
 The Law on Political Parties stipulates that every political party must reject all
 forms of violence, including fanaticism and racism and other discrimination. No
 party may claim to represent a religion, race, sex, or region. No party may receive
 funds from a foreign party or material aid directly or indirectly from foreign coun-
 tries or foreigners. All party members must have been Tunisian citizens for at least
 5 years. There are seven legal parties. No new parties registered in 1993, but the
 Tunisian Communist Party transformed itself into a leftist grouping under a new
 
 
 1297
 name, the Renewal Movement Party. In addition, there are several unrecognized
 parties, including the Islamist An-Nahda Party which claims a large membership
 and aspires to reognition, and the extreme feft Tunisian Communist Workers'
 Party ("POCT"), a smaller organization which remains underground. An-Nahda is
 ineligile for recognition because it is a party that la trepresent a religion.
 arch 1992, the Government amended the Law on Asociations making it ille-
 gal for an officer in a political party to serve as an officer of a private "general" asso-
 ciation and also for such an association to reject membership applications. The re-
 suit of this amendment was the closure for several months of the Tunisian Human
 Rights League from June 1992 to March 1993. The League was permitted to resume
 its operations pending a judicial ruling on its status. The law is not known to have
 been applied against any other organization. (See also Section 4.) Human rights
 monitors claim that this amendment is one of the means by which the Government
 seeks to control all associations. Other means include the threat of arrest or pros-
 ecution of association leaders and the provision of subsidies which make organiza-
 tions financially beholden to the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion
 but allows the practice of most other religions. Since 1984 there has been a ban on
 public Baha'i religious activities because the Government considers this faith a he-
 retical sect of Islam. Moreover, proselytizing for religions other than Islam is prohib-
 ited, although no specific sanctions are prescribed. Foreigners caught proselytizing
 have been threatened with expulsion. The Constitution calls on al[ political parties
 to respect and defend Tunisia a Arab-Muslim identity, and the President as well as
 the parents and grandparents of the President must be Muslim. The Government
 controls the mosques and pays the salaries of the prayer leaders. According to the
 1988 Law on Mosques, only government-appointed personnel may lead activities in
 the mosques, except with permission from the Prime Minister's office.
 Jews comprise the largest religious minority, with a population of as many as
 2,500. The   vernment assures freedom of worship for the ewis community, safe-
 guards its safety, and pays the salary of the GrandRabbi of the community. Tunisia
 encourages Jewish tourism and gave widespread media coverage to the annual Jew-
 ish pilgrimage  the Tunisian island of Jerba in May. Tunisia s very small commu-
 nity of Christians is composed mainly of foreign nationals, who freely attend church
 services.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is freedom of movement within Tunisia, and people are free to
 change their place of residence or work at will.
 In 1993 there were an increasing number of credible complaints that the Govern-
 ment withheld passports in certain cases, and Islamists continued to complain of
 difficulties in obtaining international travel documents. The Government stated it
 denies passports only to persons with legal problems at home or abroad and to those
 persons who are not likely to use them for tourist purposes. However, lawyers who
 have defended Islamist clients and persons associated with lefist or opposition
 causes also reported they and their family members were unable to obtain or renew
 passports.
 There is no arbitrary restriction on emigration or repatriation. Approximately
 570,000 Tunisians are living abroad. Tunisia does not accept refugees for permanent
 resettlement and is not a country of first asylum. There were no cases of forced re-
 patriation. There are approximately 50 refugees with resident status and approxi-
 mately 4,000 Palestinians residing in Tunisia. A growing number of Algerians
 moved to Tunisia in 1993 as the security situation in Algeria deteriorated.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The ability of the citizens of Tunisia to change their rvernment through dem-
 cratic meanshas ayet to be demonstrated. The ruling RCceand its direct predecessor
 parties have controlled the political arena since independence. The largest opposi-
 tion party, the proscribed Islamist An-Nada party, received 18 percent of the vote
 in the legislative elections in 1989, when its candidates were permitted by the Gov-
 ernment to run as independents. However, the party remains illegal and is in dis-
 array following the conviction in 1992 of nearly all its leaders for plotting to over-
 throw the Government. Rachid Ghannouchi, the nominal head of the party, was sen-
 tenced in absentia to life in prison in 1992. In 1993 he was granted political asylum
 in Great Britain.
 The Constitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with separation of the
 executive, legislative, and judicial powers. The al-RCD legislature remains subordi-
 nate to the executive branch. Portions of the plenary sessions are sometimes tele-
 vised. Media representatives, diplomats, and other visitors are permitted to attend
 
 
 1298
 plenary sessions, but committee debates are in closed sessions and receive little
 media coverage.
 The President appoints the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and the 23 governors.
 The executive is dominated at the national, regional, and local levels by the Presi-
 dent and his party. Government and RCD mechanisms are hardly distinguishable;
 the President of the Republic is also the President of the party, and the Secretary-
 General of the party holds the rank of Minister of State.
 At the time of the last legislative elections in 1989, the Tunisian Electoral Code
 provided for a majority winner-take-all system. As a result, the dominant RCD was
 allotted all parliamentary seats after winning 80 percent of the popular vote. In
 1993 the Electoral Code was amended to ensure representation of opposition parties.
 The winner-take-all system remains in place, but some 19 additional "national"
 seats were added to the chamber which will be reserved proportionally for parties
 that do not otherwise win representation in the chamber. Opposition parties that
 participate in the March 20, 1994, elections are assured of at least token representa-
 tion in the chamber. Elections for the Presidency and the Chamber of Deputies are
 held every 5 years. Voting is by secret ballot. All legal parties are free to present
 candidates. However, to run for president a candidate must gather the signatures
 of at least 30 members of the Chamber of Deputies or presidents of municipalities.
 In 1993 there was only one person among the authorized opposition parties who was
 not a member of the President's RCD. By the end of 1993, all the legal opposition
 parties and many professional organizations and associations had endorsed Presi-
 dent Ben Ali for reelection.
 While there are no legal impediments to women's participation in government and
 politics, they are underrepresented and hold very few senior leadership positions.
 In 1993 the President promoted one woman to ministerial rank and one to the 13-
 member ruling party RCD Politburo There are 6 female members in the 141-seat
 Chamber of Deputies, and a woman is the second Vice President of the Chamber.
 In municipal councils, 11 percent of the members are women. Ten percent of the
 members of the Economic and Social Council are women.
 There is a small Berber minority, constituting about 3 percent of the population,
 which is able to participate freely in the political process.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights organizations are active in Tunisia and are recognized by
 the Government, but they are subject to a variety of restrictions. The Tunisian
 Human Rights League was forced to suspend its operations in 1992 following
 amendments to the Associations Law (see Section 2.b.), but was permitted to resume
 its activities in March pending a judicial interpretation of the law. Desite the
 League's resumption, it has yet to recover fully from its period of suspension. The
 League is scheduled to hold its first congress since 1989 in early 1994. The Arab
 Institute of Human Rights, founded in 1989, is a collaborative effort of the Tunisian
 Human Rights League, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, and the Union of
 Arab Lawyers. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) operates a re-
 ional office in Tunis. The Maghreb Human Rights League is headquartered in
 Turns.
 In 1993 the Hi.her Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, formed by
 President Ben Ali in 1991, released a report "Human Rights in Tunisia: 1991-1993."
 The report does not address specific problems or casesbut merely lists the accom-
 plishment claimed by the Government. Human rights monitors are skeptical of the
 independence and effectiveness of offices created in 1992 to coordinate human rights
 concerns in the Interior, Justice, Social Affairs, and Foreign Ministries.
 In 1993 AI officials, including its secretary general, met with the Foreign Minister
 and other Tunisian officials. Another AI representative visited Tunisia and issued
 a report alleging that security forces were responsible for torture, widespread har-
 assment, and sexual abuse against women relatives of incarcerated Islamists. The
 Government strenuously disputed the report's fimdings, as did several of the opposi-
 tion parties and prominent women activists.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-In 1993 the Chamber of Deputies adopted major changes to the 1956
 Personal Status Code, which established equal rights for men and women in most
 fields. The Chamber also amended the Penal, Labor, and Nationality Codes to fur-
 ther enhance and protect women's rights. These changes increased the legal rights
 and protection enjoyed by women and children, including allowing women to trans-
 mit Tunisian nationality even though married to a foreigner and living abroad.
 
 
 1299
 Criminal penalties for wife beating were strengthened; labor laws were amended to
 further reduce job discrimination based on sex- and a fund was established to pay
 child support until delinquent fathers can be found and made to pay. Inheritance
 laws are still governed by Islamic law, which favors male descendants. The husband
 is still recognized as the head of the household, even though maintenance of the
 family is a joint effort and the wife's wishes are to be respected.
 According to the 1989 census, 48.1 percent of females over the age of 10 were illit-
 erate, compared with 26.3 percent of males. There is a significant trend however,
 toward greater educational and professional opportunities or women, and the num
 ber of women in the medical, legal, and other professions continued to grow steadily.
 Twenty-five percent of Tunisian magistrates are women. In 1992 women comprised
 an estimated 25 percent of the work force, a figure that probably understates their
 presence as many women were employed in the informal sector and seasonally in
 agriculture. According to figures released in 1992, 21 percent of civil service emplo-
 ees were women, who were predominantly found in the fields of education, health
 and social affairs at the lower or middle levels.
 Violence against women does occur, but there are no official statistics or studies
 on the subject. In 1993 the Government initiated a survey on violence against
 women. The media has begun ito break its silence on this issue, which had seldom
 been raised publicly given the importance attached to family privacy in this tradi-
 tional society. A woman deputy called on the Religious Affairs Minister to instruct
 religious leaders to address the problem in mosques to emphasize that Islam does
 not condone violence against women. The Tunisian Association of Democratic
 Women (ATFD) operates a small office which provides counseling services to bat-
 tered and abused women 6 days a week. An attorney and psychologist are on duty
 2 days a week. However, ver few women have used the organization's services. No
 other support groups or shelters are known to exist. A battered woman was still
 most likely to seek shelter with her extended family.
 There are several active women's rights groups in Tunisia, the most influential
 being the RCD-affiliated National Union of Tunisian Women (UNFT), the Tunisian
 Association of Democratic Women (ATFD), and the Tunisian section of the World-
 wide Movement of Mothers (MMM).
 Chidren.-Law protecting the rights of children are included in statutes govern-
 ing education, health, inheritance, adoption, and child custody. The Personal Status
 Code, n particular, provides important guarantees for children in cases of adoption
 and the right to custody of minor children in the case of death or incapacitation of
 the father. Education is mandatory to age 16. The Government has an ambitious
 plan to reduce mortality rates by reducing malnutrition, reducing the incidence of
 low-weight births, and reducing iron and vitamin deficiencies in women.
 lndigenous People.-The small Berber minority constitutes approximately 3 per-
 cent of the population. Less than half of them have retained their native language.
 People with Disabilities.-The rights of the people with disabilities are protected
 by a law enacted in 1981 that prohibits discrimination based on disabities and
 mandates that at least 1 percent of public agency and private sector employees be
 disabled persons. There are approximately 10 nongovernmental organizations that
 address the rights of disabled persons. These organizations receive government fi-
 nancing administered by the Ministry of Social Affairs and operate schools and
 other social programs for the benefit of the disabled. They also bring pressure on
 the Government to show sensitivity to the problems and rights of the disabled. The
 Ministry of Education operates one school for the deaf and two for the blind. All
 public buildings constructed since 1991 must guarantee accessibility to physically
 disabled persons. Many cities, including Tunis, have begun to install wheelchair ac-
 cess ramps on city sidewalks, and there is a general trend toward making public
 transportation more accessible to disabled people. Disabled persons also receive ape.
 cia cards from the Government which enttle them to such benefits as unrestricted
 parking, priority in receiving medical services, priority onpublic transportation, and
 some discounts. Vehicles purchased to transport disabled reople are exempt from
 taxes and customs duties.
 Section 6. Wor'ker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Tunisian Constitution and the Labor Code stip-
 ulate the right of workers to form unions. The central labor fcderation, the Tunisian
 General Federation of Labor (UGTU, claims about 15 percent of the work force as
 members, including civil servants and employees of state owned enterprises. The
 Unt  and its member unions are legally independnt of the Government, the ruling
 arty, and other political forces hut operate under government regulations which
 have to some extent restricted their freedom of action. The UGIFrs membership and
 ohicers include persons assoiated with all political tendencies. The current leader-
 
 
 1300
 ship follows a policy of cooperation with the Government, and there are credible re-
 ports that the UGIT receives substantial subsidies from the Government to supple-
 ment the officially mandated monthly union contributions from UGTr members.
 Most incumbent UGiT officials on the national, regional, and federation levels were
 reelected in 1993 in voting which some observers claimed was influenced by the
 Government.
 Dissolution of a union requires action by the courts. There is no requirement for
 a single trade union structure; the fact that Tunisia has a single labor central (the
 UG'T'T) is a result of historical circumstances, not government action. However, the
 Government has decreed that UGTT member federations are the labor negotiators
 for collective bargaining agreements which cover 80 percent of the private sector
 work force, whether unionized or not (see Section 6.b.).
 Unions, including those for civil servants, have the right to strike, provided 10
 days' advance notice is given and the UGTT approves. The 1993 report of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee of Experts (COE) cited the Labor
 Code provision that the UGTT approve strikes as being inconsistent with ILO Con-
 vention 87 on freedom of association. However, these restrictions on strikes are
 rarely observed in practice. In recent years, the majority of strikes were illegal be-
 cause they were not approved in advance. In the first 6 months of 1993, there were
 23 legal strikes and 245 illegal strikes. The Government did not prosecute workers
 involved in illegal strike activity. Tunisian law prohibits retribution against strik-
 ers, but some employers punish strikers who are then forced to pursue costly and
 time-consuming legal remedies to protect their rights. Labor disputes are settled
 through conciliation panels on which labor and management are equally rep-
 resented. If conciliation fails, arbitration may be pursued, provided both sides agree
 on an arbitrator. The need for agreement, however, hai meant that the latter mech-
 anism is rarely used. Nearly all strikes in 1993 were settled through conciliation.
 Unions in Tunisia are free to join federations and international bodies. The UGTT
 is a member of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and various
 re.ional groupings.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and practiced throughout the country. Wages
 and working conditions in Tunisia are set through the negotiation by the UGT
 member federations and employer representative.3 of approximately 47 collective
 bargaining agreements which set standards applicable to entire industries in the
 private sector. The UGTT is by law the labor negotiator for these agreements, which
 cover 80 percent of the private sector work force, whether unionized or not. The
 Government's role in concluding these agreements is minimal. It has, however, lent
 its good offices if talks appear to be stalled. The Government must approve the col-
 lective baraiing agements (although it cannot modify them) and publish them
 in the official journal before these ag ments acquire legal validity. No agreement
 between a union and an individual firm may be concluded unless there already ex-
 ists an agreement applicable to that firm's economic sector.
 The UG ITr also negotiates with the various ministries and 208 state-run enter-
 prises in the public sector. In 1993 the UGTT concluded 3-year public and private
 sector collective bargaining agreements calling for an average 5 percent annual
 wage increase.
 Antiunion discrimination by employerr against union members and organizers is
 prohibited by law, and there are mechanisms for resolving such disputes. However,
 the UGTT has complained about what it claims are increasingly vigorous antiunion
 activities by private sector employers, particularly the firing of union activists and
 employers' use of temporary workers as a pretext to avoid unions, which in certain
 fac'res, especially in the textile sector, account for up to 80 percent of the work
 force. The Labor Code extends the same worker rights protection to temporary
 workeri as to permanent workers, but its enforcement in the case of the former is
 much more difficult.
 Two export processing zones, authorized by a 1992 law, have not yet begun oper-
 ations. Workers in export firms have the same right to organize, bargain collec-
 tively, and strike as those in nonexport firms. The unionization rate is about the
 same, even though export firms are more likely to be antiunion. The State pays the
 employer contribution to the social security system if the firm produces primarily
 for export.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Lcbor.--Compulsory labor is not specifi-
 cally prohibited by Tunisian law, but there have been no reports of its practice in
 recent years.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-For manufacturing, the minimum
 age for employment is 15 years; in agriculture it is 13. Tunisian children are re-
 quired to attend school until age 16. Inspectors from the Social Affairs Ministry
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1301
 
 check the records of employees to verify that the employer complies with the mini-
 mum age law. Des pite this law, young children often perform agricultural work in
 rural areas and sel food and other items in urban areas. Small enterprises in the
 informal sector (which employs approximately 20 percent of the work force) report-
 edly violate the minimum age law frequently. The UGTT has expressed concern that
 child labor-frequently disguised as apprenticeship-still exists, principally in the
 traditional craft sectors suchas ceramics and stone carving. Young girls from rural
 areas are sometimes placed as domestics in urban homes by their fathers, who col-
 lect the child's wages. Workers between the ages of 14 and 18 are prohibited from
 working from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Children over 14 may work a maximum of 4.5 hours
 a day. The combination of school and work may not exceed 7 hours.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istrativel determined minimum wages. Two increases in both the agricultural and
 industrial minimum wage in 1993 followed the rise in the cost of living. Even sup-
 plemented by transportation and family allowances, the minimum wage is barely
 adequate to provide a decent living for a worker and his family. Effective in August
 1993, the minimum monthly industrial wage is roughly $127 (127 Tunisian dinars)
 for a 40-hour workweek and $145 for a 48-hour week. The minimum agricultural
 wage was set at $4.36 per day.
 Tunisia's Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and re-
 quires one 24-hour rest period. The workweek is 40 hours for those employed in the
 energy, transportation, petrochemical, and metallurgy sectors.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards. Most firms are
 inspected about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of
 the economy. Moreover, a considerable amount of labor takes place in the informal
 sector, which falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Social Affairs Ministry has an office with responsibility for improving health
 and safety standards in the workplace: There are special government regulations
 covering many hazardous jobs-e.g., mining, petroleum engineering, and construc-
 tion. Although the Ministry maintains offices throughout the country, these regula-
 tions are enfored more strictly in Tunis than in other regions, where much work,
 especially in construction, is performed in the informal sector. Working conditions
 and standards tend to be better in firms that are export-riented than in those pro-
 ducing for the domestic market. Industrial accidents rose 19 percent to an annual
 rate of 36,693 in 1992, despite an intensive public awareness campaign in the
 media. Workers are free to remove themselves from dangerous situations without
 jeopardizing their employment. Workers may take legal action against employers
 who retaliate for taking such action.
