Tunisia
The recent surge in Islamist political activity throughout North Africa has resulted in a backlash of government-sponsored repression. As the State Department's report makes plain, Tunisia has been no exception. In 1992, the Tunisian government completed its crackdown on the outlawed An-Nahda movement, which had begun with a wave of mass arrests in 1991. A new law passed by Tunisia's parliament in 1992 also resulted in the dismantling of the Tunisian League for Human Rights.
The centerpiece of any survey of human rights in Tunisia during 1992 must be the twin military tribunals held in July and August at Bouchoucha and Bab Saad-oun. In these two mass trials, 279 An-Nahda supporters -- from the rank and file as well as the executive councils of its leadership -- stood accused of an ill-defined plot to assassinate the President and destabilize the Tunisian government. The very process by which these trials unfolded exposed widespread human rights abuses, including repeated acts of torture during custody, extended incommunicado detention, harassment of defense attorneys and an institutional indifference to fundamental notions of due process.
By the sentences imposed in these two courts on August 28 and 30 (45 of the defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment and 220 to sentences between one and 24 years), the Tunisian government may well have broken the back of the An-Nahda movement. But it also reversed all progress Tunisia had made in recent years in acknowledging
international norms of human rights and in fostering greater openness in its West-ern-oriented government. The unfortunate result of the An-Nahda trials also undermined any promise for meaningful reform that might have been built upon the work of the Tunisian Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic Freedoms (the Driss Commission). The Commission, named for its chairman, Rachid Driss, issued its cautiously critical findings in late July, midway through the Bouchoucha trial.
On balance, this year's report by the State Department correctly identifies the areas in which Tunisia's human rights records have been challenged. However, there is missing from the report a sense of conviction that longstanding allegations about human rights abuses in Tunisia are no longer matters of speculation. The results of the An-Nahda trials, even the tepid conclusions of the Driss Commission, sadly confirm them.
For example, the report should have begun by noting that there have been at least seven confirmed deaths of An-Nahda movement members while in recent custody. The death of Faisal Barra-kat, which the report properly notes, is just one example. In August, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights transmitted to the government of Tunisia two other names of persons (Mouldi Ben Amor and Rashid Chammaki) suspected of dying in detention as a result of torture. Amnesty International has reported the deaths in custody of still three others: Abdelaziz Mahuashi, Abdelarouf Laaribi and Ameur Degache. The Driss Commis-
384
Tunisia
sion report confirms the deaths of Barra-kat, Chammaki, Mahuashi, Laaribi, De-gache and two others, Abdelwahed Ab-delli and Fethi Khiari — all "under suspicious circumstances." Unfortunately, the Driss Commission does not explain the nature of its suspicions; it merely promises that "judicial investigations" have been opened.
The State Department report goes on to state that many of the defendants at the An-Nahda trials made "credible" claims that their confessions had been extracted through torture. But the report adds that a committee of court-appointed doctors failed to substantiate the charges. This leaves the misimpression that reports of torture -- a matter widely testified to at the An-Nahda trials and confirmed by the Driss Commission - are subject to doubt. The report omits to state that the court-appointed doctors did not conduct forensic medical examinations to determine sequelae of torture. Nor were these examinations contemporaneous with the acts of torture themselves. At their trials, most defendants reported being tortured and abused while they were still in incommunicado detention, many months to a year before the court-appointed medical examinations were undertaken.
The trials themselves provided independent corroboration of the claims of torture. Trial observers from Amnesty International, Middle East Watch and the Lawyers Committee reported observing defendants who appeared at their plaidoirie bearing the scars, bruises and limps that constitute tangible evidence of the mistreatment they received in the military prisons. Notwithstanding the compelling
evidence of pretrial physical and psychological abuse, the presiding judges refused the demands of defense attorneys that confessions extracted by torture be disallowed. Although the report acknowledges that "questions remain" as to whether proper procedures were followed at trial, by omitting details on the courts' rulings, it leaves the incorrect impression that legal safeguards exist.
The report also understates the widespread abuse of the garde d vue detention which, under Tunisian law, is supposed to last no more than 10 days. The confirmed instances in which arrest records have been falsified in order to extend -sometimes by months -- the period of incommunicado detention, are so numerous that they bear underscoring. In a series of fact-finding missions by Amnesty International, the Lawyers Committee and other human rights observers during 1992, numerous credible examples of the falsification of arrest records were cited by defense attorneys and the families of suspects.
Where the report describes the de jure provisions for due process under Tunisian law, it falls short by not contrasting them with actual practice. To suggest, as the report does, that the system of military tribunals allows for representation by counsel and the right of appeal, ignores the actual practice.
In the first instance, the jurisdiction of the military courts has been extended to absurd extremes, most notably in the arrest, trial and conviction, by a military tribunal, of Hamadi Jebali and Mohammed Al-Nouri. Neither man was a member of the military. Jebali was the editor of Al-
385
Tunisia
Fajr, the weekly magazine of the An-Nahda party. Because of an article written in 1990 by M. Al-Nouri, an author and lawyer, which criticized the military court system, both Jebali and Al-Nouri were arrested and tried by a military, rather than civilian, tribunal. Al-Nouri was released on bail in March 1992 but Jebali remained in detention on new charges of having joined in the An-Nahda plot to overthrow the government. The arrests of Messrs. Jebali and Al-Nouri were condemned by the Working Group of the UN Commission on Human Rights as "arbitrary" and in violation of the right to freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Similarly, it is an overstatement to observe (as the report does) that the findings of Tunisia's military tribunals are subject to appeal. In fact, the appeal lies only to the Cour de Cassation -- an appellate court of limited review which may concern itself only with errors of law and procedure. Had these trials been conducted in a civilian court, an appeal would lie as well to the Court of Appeal, which is empowered to review errors of fact.
The report also leaves the misleading impression that military tribunals are "open" to the public and the press. Numerous observers have concluded that they are "open" in name only. For example, the Bab Saadoun and Bouchoucha trials were conducted under the heavily-armed guard of military, police and Interior Ministry forces. To obtain access to these proceedings, an observer or journalist had to obtain credentials from the government's External Communications Agency. No more than one member of a
defendant's family was allowed to attend. The general public was otherwise barred, allegedly because of space considerations (most of the available seating being occupied by security agents). The non-Arabic speaking trial observers sought, but were denied, permission to bring interpreters to attend sessions of the trial.
Moreover, to the extent the report suggests that free press access may otherwise redress the limits placed on general public access, all observers found that the French and Arabic press based in Tunisia omitted any detailed discussion of the defendants' claims of torture and extended incommunicado detention. On the other hand, the report is quite candid in describing the nature and extent of Tunisia's control over the established press, particularly radio and television. As the report describes, in December, transmissions of the French state channel France 2, which in the normal course is re-broadcast in Tunisia, were blocked when the station reported on criminal drug charges lodged in France against the brother of Tunisia's President Ben Ali.
Finally, while the report gently underscores some of the deficiencies in the Driss Commission findings, its references to the Commission undertaking should have been more critical. This is of particular importance, inasmuch as Tunisia repeatedly proclaims the self-critical work of the Driss Commission as evidence of Tunisia's commitment to human rights. While the Driss Commission report is to be commended for acknowledging, even in its limited way, that deaths and other "abuses" had occurred in Tunisia's prison, it is flawed in key respects.
386
Tunisia
For example, the Commission defined its own role without the benefit of public comment or the direct involvement of prisoners' families. Although it visited several prisons in and around Tunis, it apparently chose not to investigate the holding cells at the Ministry of the Interior, where many of the acts of torture committed on Islamists are said to take place. (Consider, for example, the case of Ameur Degache, who is said by the Ministry of the Interior to have thrown himself out a third floor window while under interrogation.)
Similarly, while the Driss Commission notes that 116 police officers have been implicated in 105 cases, it offers no details about the "abuses" the officers are said to have committed. Nor does it state what discipline resulted -- most observers widely believe the sanctions were minimal. At a meeting with Interior Minister Abdullah Kallal in June 1992, the Lawyers Committee requested information about police officers who had been prosecuted for involvement in deaths while in custody. After much discussion, the Lawyers Committee received by special messenger a sheet of paper with five names on it. No indication was given of the nature of the involvement of these individuals in the deaths in custody, nor was there any way to discern the particular incident in which the person or persons were involved. In short, the material provided by the Minister was not informative and no one has been held publicly accountable for these serious violations of human rights.
The Driss Commission is also disturbingly unconcerned about violations of the law on incommunicado (garde d vue)
detention. Its conclusion that only "minor" discrepancies occurred in the detention process is undermined by the fact that the Commission verified detention periods against arrest registers controlled and maintained by the police. It is generally believed that these arrest registers are routinely altered and post-dated by the police.
387
