Tunisia
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Constitutional
Democratic Assembly, dominate political life in Tunisia. The government
uses the threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack
down on peaceful dissent. Government critics are frequently harassed or
imprisoned on trumped-up charges after unfair trials. Over four hundred
political prisoners remained incarcerated, nearly all of them suspected
Islamists. There are continuous and credible reports of torture and ill-treatment
being used to obtain statements from suspects in custody. Sentenced
prisoners also face deliberate ill-treatment. However, during 2005 authorities
allowed the International Committee of the Red Cross to start visiting prisons,
and ended the practice of placing certain political prisoners in prolonged
and arbitrary solitary confinement.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused legal recognition to every truly independent human
rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then use the
pretext of an organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its activities. On
September 3, police encircled the Tunis office of the non-recognized
National Council on Liberties in Tunisia (CNLT) and, as they had done
many times before, prevented members from meeting. Authorities also prevented
the non-recognized Tunisian Journalists’ Syndicate from holding its
constitutive assembly on September 7.
In 2005 the independent Tunisian Human Rights League (a legally recognized
group) was beset by lawsuits filed by dissident members over procedural
matters. The broader context shows that these suits are part of a larger
pattern of repression; the courts ruled systematically in favor of these plaintiffs,
providing a legal veneer for swift and large-scale police operations to
prevent League meetings, including its general assembly scheduled for
September. The government has continued to block grants issued by the
European Union to the League, and Tunisia’s mainstream press obliges with a blackout on criticism by the League and other human rights organizations
of Tunisia’s rights record.
Authorities tried to undermine another legally recognized organization, the
Tunisian Association of Magistrates, after it elected a leadership calling for
more judicial independence. In July judges close to the ruling party attempted
to oust that leadership in a special vote. In August authorities evicted the
leadership from the association’s headquarters on the disputable grounds that
it had been repudiated in the July vote.
Human rights defenders, like dissidents generally, are subject to heavy police
surveillance, sporadic travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in
phone service, physical assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of
vandalism and theft, and slander campaigns in the press. In early May CNLT
spokesperson Sihem Bensedrine was the target of an especially vulgar series
of articles in at least four pro-government newspapers.
Police arrested lawyer and dissident Mohamed Abou on March 1, 2005— the
day after he published an article online comparing President Ben Ali unfavorably
to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. To disguise that this was the real
reason for Abou’s arrest, authorities prosecuted him instead for an article he
had written in August 2004 deploring Tunisian prison conditions and on a
second, trumped-up charge of assaulting a woman lawyer in 2002. He
received a three-year prison sentence.
The Justice System
The judiciary lacks independence. Investigative judges often question defendants
without their lawyers present. Trial judges frequently turn a blind eye
to torture allegations and procedural irregularities, convicting defendants
solely or predominantly on the basis of coerced confessions. Civilians are
sometimes tried on terror charges in military courts, verdicts of which carry
no right of appeal.
In political cases lawyers are frequently hobbled in their attempts to mount
an effective defense of their clients. They sometimes encounter obstacles to
obtaining their clients’ complete court file or gaining access to their clients in detention before trial.
Media Freedom
Tunisia’s press remains largely controlled by the authorities. None of the
print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government policies,
apart from a few low-circulation independent magazines. The private dailies
are all loyalist, often slandering government critics in a manner that is
deemed too base for the official media. In 2005 Tunisia got its second private
radio station and first private television station, but here too private ownership
was not synonymous with editorial independence.
The government blocks certain political or human rights websites that focus
on critical coverage of Tunisia. As of September 2005, the government was
blocking access to more than thirty such sites, although censorship had been
lifted on other sites, such as those of Le Monde and Liberation and of various
international human rights organizations.
In light of Tunisia’s record on freedom of expression, human rights organizations
criticized Tunisia’s designation as host of the World Summit on the
Information Society (WSIS) in November 2005. During that event, authorities
prevented Tunisian and international human rights organizations from
organizing an alternative “Citizens’ Summit” in Tunis.
Counterterrorism Measures
Tunisian authorities claim that they have long been in the forefront of combating
terrorism and extremism, alluding to their long-running crackdown
against the once-tolerated Islamist Nahdha movement. In December 2003
Tunisia adopted the “Law in Support of International Efforts to Fight
Terrorism and the Repression of Money-Laundering.” It contained a broad
definition of terrorism that could be used to prosecute persons for peaceful
exercise of their right to dissent.
Tunis, and the suspicious stabbing of French journalist Christophe Boltanski
on a Tunis street on November 11.
France made diplomatic representations, “on a humanitarian basis,” on behalf
of a few political prisoners, selected because they had relatives who were
French citizens or who resided in France. Tunisian authorities freed one of
these, Lotfi Farhat, in July.
In 2004, France returned to Tunisia Taher Belkhirat, despite strong evidence
that he would face persecution there. Tunisian authorities arrested him upon
his arrival and, in 2005, sentenced him in an unfair trial to ten years in prison
(reduced to five years on appeal) on charges of membership in, and recruiting
for, a terrorist organization operating abroad. In January 2005, the French
Council of State issued a ruling voiding Belkhirat’s expulsion order—months
after he had been expelled to and jailed in Tunisia.