Tunisia
Tunisia’s process of democratic transition continued, but at a slow pace. The
National Constituent Assembly (NCA), elected in October 2011, continued to
draft a new constitution but at this writing it had yet to be approved. The assassination
by alleged Islamist militants of two leading leftist opposition politicians,
Chokri Belaid and Mohamed Brahmi, on February 6 and July 25 respectively,
caused widespread shock and sparked a political crisis that saw the NCA
suspended for two months.
Since they overthrew the Ben Ali regime in 2011, Tunisians have enjoyed greater
freedom of expression, assembly and association, including the freedom to
form political parties. However, several factors have hampered the consolidation
of rights’ protections. These include the delay in adopting a new constitution
consistent with international human rights law and standards, the retention
of the former regime’s repressive legal arsenal, and attempts by the executive
branch to control media and prosecute speech offenses.
Human Rights in the Draft Constitution
The NCA issued a new draft constitution in June. Thought an improvement on
the three previous drafts—providing safeguards for most civil, political, economic,
social, and cultural rights—it was also deficient in several respects. In
particular, it failed to include a clause directly incorporating human rights, as
defined under customary international law and in international treaties that
Tunisia has ratified, into Tunisian national law. In addition, the new draft contained
only weak formulations of the principles of equality and non-discrimination
before the law, and allowed for limitation of the rights to freedom of
expression, assembly, association, movement, and access to information in
overly broad terms, which could result in their arbitrary restriction. At time of
writing, it remained unclear when the new constitution would be adopted.
Freedom of Expression and Media
The authorities decided in May 2013, after some delay, to implement decreelaw
116 on audiovisual media. This required the creation of an Independent
High Authority for Audiovisual Communication (HAICA) to regulate broadcast media. Despite this, the executive branch continued unilaterally to appoint the
heads of state radio and television broadcasters in contravention of international
freedom of expression standards governing the independence of public
service media.
In 2013, judicial authorities prosecuted many journalists, bloggers, artists, and
intellectuals on account of their peaceful exercise of freedom of expression
using penal code provisions criminalizing “defamation,” “offenses against
state agents,” and “harming public order,” all of which can result in prison
terms. The NCA made no effort to abolish or suspend these Ben Ali era provisions,
and the courts did not rule them inconsistent with international human
rights law.
On March 8, authorities charged blogger Olfa Riahi with criminal defamation
after she published information online about alleged misuse of public funds by
former foreign minister Rafik Abdessalem. Her case was still under investigation
at time of writing.
On August 30, a criminal court in Hammamet imposed prison terms on two
Tunisian rappers, known by the names “Weld El 15” and “Klay BBJ,” after convicting
them in their absence of “insulting the police” and other charges. They
had performed a song critical of police violence at a music festival. On October
17, an appeals court acquitted Klay BBJ and set him free after three weeks in
prison. In March, Weld El 15 had released a video accompanying his song “Cops
Are Dogs,” which showed police assaulting people. For this, a criminal court in
Manouba sentenced him to two years in prison, which the Appeals Court in
Tunis reduced to a suspended six-month term on July 2.
On September 9, an investigative judge ordered the arrest and detention of
police union leader Walid Zarrouk after he allegedly posted comments on a
Facebook post criticizing politicized prosecutions. The same day, in separate
cases, prosecutors summoned Zouhaer al-Jiss, a journalist, for moderating a
radio program in which a participant criticized Tunisia’s president, and Zied al-
Heni, a journalist who had criticized the arrest of a cameraman who filmed an
egg-throwing attack on the culture minister. Al-Heni was arrested that day and
spent three days in jail before being released on bail.
Judicial Reform
In April, the NCA appointed a temporary high judicial council to supervise
the appointment, promotion, transfer, and discipline of judges pending the
adoption of a new constitution. This long awaited reform was intended to end
or reduce the undue executive influence over the judiciary that, in October
2012, saw the Ministry of Justice arbitrarily dismiss 75 judges.
Women’s Rights
Tunisia has long had a reputation as among the most progressive of Arab states
with respect to women’s rights. The new draft constitution reflects this, declaring
that the state “guarantees the protection of women’s rights and supports
their gains,” “guarantees equal opportunity between men and women to
assume responsibilities,” and “guarantees the elimination of all forms of violence
against women.” This is an improvement over previous constitutional
drafts that invoked notions of “complementary” gender roles that risked diluting
the principle of equality between men and women. However, the new draft
constitution fails to fully embody the principle of equality between the sexes as
it refers to equal opportunity in “assuming responsibilities,” but not to the
broader right to equality of opportunity in all political, economic, and other
spheres.
Prosecution of Attacks by Fundamentalist Groups
In May, a Tunis court imposed two-year suspended prison sentences on 20
defendants it convicted of participating in an attack on the American Embassy
on September 14, 2012, by thousands of people, mostly religious conservatives,
protesting a movie made in the US that they deemed insulting to Islam.
Four protesters died in the attack, in which protestors burned the American flag
and a nearby American school, and destroyed cars and other property.
The authorities also accused Islamist religious conservatives of responsibility
for the assassinations of Chokri Belaid and Mohamed Brahmi, and said that
both men were shot with the same gun. Their murders sparked widespread
protests. The authorities declared Ansar al-Sharia, an Islamist group, a “terrorist
organization” and arrested dozens of suspected members. Two of the suspects
alleged torture in prison.
Abuses against Protesters
Tunisians now have more freedom to exercise their rights to peaceful demonstration
since Ben Ali’s ousting. However, police and other security forces continued
to use excessive force against demonstrators in 2013. For example, on
May 19, security forces fired live ammunition and birdshot at protestors during
clashes in Intilaka and Cite Ettadhamen, Tunis neighborhoods, killing one person
and injuring four others. Following the murder of Mohamed Brahmi, security
forces used excessive force, including beatings and tear gas, to disperse protesters,
killing one person and injuring others. The authorities failed to investigate
and to hold the security forces accountable.
Accountability for Past Crimes
In June, the NCA began considering a draft transitional justice law, which proposes
the creation of a Council of Truth and Dignity to uncover the truth about
past rights abuses. At time of writing, the law had yet to be enacted.
Military courts have tried several groups of defendants accused of killing protesters
during the revolution which toppled the former president. A military
court also sentenced Ben Ali, who remains in Saudi Arabia, to life in prison for
complicity in murder, after trying him in absentia, and jailed several former
high-ranking officials.
These trials appeared to respect defendants’ rights and enabled some victims
to pursue justice, but several factors undermined their value towards achieving
accountability, notably the authorities’ failure to identify the direct perpetrators
of killings and lack of an adequate legal framework to prosecute senior officers
with command responsibility for crimes that their subordinates committed. The
government’s failure to press effectively for Ben Ali’s extradition from Saudi
Arabia also undermined accountability.
Although Ben Ali’s security forces used torture extensively, the new authorities
have failed in the almost three years since the overthrow of Ben Ali to investigate
the majority of torture cases. In the one torture-related trial that has taken
place, a court convicted former Interior Minister Abdallah Kallel and three security
officials of “using violence against others either directly or through others,”
and sentenced them to two year prison terms. The case arose from the arrest and detention of 17 senior military officers in 1991 in connection with an
alleged plot by the Islamist group Al-Nahdha against Ben Ali.
Key International Actors
The European Union provides funding support for judicial, security sector and
other institutional reform. In October 2012, the EU approved €25 million (US$32
million) to support strengthening judicial independence and pledged a further
€40 million ($51.2 million) in June 2013.
On September 13, following his visit to Tunisia, the special rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence urged
the government to adopt a comprehensive transitional justice program, and to
enact legislation transferring jurisdiction over cases involving gross violations
of human rights in which the military or security forces are implicated, from military
courts to the ordinary civilian justice system.