 TUNISIA
 Tunisia, an Arab state in North Africa, has traditionally been
 open to the West and socially progressive. Islam is
 acknowledged as Tunisia's official religion. From
 independence in 1956 to November 7, 1987, Tunisia was led by
 President Habib Bourguiba, the leader of the Destour Socialist
 Party (PSD), who is now in his mid-80's. Following the
 findings of a medical commission in November that Bourguiba
 was unfit to continue to serve, Prime Minister Zine el Abidine
 Ben Ali assumed the Presidency. The Tunisian Government has
 stated that'this occurred in accordance with Article 57 of the
 Constitution.- Opposition parties have called for general
 legislative elections to be held before the next regular
 elections scheduled for November 1991. The Government has
 scheduled legislative byelections for January 1988 to fill
 five legislative vacancies.
 Although Tunisian policy traditionally has emphasized economic
 development over defense spending, in recent'years the
 Government has begun a-modest program to modernize its army.
 In 1987-the.security forces were augmented by the reactivation
 of the PSD's militia to guard party establishments, help
 police with crowd control, and put down Islamic demonstrations.
 This activity raised concerns that public order might become
 the responsibility of nongovernmental agents. Hdwever, the
 militia was officially disbanded with the change of government
 in November.
 In 1987.the economy, recovering from the low point reached in
 1986 when real gross domestic product [GDP] contracted by 1.2
 percent, was expected to register a 5 percent gain in real
 GDP. The improved economic performance was partly the result
 of a structural adjustment program introduced in August 1986.
 Howevei, the economy remained vulnerable to external shocks
 and the effects in 1987 of the adjustment program included
 higher inflation and unemployment.
 Throughout most of 1987, until the change of government, human
 rights in Tunisia suffered as a result of violent
 confrontations between the Government and Islamic
 fundamentalists. There were periodic and sometimes violent
 street demonstrations leading to the arrest of more than a
 thousand Islamic activists. Several judges and PSD officials
 were subjected to acid attacks, and the violence culminated
 with bomb explosions in four tourist hotels on August 2. A
 special State Security Court was constituted to try 90
 fundamentalists accused of specific acts of violence as well
 as trying to overthrow the regime through violent means. The
 trial ended with death sentences and executions of 2 men who
 confessed to violent acts, 5 death sentences in absentia, long
 prison sentences for some leaders of the umbrella Islamic
 organization, the Islamic Tendency Movement (MTI), (including
 a life sentence for its leader Rachid Ghannouchi), and 14
 acquittals. At the same time, human rights activists sharply
 criticized the Government and its security services for
 torture of members of the MTI, the suspicious deaths of some
 persons, and alleged violations of homes and detention of
 relatives in the course of security sweeps. They also raised,
 serious questions about the fairness of judicial procedures in
 the MTI trial. However, in Tunisia the verdicts were welcomed
 to the extent that they distinguished between violent crimes
 and political activities.
 The new Government has charted a bold new course aimed at
 improving human rights. On his assumption of power, Ben Ali
 
 
 1323
 TUNISIA
 promised constitutional reform and new laws to promote greater
 liberty and participation in the political system for parties
 and mass organizations. He also pledged to enhance freedom of
 the press, to end inequality and injustice in the.application
 of law, and to fight against favoritism in the government.
 Within two months the new Government had made significant
 progress toward fulfilling his promises. A law limiting
 prearraignment and pretrial detention, previously unlimited by
 Tunisian law, was adopted. The special State Security Court
 and the function of the General Prosecutor of the Republic
 were eliminated. Several banned opposition newspapers
 reappeared, and the Government and PSD media began more
 balanced and objective news coverage. The new regime also
 appointed commissiona to rbvise the laws on mass organizations
 and the press. In so doing, the Government solicited and
 sometimes implemented ideas from independent and opposition
 politicians. The Government also enunciated a policy of
 making the General Union of Tunisian Workers (UGTT) more
 autonomous and representative, and returned dozens of fired
 union activists to their jobs.
 In December Hen Ali granted presidential clemency and commuted
 the sentences of 2,892 prisoners. On December 31, he granted
 clemency and commuted the sentences of an additional 405
 prisoners tried in regular courts (not including the State
 Security Court). In effect, he reduced the sentences of most
 of these prisoners to time already served, and the vast
 majority were to be released in the near future. Most of the
 prisoners affected were Islamic fundamentalists convicted in
 1987 of membership in an unauthorized organization (MTI) and
 participation in unauthorized street demonstrations. There
 were also some political figures, including convicted relatives
 of former Prime Minister Mohamed Mzali 9nd the former first
 lady, Wassila Ben Ammar. The clemency and reduction in
 sentences did not affect the fundamentalist Muslims convicted
 by the State Security Court, including Rachid Ghannouchi.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings in 1987.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1987.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In July 1987 Tunisia officially adhered to the 1984 United
 Nations Convention on Torture. However, there is reliable
 evidence that there were instances of physical and
 psychological abuse of prisoners in 1987. Occasional reports
 of torture appeared from time to time in the local Arabic-
 language press and in communiques of the Tunisian Human Rights
 League. Most accusations of mistreatment revolved around a
 government crackdown on Islamic fundamentalism, especially on
 the MTI. Reliable sources reported several accusations of
 beatings by police during questioning in order to extract
 confessions. These accusations were substantiated in some
 cases by statements of detainees before arraignment judges and
 
 
 1324
 TUNISIA
 formal statements by lawyers-attesting to the poor physical
 condition of~their clients.- In addition, several Islamic-
 fundametalists testified before the State Security Court that
 they had been beaten byrpolice and force& to confess .to
 membership~in-the MTI. There were-several reporteddeaths due
 to injuries sustained while in police custody. The MTI claims
 that 13 of its 'members, including the cases noted above, were
 killed by police in 1987.
 Conditions in Tunisian detentiorf centers and prisons.are poor
 and, in some instances, injurious to health. Reports indicate
 that civil prisons-are poorly supervised. Families of
 prisoners usually provide food and personal items for the -
 prisoner,'s use.
 d,. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile,.or Forced Labor
 Prior to the.November change ingovernment, the authorities
 arrested some -persons 'engaged in opposition activities,, most
 often on charges of illegal political activity, spreading
 false information, or defamation of the President. During
 1987, according to former Prime Minister Rachid Sfar, as many
 as 1,600 Islamic fundamentalists were arrested, and, according
 to the Prosecutor General, 1,270 were tried and sentenced--to
 between 6 months and 6 years in prison--for participating in
 unauthorized street demonstrations and membership in an
 unauthorized organization. Fourteen members of the
 unrecognized Progressive Socialist Rally [RSP] were also
 sentenced to 6 months in jail for belonging to an unauthorized.
 organization. They were later pardoned by President Bourguiba,
 before serving their sentences-
 There were reports that, police raided university dormitories
 in. Tunis in April following campus unrest, and that a leader
 of the Islamist Tunisian General Union of Students (UGTE) fell
 from a window to his death during one of the raids. In
 December Ben Ali released from national service a number of
 students who were inducted into government work groups as a
 result of university unrest during the 1986-87 academic year.
 Khemais Camari, a prominent member of the Tunisian Human
 Rights League and the opposition Democratic Socialist Movement
 (MDS), was arrested in April and-charged with defamation of
 the President and-spreading false information. He-was
 released from detention shortly afterward for health reasons,.
 and his trial has been postponed-several times. Twenty-one
 trade unionists were also arrested in April for holding an-
 unauthorized labor meeting. No formal charges were brought
 against them, and they were released after 4 days. A number
 of Islamic fundamentalists were arrested in March and held
 until their formal arraignment in August. During this time
 some were not allowed access to family or lawyers.
 During the change in power, some two dozen close associates of
 Bourguiba were briefly detained; most were released within a.
 week; some are still under detention. One remained under
 house arrest, and two were being held on charges of corruption.
 There were also numerous accusations in 1987 of police arrests
 of relatives to compel persons being sought to turn themselves
 in to the police.
 Until November prearraignment and preventive (pretrial)
 detention was unlimited by Tunisian law. In its 1987 Report,
 Amnesty International expressed particular concern about the
 practice of prolonged incommunicado detention in Tunisia. The
 
 
 1325
 TUNISIA
 passage by the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies on November 22 of
 a law limiting prearraignment and pretrial detention, if
 effectively enforced, will represent a significant change in
 practice. Under the new laws prearraignent detention is
 limited to a maximum of 10 days: 4 days initially, which can
 be extended an additional 4 days with a written request from
 the prosecutor, and a final 2 days may be allowed in "cases of
 extreme need." The detainee may also request 'n examination
 by a doctor during or immediately after this period. After
 arraignment, detention of a defendant is limited to 6 months,
 renewable by an arraignment judge for one additional period of
 6 months in cases of misdemeanor, and for two additional
 periods of 6 months for felonies.
 In 1981 the International Labor Organization (ILO] criticized
 Tunisia for its policy of compulsory labor in prisons. While
 Tunisia continues to'use compulsory labor as a sentence, it
 reportedly resolved ILO concerns on this issue in 1983 in a
 comprehensive report. The ILO has continued to urge Tunisia
 to bring its legislation on rehabilitation work and civic
 service into conformity with the Convention on Forced Labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Triil
 All trials in Tunisia are normally open to the public, and
 both domestic and foreign journalists and observers regularly
 attend proceedings. Tunisian prison sentences are usually
 divided into two categories: confinement in prison and
 confinement at forced labor. No secret'trials were held in
 1987. Critics have alleged govdrnment interference in the
 judicial process, especially with regard to Islamic
 fundamentalists and members of the opposition. The majority
 of Islamic demonstrators charged with unauthorized assembly
 appeared before-one judge, described by a member of the
 opposition as "government manipulated." In August the
 Government constituted a special State Security Court to hear
 the cases of 90 Islamic fundamentalists, including MTI leaders
 and six men accused of bombing tourist hotels in Sousse and
 Monastir. The accused were charged with attempting the
 violent overthrow of the State, collusion with a foreign power
 (Iran), and inciting the population to revolt and murder.
 Both foreign and Tunisian journalists and observers attended
 the trial and provided detailed coverage of the prosecution,
 defense, and testimony. After a month of sessions and a
 lengthy deliberation, the court convicted 76 of the 90
 defendants and sentenced 7 to death--2 in custody who admitted
 to carrying out violent acts, and 5 in absentia. MTI
 President-Rachid Ghannouchi received life at hard labor, and
 the other defendants found guilty received sentences varying
 from 2 years in prison to 20 years at hard labor. The
 verdicts and sentences were viewed by many in Tunisia as
 balanced and responsible, but several international human
 rights organizations, including Amnesty International and the
 Arab Association for Human Rights, criticized the trial
 procedures and pronounced the sentences harsh.
 Following the trial, 13 of the defendants convicted in
 absentia were apprehended and retried in the State Security
 Court in November. The Court confirmed the verdicts of 11
 defendants, including 1 death sentence. Two defendants had
 their original sentences of 10 years' imprisonment reduced to
 5 years. President Ben Ali commuted the death sentence to
 life at hard labor after the appeals court upheld the
 verdict. An appeals court upheld the convictions of the
 others tried in November as well.
 
 
 1326
 TUNISIA
 After these retriais in the'State Security Court, President
 Ben Ali introduced a bill abolishing this court. Local press
 commentary explained the move as an attempt to insure that
 individuals would henceforth Pe-tried only in regular courts
 for specific crimes, not in special courts for beliefs or
 associations. Ben'Ali also introduced a bill abolishing the
 position of General Prosecutor of the Republic, a move
 explained by the press as an attempt to decentralize the
 judiciary and reduce executive branch influence. In late
 December, the Chamber of Deputies passed both of these'bills
 into law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person
 as well as the inviolability of the home and privacy in
 correspondekce, "except in exceptional cases defined by law."
 The privacy of the individual and the home are generally
 respected in practice. However, according to respected
 sources, the security police in 1987 obtained blanket
 authorization to search for persons suspected of Islamic
 fundamentalism or membership in the MTI. Police, security
 forces, and, according to some reports, the ruling party's
 militia conducted a  eries of sweeps and searches in several
 cities during July and August. There are some reports of the
 monitoring of correspondence and telephones.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties,.Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tunisian citizens generally feel free to criticize their
 Government in private. In public they are much more
 restrained. Personal criticism of the President in public is
 a crime under the press code; the new Government has promised
 a reform of the press code and has created a committee to
 draft a new law.
 Tunisian law reguires that the first copy of each edition of
 all periodicals and the first copy of all published books be
 submitted to a censorship authority. This body has the power
 to censor, either partially or completely, any publication it
 receives. During 1987 two opposition publications were
 suspended for periods of 6 months, and all the magazines and
 reviews issued by the Paris-based publishing house Jeune
 Afrique were banned twice for limited periods, once in March
 and again in September. Issues of two other independent
 papers were seized in 1987, leading them to stop publishing
 temporarily.
 After the change of government in November, most of the-
 suspended publications began to publish again, and Jeune
 Afrique was again allowed in the country. Newspapers,
 including government and ruling party organs, regularly
 carried'political debate and dissent on government positions.
 Government radio and television news coverage became more
 balanced and included far less coverage of the daily
 activities of government officials. Arabic radio and
 television stations also began broadcasting the Muslim calls
 to prayer, a practice not previously permitted.. In November
 the Government also-announced a series of cultural reforms,
 among them the revision of the law on cultural associations,
 and the lifting of a previous ban on the publication of five
 books. However, in December the Government seized an issue of
 
 
 1327
 TUNISIA
 the independent weekly Les Annonces and suspended it for 3
 months for carrying a cartoon which, in the Government's view,
 insulted former president Bourguiba.
 Academic freedom is generally respected. Teaching and
 scholarly research on topics at the university level are not
 subject to interference. University administrators are
 appointed by the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Tunisian Constitution provides for freedom of assembly,
 but any group that wishes to organize must obtain government
 authorization. This authorization has been withheld from some
 political opposition groups, such as the MTI and the Baathist
 RSP, which are denied permission for public gatherings or
 demonstrations. Recognized organizations must obtain
 qovernment permission to hold mass meetings. Recognized
 opposition political parties and independent organizations
 such as the Tunisian Human Rights League held periodic
 meetings during the year. President Ben Ali promised a new
 law on associations and political parties, and has been
 consulting with prominent members of the opposition about its
 content.
 Tunisia's Constitution stipulates the right to organize a
 union and to strike, and most public sector workers are
 affiliated with an appropriate union. In the past, these
 constitutional provisions contributed to a tradition of free
 trade unionism based on the French model. During the
 extraordinary Congress of the General Union of Tunisian
 Workers (UGTT) in January 1987, however, government pressure
 led to the deposing.of the previously elected executive board
 of the UGTT. The deposed board members were loyal to the
 labor leader Habib Achour. Amid charges of government
 meddling, the January congress culminated in the election of a
 new executive board dominated by men closer to the ruling PSD.
 The Congress also drafted a new charter that, while asserting
 the workers' right to strike and associate, instituted new
 procedures for those activities. Henceforth, sanctioned
 strikes require a majority vote of all member unions, not just
 the affected syndicate as in the past. The charter also
 contained an implicit agreement complying with the Government's
 earlier insistence that future wage increases hinge on
 increased productivity in concerned enterprises. Opposition
 labor activists accused the Government and PSD of manipulating
 the Congress and shutting out labor leaders who were not
 progovernment.
 There were some isolated wildcat strikes in 1987. Following
 protracted labor tension, the Government arrested Habib Achour
 in 1986 f  mismanagement of labor funds and later tried and
 sentencedhim to 6 years in prison. In June 1987, the
 Government permitted the ailing 74-year old labor leader to
 spend the remainder of his sentence under house arrest, and
 the new Government released him altogether in November on the
 understanding that Achour would no longer engage in union or
 political activity. The new Prime Minister, Hedi Baccouche,
 said that the UGTT should be more representative and should be
 allowed to solve its problems internally. The Government
 permitted dozens of workers, who had been fired for union
 activities, to return to their jobs. It also permitted other
 union activists to recover their passports, and to resume
 publishing in Tunisian periodicals, and corresponding with
 labor activists abroad.
 
 
 1328
 TUNISIA
 c. Fieedom-of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion of
 Tunisia but also provides for the free practice of other
 religions." During the latter years'of the Bourguiba regime,
 Islamic fdndamentalists were prosecuted. Proselytizing for
 religions 6ther than Islbm iS prohibited. The small Jewish
 community worships freely and maintains indigenous
 organizations with official sanction. Christians, mostly
 expatriate, freely attend church services. Under an agreement
 between the Vatican and the Tunisian Government, several Roman
 Catholic6rddrs remain active. The Government imposed an
 official'ban'on afhai' religious meetings in 1984, but placed
 no futthtr res6trictions bn this group in 1987.
 d. Fieedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigratiori, and Repatriation
 There id fied6m of movement within Tunisia, but all citizens
 must carry identity'cards. Passports for foreign travel are
 easily'avaifable but can be withheld for a variety of reasons,
 most often for suspicioi of a crime. The Ministry of the
 Inteior'-*cairies out random roadblocks and identity checks as
 part of its internal security measures. General security
 controls are fairly strict, partly due to the presence of Arab
 League and Palestinian Liberation Organization hjeadquarters in
 Tunis. Sedurity was tightened in 1987 due to university
 t4nrest and an increased threat from Islamic fundamentalists.
 Ther-is no festriction on emigration or repatriation,
 although for~eign exdhnngd -restrictions and a substantial
 departure tax rhake internationaI travel more difficult.
 Section 3  Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Th6 Cohstitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with
 sepYratidn of executive, 'legislative, and judicial powers.
 From 1976 to 1987 Bourguiba 'ruled as President for Life.
 There is a unidameral legislature, the Chamber of Deputies,
 which is elected every 5 years and is the lawmaking
 authoiity. In practice, legislation in the past involved
 ratification df executive decisions, although executive
 initiatives were debated and modified in the process. The
 three legal opposition parties took little part in the general
 legislative elections of November 1986, and in 1987 the Chamber
 of Deputies contained only members of the ruling party. The
 Islamic Tendency Movement (MTI), the only significant
 religion-oriented political force, has benefited from the wave
 of Islamic fundamentalism throughout the Middle East in recent
 years but is proscribed by the Government. Opposition parties
 called for new elections following the change in government.
 While parliamentary byelections are scheduled for January,
 Prime Minister Hedi Baccouche has indicated that the Government
 does not plan to hold either general legislative or
 presidential elections before the now regularly scheduled
 elections in November 1991.
 Since November the new Government has encouraged legislative
 debate, and the local press has carried summaries of chamber
 discussions on key issues. The Government also pledged to
 allow opposition participation in interim elections to fill
 five vacancies in the Chamber of Deputies. The Government
 also solicited and sometimes implemented the ideas of
 opposition and independent political figures on such diverse
 
 
 1329
 TUNISIA
 issues as reform of the Constitution, the law on pretrial
 detention, and reforms of the press code and the law on mass
 organizations.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Tunisian League of Human Rights is one of the oldest and
 most respected human rights organizations in the Arab world.
 During 1987, while coming under increasing criticism from the
 government-controlled press, the League continued to consult
 with government officials about allegations of human rights
 abuses, and to publish periodic communiques pointing out what
 it considered well-documented instances of abuse. In August
 the League released a communique expressing its "profound
 preoccupation faced with the degradation of the state of human
 rights and public liberties during the year 1987..." However,
 the League has been vocally supportiMe of the new Government's
 reforms, especially the law on limitation of prearraignment
 and pretrial detention and the elimination of the State
 Security Court and the position of.General Prosecutor.
 In May a second human rights organization, the Association for
 the Defense of Human Rights and Civil Liberties, was created
 with the encouragement of the Government. The President of
 the Association is Dr. Dhaoui Hannablia, a former Minister of
 the Interior. The Association, still in its infancy, has no
 national structure and conducts most of its business out of a
 Tunis office. In 1987 the Association aided families of some
 of the arrested Islamic fundamentalists to get in touch with
 their relatives in custody. The Association also released
 several statements reaffirming its support for Tunisian
 institutions and pledging to watch for human rights abuses.
 Upon taking office in October 1987, Prime Minister Ben Ali met
 publicly with leaders of both human rights organizations in a
 reaffirmation of the legitimacy of their activities.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Personal Status Code--enacted in 1957 and a landmark human
 rights document in the Arab world--calls for equal rights for
 men and women, including equal rights in divorce and child
 custody. A small number of women serve in the Cabinet and at
 high levels of the Government. Equal access to education is
 also stipulated by law, and approximately 40 percent of
 primary and secondary students are female:
 Women in Tunisia generally earn less than men, in part because
 much female labor takes place in the unregulated informal
 sector, and because traditional Arab culture gives men the
 responsibility for earning a living. According to 1984
 government statistics, women make up 21.7 percent of the work
 force. Forty-three percent of the female work force have jobs
 in the low-paying textile-leather industry, 26 percent are
 employers or own their own businesses, and about 25 percent
 are officially estimated to work in agriculture. Despite
 government efforts, traditional practices keep many women from
 attaining their full legal rights, especially in the rural
 areas. According to a recognized academic expert, women in
 agriculture earn about half the wages of their male
 counterparts. Women in the industrial work force usually
 
 
 1330
 TUNISIA
 receive the poprest paying jobs, partly due to the fact that
 most female,industrial workers are young and single and quit
 their jobs when they marry.
 There-is no. religious discrimination in private commerce and
 employment, but government employment is generally reserved
 for Muslims. The small Jewish minority-is an active part of
 the middle class in Tunis and has some influence on government
 decLsions through informal contacts and networks. There is
 verylittle racial, linguistic, or social discrimination in
 Tumioia .- .
 CONDITIONS OF.LABOR
 TuniSia has a labor-code, dating from independence in 1956,
 that sets,_standarAs of work, hours of work, and a minimum, wage
 for smme,60.percent of the labor force working in the civil
 service, public sector companies, and professions such as
 teaching. A considerable amount of labor, howeyer, takes-
 place in the informa-l econQmy outside the Government's
 control. Such labor includes both moonlighting in occupations
 covered by the labor code and activities such as residential
 construction falling outside the code's purview. Work
 standards in the informaal sector are often below government
 norms.. :The" labor code-also serves as an indirect model for
 the largex private sector, companies.
 The Government -announced .a 10 percent increase in the base
 monthly minimum industrial wage, to be phased in in two 5
 percent installments. The first stage took effect November 1
 and increased the industrial minimum wage to about $123 for a
 40-hourwrkweek and $139 for a 48-hour week. Employees who
 are covered by the minimum wage law should also receive other
 benefitg, including social security, disability and health
 insurance, transportation and family allowances, and paid
 leave, but sometimes do not. The labor code also requires
 employers to pay overtime, a night work differential, and
 holiday pay.
 In the major urban areas, a minimum wage employeewith a
 family of four nets between $170-210 per month when allowances
 are included. In agriculture the base wage is about $3.85 per
 day, although this directly applies only to 37 percent of the
 agricultural work force and does not cover migrant
 agricultural wnrkers.
 Child labor is prohibited prior to the age of 16. The
 Ministry of Social Affairs directs the oversight of the
 provisions affecting child labor. However, in rural areas,
 children perform much of the agricultural work.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has an office designed to
 improve health and safety standards in the workplace. In many
 hazardous jobs--i.e., mining, petroleum engineering, and
 construction--the Government has established and is more
 strictly-enforcing new safety regulations. However, these
 regulations are enforced more strictly in Tunis than in the
 rest of the country where much work, especially in
 construction, is done in the informal sector.
 
 
 1331
