 TUNISIA
 Tunisia is a republic dominated by a single political party. President Zine El-
 Abidine Ben Ali and his Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD) party have con-
 trolled the Government, including the legislature, since 1987. The President ap-
 points the Prime Minister, the Cabinet, and 23 governors. Four opposition parties
 hold 19 of the 163 seats in Parliament. The executive branch and the President
 strongly influence the judiciary.
 The police share responsibility for internal security with a paramilitary national
 guard. The police operate in the capital and a few other cities. In outlying areas,
 their policing duties are shared with, or ceded to, the national guard. Both forces
 
 
 1810
 
 are under the control of the Minister of Interior and the President. The security
 forces continued to be responsible for serious human rights abuses.
 Tunisia has made substantial progress towards establishing an export-oriented
 market economy based on manufactured exports, tourism, agriculture, and petro-
 leum. The per capita gross national product for 1998 was approximately $2,200
 while real per capita income grew by 5.2 percent. Sixty percent of citizens are in
 the middle class and enjoy a comfortable standard of living, and the Government
 reported that 80 percent of households owned their own homes. The country has a
 high level of literacy, low population growth rates, and wide distribution of basic
 health care.
 The Government's human rights performance was uneven, and it continued to
 commit some serious abuses. The ability of citizens to change their government has
 yet to be demonstrated. The ruling RCD party is firmly intertwined with govern-
 ment institutions throughout the country, making it difficult for opposition parties
 to compete on a level playing field. Members of the security forces reportedly tor-
 tured and physically abused prisoners and detainees; several students arrested in
 the Government's investigation of illegal Communist Workers Party activities
 claimed that police and prison guards tortured and beat them. Security forces also
 monitored the activities of government critics and at times harassed them, their rel-
 atives, and associates. Prison conditions reportedly ranged from Spartan to poor. Ar-
 bitrary and incommunicado detention continued. The judiciary is subject to execu-
 tive branch control, and due process rights are not always observed. Human rights
 activists reported that the Government violated the due process rights of Tunisian
 Human Rights League (LTDH) vice president Khemais Ksila during his April ap-
 peal hearings. The Government infringed on citizens' privacy rights.
 The Government continued to impose significant restrictions on freedom of speech
 and of the press, and journalists practice self-censorship. The Government dem-
 onstrated a pattern of intolerance of public criticism, opening criminal investigations
 against activists Mohamed Moaada, Radhia Nasraoui, and Abdelmajid Sahraoui,
 and arresting 16 students and labor activists who reportedly criticized government
 policies. In February the Government convicted former LTDH vice president
 Khemais Ksila on defamation charges and sentenced him to 3 years in prison and
 a $900 (1,000 dinar) fine. The Government continued to use the mandatory
 prescreening of publications and control of advertising revenue as means to discour-
 age newspapers and magazines from publishing material that it deemed undesir-
 able. The Government regularly seized editions of foreign newspapers containing ar-
 ticles that it considered objectionable. However, the Government improved access to
 the Internet and began broadcasting a monthly public affairs program that per-
 mitted citizens to debate issues with government officials. The Government restricts
 freedom of assembly and association. The Government limits partially the religious
 freedom of members of the Baha'i faith. The Government does not permit proselytiz-
 ing. The Government continued to restrict the freedom of movement of government
 critics and their family members. The Government refused to meet with members
 of the LTDH and placed serious obstacles in the way of the LTDH's effective oper-
 ation. The Government reportedly subjected LTDH members and other human
 rights activists to harassment, interrogation, property loss or damage, and denial
 of passports. The Government permitted researchers and trial observers from sev-
 eral international human rights groups to work freely and facilitated their access
 to government officials. The Government continued to demonstrate its strong sup-
 port for the rights of women and children; however, legal discrimination against
 women continued to exist in certain areas, such as property and inheritance law,
 and societal discrimination exists in areas such as employment. Violence against
 women occurs.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were unconfirmed reports
 that former Islamist prisoner Tijani Dridi died in police custody between August 2
 and 7. The Government stated that Dridi died on July 21 from injuries sustained
 the previous day in a motorcycle collision.
 There were no developments in the September 1997 death of Ghezala Hannachi,
 an elderly woman who, according to human rights activists, died after police used
 excessive force against her during a search of her home. The Government main-
 tained that Hannachi died of natural causes but did not release the results of the
 prosecutor's inquiry into her death.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 
 
 1811
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Penal Code prohibits the use of torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment; however, security services allegedly used various methods
 of torture to coerce confessions from detainees. The forms of torture allegedly in-
 cluded electric shock, submersion of the head in water, beatings with hands, sticks,
 and police batons, cigarette burns, and food and sleep deprivation. Police also re-
 portedly utilized the "rotisserie" method: Stripping prisoners naked, manacling their
 wrists behind their ankles, and beating the prisoners while they were suspended
 from a rod. Human rights activists alleged that police tortured accused Communist
 Workers Party (PCOT) member Lotfi Hammami in this fashion in April, beating
 him severely on his genitals. Human rights activists also alleged that Imane
 Darwiche and Henda Aroua, arrested in a February roundup of 16 students and
 labor activists on charges of PCOT membership, were tortured and forced to sign
 confessions that they were not permitted to read (see Sections 2.a., 2.b., 4, and 6).
 The Government maintained that these charges were unfounded and alleged that
 the prisoners had not filed complaints with judicial authorities.
 In November the U.N. Committee Against Torture noted that although the Gov-
 ernment had adopted numerous positive measures to protect and promote human
 rights, the Committee had "concerns with regard to the difference between the law
 and its practice." The Committee expressed concern over reports of torture and
 death in custody and recommended that the Government shorten pretrial detention
 periods and reduce prearraignment incommunicado detention periods from the cur-
 rent legal limit of 10 days to 48 hours, as most torture cases reportedly occurred
 during prearraignment incommunicado detention.
 According to Amnesty International and defense attorneys, the courts routinely
 fail to investigate allegations of torture and mistreatment and have accepted as evi-
 dence confessions extracted under torture.
 In a report published in November as an alternative to the Government's report
 to the U.N. Committee Against Torture, the International Federation of Human
 Rights Leagues (FIDH) stated that torture was a "blatant, grave, and systematic"
 practice. The report listed at least 500 cases that occurred between 1990 and 1998,
 including at least 30 cases of death during torture. The majority of these cases oc-
 curred between 1990 and 1995. The FIDH reported that the total number of victims
 of torture between 1990 and 1998 probably totaled several thousand, and that gov-
 ernment harassment discouraged victims of torture from filing complaints. The re-
 port was prepared in conjunction with the LTDH and the Committee for the Respect
 of Liberties and Human Rights in Tunisia.
 Human rights activists alleged that police and prison authorities mistreated pris-
 oners by subjecting them to physical abuse. Guards in Manouba prison reportedly
 beat alleged PCOT member Imane Darwiche in June after she and to other pris-
 oners criticized the conditions under which they were detained. LTDH vice president
 Khemais Ksila alleged that Tunis prison guards pretending to be medical authori-
 ties physically abused 'him on July 23 after Ksila began a hunger strike to protest
 his prison conditions (see Sections 2.a. and 4).
 Human rights advocates maintain that charges of torture and mistreatment are
 difficult to substantiate because government authorities often deny medical exami-
 nations-until evidence of abuse has disappeared. For example, attorneys for Lotfi
 Hammami-alleged that judicial authorities rejected-repeated requests for a medical
 examination of Hammami. The Government maintained that it investigates all com-
 plaints of torture and mistreatment filed with the prosecutor's office and noted that
 alleged victims sometimes publicly accused authorities of acts of abuse without tak-
 ing the steps required to initiate an investigation. Absent a formal complaint, the
 Government may open an administrative investigation, but is unlikely to release the
 results to the lawyers of affected prisoners.
 According to defense attorneys and former prisoners, prison conditions ranged
 from Spartan to poor and, in some cases, did not meet minimum international
 standards. Credible sources reported that overcrowding continued to be a serious
 problem, with 40 to 50 prisoners typically confined to a single 194 square feet cell
 and up to 140 prisoners held.in a 323 square feet cell. Defense attorneys reported
 that prisoners in the Ninth of April prison in Tunis were forced to share a single
 -water and toilet facility and a single razor with their cellmates, creating serious
 sanitation problems.
 There were credible reports that conditions-and prison rules were more stringent
 for political prisoners than for the general prison population. One credible report
 has alleged the existence of special cell blocks and prisons for political prisoners,
 where they may be held in solitary confinement for months on end. Another credible
 source reported that high-ranking leaders of the illegal An-Nahda Islamist move-
 ment have been held in solitary confinement since 1991. Other sources alleged that
 
 
 1812
 political prisoners regularly were moved among jails throughout the country, there-
 y making it more difficult for the prisoners' families to deliver food to the pris-
 oners. One prisoner reported serving in 3 different jails while serving a 6-month
 sentence; another reported serving in 10 different jails in 3 years. Other prisoners,
 including LTDH vice president Khemais Ksila, alleged that the authorities limited
 the quantity and variety of food that families of political prisoners could bring to
 supplement prison fare.
 There were no developments in the 1997 deaths in custody of prisoners Ridha
 Khemiri and Ahmed Ouafi, who, according to human rights activists, died because
 of prison authorities' negligence. The Government denied these allegations, citing
 authorities' efforts to provide medical care, but did not release the results of the au-
 topsies that it reportedly conducted.
 National High Commissioner for Human Rights Rachid Driss, whose organization
 is government-funded, has conducted bimonthly, unannounced prison inspections
 since 1996. Although Driss has declared that prison conditions and prisoner hygiene
 were "good and improving," details of his inspections have not been made public.
 The Government does not permit international organizations, independent human
 rights organizations, or the media to inspect or monitor prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law authorizes the police to make
 arrests without warrants in the cases of suspected felons or crimes in progress. The
 Government may hold a suspect incommunicado for 10 days following arrest and
 prior to arraignment. Detainees have the right to be informed of the grounds for
 arrest before questioning and may request a medical examination. They do not have
 a right to legal representation during the 10-day incommunicado detention period.
 Attorneys, human rights monitors, and former detainees maintain that the authori-
 ties illegally extend the 10-day limit by falsifying the date of arrest.
 Human rights activists alleged that the Government subjected the family mem-
 bers of Islamist activists to arbitrary arrest (see Section 1.f.). In February and
 March, the Government arrested 16 students and labor activists in response to their
 reported criticism of the Government (see Section 2.a.).
 Detainees have a right to be represented by counsel during arraignment. The Gov-
 ernment provides legal representation for indigents. At arraignment the examining
 magistrate may decide to release the accused or remand him to pretrial detention.
 The law permits the release of accused persons on bail, which may be paid by a
 third party. In cases involving crimes for which the sentence may exceed 5 years,
 or which involve national security, pretrial detention may last an initial period of
 6 months and may be extended by court order for two additional 4-month periods.
 During this period, the court conducts an investigation, hears arguments, and ac-
 cepts evidence and motions of both parties.
 A case proceeds from investigation to the Criminal Court, which sets a trial date.
 There is no legal limit to the length of time the court may hold a case over for trial
 nor is there a legal imperative for a speedy hearing. Complaints of prolonged deten-
 tion awaiting trial were common, and President Ben Ali has publicly encouraged
 judges to make better use of release on bail and suspended sentences. Radhia
 Aouididi, who was arrested on November 9, 1996 on charges of association with the
 illegal An-Nahda movement and possession of a false passport, was held for 18
 months before the Government tried and convicted her on May 26 (see Section 2.d.).
 The trial of Salowa Souilem, who was arrested on May 28, 1996 on charges of asso-
 ciation with An-Nahda, is scheduled for January 1999 (see Section 1.f.).
 Human rights activists reported that security services arbitrarily imposed admin-
 istrative controls on former prisoners following their release from prison. Although
 the Penal Code contains provisions for the imposition of administrative controls fol-
 lowing completion of a prison sentence, only judges have the right to order a former
 prisoner to register at police stations, and the law limits registration requirements
 to 5 years. On August 13, the Government arrested former Islamist prisoner Tarek
 Soussi on charges of beating a fruit vendor, after Soussi refused to continue register-
 ing with the police following expiration of the 5-year limit on his administrative con-
 trols. The Government convicted him on September 10 and sentenced him to 5
 months in prison. Human rights lawyers argued that the partially paralyzed Soussi
 was incapable of beating anyone. The Government maintained that it prosecuted
 and convicted Soussi in accordance with the law and that these assault charges
 were unrelated to Soussi's previous convictions. The Government also alleged that
 Soussi had not filed any official complaints after the limit on.his administrative con-
 trols expired and police authorities continued to require him to register.
 There are likely a sizable number of political detainees, although there is no reli-
 able estimate due to arbitrary government detention practices and the lack of
 records of arrests.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 
 
 1813
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, the executive branch and the President strongly influence the ju-
 diciary. In practice, the judicial branch is part of the Ministry of Justice and the
 executive branch appoints, assigns, grants tenure to, and transfers judges. In addi-
 tion, the President is head of the Supreme Council of Judges. This situation renders
 judges susceptible to pressure in politically sensitive cases.
 The court system comprises the regular civil and criminal courts, including the
 courts of first instance, the courts of appeal, and the Court of Cassation, the nation's
 highest court, as well as the military tribunals within the Defense Ministry.
 Military tribunals try cases involving military personnel and civilians accused of
 national security crimes. A military tribunal consists of a civilian judge from the Su-
 preme Court and four militry judges. Defendants may appeal the tribunal's verdict
 to the Court of Cassation.
 The Code of Procedure is patterned after the French legal system. By law the ac-
 cused has the right to be present at trial, be represented by counsel, question wit-
 nesses, and appeal verdicts. However, in practice judges do not always observe these
 rights. The law permits trial in absentia of fugitives from the law. Both the accused
 and the prosecutor may appeal decisions of the lower courts. Defendants may re-
 quest a dferent judge, if they believe that a judge is not impartial. The Court of
 Cassation, which considers arguments on points of law, as opposed to the facts of
 a case, is the final arbiter.
 Trials in the regular courts of first instance and in the courts of appeals are open
 to the public. The presiding judge or panel of judges dominates a trial, and defense
 attorneys have little o portunity to participate substantively. Defense lawyers con-
 tend   at the courts oten fail to grant them adequate notice of trial dates or allow
 them time to prepare their cases. Some also reported that judges restricted access
 to evidence and court records, requiring in some cases, for example, that all attor-
 neys of record examine the court file on one appointed day in judges' chambers with-
 out copying material documents. They also complained that the judges sometimes
 refused to allow them to call witnesses on their clients' behalf or to question key
 government witnesses.
 The Government rep ortediy violated LTDH vice president Khemals Ksila's right
 to due process during his April 25 appeals hearing. After resuming the hearing fol-
 lowing a 2-week recess, the presiding judge refused to allow Ksila to make a state-
 ment before the new panel of judges, as is required by law. In June the Court of
 Cassation upheld Ksila's original February conviction and sentence. The Govern-
 ment malin    ed that Ksila was tried and convicted in full accordance with the law
 (see Sections 1.c., 2.a., and 4).
 Amnesty International and defense attorneys report that courts routinely fail to
 investigate allegations of torture and mistreatment and have accepted as evidence
 confessions extracted under torture (see Section 1.c.).
 There is no reliable information n othe number of poltical prisoners. Human
 Rights Watch (HRW) reported that there may be hundreds of political prisoners,
 convicted and imprisoned for membership in the Islamist group An-Nahda and the
 Communist Workers Party, for disseminating information produced by these banned
 organizations, and for ading relatives of convicted members. Amnesty International
 estimates that there are up to 2,000 poitical prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities infringed on citizens' privacy rights. The Constitution provides for the in-
 violability of the person, the home, and for the privacy of correspondence, "except
 in exceptional cases defined by law." The law requires that the police have warrants
 to conduct searches, but police sometimes ignore the requirement if authorities con-
 sider that state security is at stake or that a crime is in progress. LTDH vice presi-
 dent Abdelkarim Allagui sad that police forces conducted an unauthorized search
 of his home on March 29. The police reportedly told Allagui that they were pursuing
 a suspect who was fleeing the scene of a crime. The Government stated that
 Allagui's claims were unfounded.
 Authorities may invoke state security interests to justify telephone surveillance.
 There were numerous reports of government interception of facsimile and computer-
 transmitted communications. The law does not explicitly authorize these activities,
 although the Government has stated that the Code of Criminal Procedure implicitly
 gVes investigating magistrates such authority. Many political activists experience
 quent and sometimes extended interruptions of residential and business tele-
 phone and facsimile services. One activist complained that his mail and telephone
 service has been interrupted since 1996.
 The security services monitor the activities of political critics, and sometimes har-
 ass, follow, question, o otherwise intimidate their relatives and associates. Police
 forces reportedly harassed and threatened the daughter of human rights lawyer
 
 
 1814
 Radhia Nasraoui and the son of LTDH vice president Khemais Ksila. The Govern-
 ment denied these charges. Police-place journalists who write articles critical of the
 Government, or who are active in human rights organizations, under surveillance
 (see Section 2.a.). Human rights activists and lawyers also reported that they were
 under police surveillance (see Section 4).
 Human rights activists alleged that the Government subjected the family mem-
 bers of Islamist activists to arbitrary arrest, reportedly utilizing charges of "associa-
 tion with criminal elements" to punish family members for crimes committed by in-
 dividuals. For example, on October 30 the Government arrested Mohamed Aouididi,
 brother of jailed alleged An-Nahda activist Radhia Aouididi, and Mohamed Abdel
 Moumen Ifa El Amri, brother of Aouididi's fiancee, and charged them with conspir-
 ing to attack a person or property and incitement to religious fanaticism and hatred.
 Defense attorneys reported that the Government arrested Salowa Souilem in May
 1996 on these charges, after her husband, a former Islamist prisoner, testified
 against the Government to a foreign human rights group that was investigating the
 death in custody of a fellow Islamist prisoner. Souilem is in jail awaiting trail in
 January 1999 (see Section I.d.). Human rights activists also alleged that the rel-
 atives of Islamist activists who are in jail or living abroad were subjected to police
 surveillance and mandatory visits to police stations to report their contact with rel-
 atives. The Government maintained that the Islamists' relatives were members or
 associates of the outlawed An-Nahda movement and that they were correctly sub-
 jected to legitimate laws prohibiting membership in or association with that organi-
 zation. The Government also reportedly refused to issue passports to the family
 members of some human rights activists.
 Human rights activists allege that security services arbitrarily imposed adminis-
 trative controls on prisoners following their release from prison (see Section 1.f.).
 Police presence is heavy throughout the country and traffic officers routinely stop
 motorists for no apparent reason to examine their personal identification and vehic-
 ular documents. The Government regularly prohibited the distribution of some for-
 eign publications and, from July until November, blocked transmission of Italian tel-
 evision channel Rai-Uno (see Section 2.a.). The security services often question citi-
 zens seen talking with foreign visitors or residents, particularly visiting inter-
 national human rights monitors and journalists.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and of the press; however, in practice, the Government restricts freedom of
 speech and of the press and relies upon direct and indirect methods to restrict press
 freedom and encourage a high degree of self-censorship. The Government also used
 the Press Code, which contains broad provisions prohibiting subversion and defama-
 tion, to prosecute individuals who expressed dissenting opinions.
 In January the Government prosecuted attorney Abdelkarim Kahloul on defama-
 tion charges after he used a proverb while defending a client in court that implied
 that a citizen had no recourse when the State was against him. Although a criminal
 court in Sousse convicted Kahloul and sentenced him to 3 months in prison, the
 Court of Appeals overturned the criminal court's ruling in April and acquitted
 Kahloul on all charges.
 On February 11, the Government convicted LTDH vice president Khemais Ksila
 on charges of defamation of the public order, dissemination of false information, and
 inciting the public to violence, and sentenced him to 3 years in prison and a $900
 (1,000 dinar) fine. The Government arrested Ksila in September 1997 after he cir-
 culated a communique in which he protested alleged government reprisals for his
 human rights activism and criticized government restrictions on freedom of expres-
 sion. The Court of Cassation upheld the convictions and sentence in June. The Gov-
 ernment maintained that Ksila was prosecuted and convicted in full accordance
 with the law (see Sections 1.c., I.e., and 4).
 In February and March, the Government arrested 16 students and labor activists
 on nine charges, including defamation, dissemination of false information, and asso-
 ciation with the illegal Communist Workers Party, after the students reportedly
 criticized the Government and its university policies during a public meeting of the
 National Student Union (UGET) and attempted to organize a campus-wide strike.
 Credible sources reported that the Government also believed that the students-had
 circulated tracts that accused the President's extended family of corruption. The
 Government issued arrest warrants in the same case for four PCOT leaders who re-
 mained in hiding, and opened criminal investigations against human rights lawyer
 Radhia Nasraoui and labor activist Abdelmajid Sahraoui (see Sections 1.c., 2.b., 4,
 and 6). The Government maintained that all individuals named in the PCOT case
 were being prosecuted in accordance with the law.
 
 
 1815
 
 Sahraoui and four other Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTT) trade
 union activists continued to face unrelated possible defamation charges for signing
 a 1997 petition that criticized the UGTT secretary general. Although Sahraoui and
 the others remained free on "conditional liberty," the Government never closed the
 Ieal case against them (see Section 6).
 In December 1997, the Government opened a criminal investigation against
 former Social Democratic Movement (MDS) opposition party leader and frequent
 government critic Mohamed Moaada, on charges of association with the illegal An-
 Nahda Islamist movement. Moaada appeared for questioning before the examining
 magstrate in charge of the investigation in May, and remained under a court order
 ibiting him from leaving Tunis for the duration of the criminal investigation.
 Human rights lawyers confirmed that there was no legal limit on either the dura-
 tion of the investigation or the accompanying restriction on Moaada's freedom of
 movement (see Sections 2.b. and 2.d.).
 Although several independent newspapers and magazines-including two opposi-
 tion party journals-exist, the Government relies upon direct and indirect methods
 to restrict press freedom and encourage a high degree of self-censorship. Primary
 among these methods is "depot legal," the requirement that printers and publishers
 provide copies of all publications to the Chief Prosecutor, Ministry of Interior, and
 Ministry of Culture prior to distribution. Similarly, distributors must deposit copies
 of publications printed abroad with the Chief Prosecutor and various ministries
 prior to their public release. While publishers need not wait for an authorization,
 they must obtain a receipt of deposit before distribution. On occasion such receipts
 reportedly are withheld, sometimes indefinitely. Without a receipt, publications may
 not be distributed legally. The Press Code contains broad provisions prohibiting sub-
 version and defamation, neither of which is clearly defined. The Code stipulates
 fines and confiscation for failure to comply with these provisions. The Government
 routinely utilized this method to prevent distribution of editions of foreign news-
 papers and magazines that contained articles critical of the country. Editions of Le
 Monde and Al Hayat, for example, were embargoed several times each month. The
 Government also reportedly withheld "depot legal" to remove from circulation books
 that it deemed critical of the Government. In addition, the Government provided of-
 ficial texts on major domestic and international events and reportedly reprimanded
 publishers and editors for failing to publish these statements.
 The Government also relies upon indirect methods, such as newsprint subsidies
 and control of public advertising revenues to encourage self-censorship in the media.
 There were reports that the Government withheld advertising orders, a vital source
 of revenues, from publications that published articles that the Government deemed
 offensive.
 The Government exerted further control over the media by threatening to impose
 restrictions on journalists, such as refusing permission to travel abroad, withholding
 press credentials, and questioning and imposing police surveillance on journalists
 who wrote articles critical of the Government. Members of the security services also
 reportedly questioned journalists on the nature of press conferences and other public
 functions hosted by foreigners that they attended. In June high-ranking Ministry of
 Interior officials questioned journalist Taoufik Ben Brik after he published an arti-
 cle critical of the Government in the French newspaper La Croix. Other journalists
 who were active in human rights organizations or attempted to run as independent
 candidates for the National Journalists Association reported that they were under
 police surveillance for weeks at a time. Visiting foreign journalists sometimes com-
 plain of being followed by foreign security officials.
 In May the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) named President Ben Ali as
 one of its "10 enemies of the press," citing the Government's "swift reprisals" for
 reporting critical of the Government. The CPJ stated that journalists were "dis-
 missed from their jobs, denied accreditation, and barred from leaving the country"
 and that self-censorship had become "virtually institutionalized." The Tunisian
 Newspaper Association remained expelled from the World Association of News-
 papers (WAN). The WAN expelled the Association in 1997 for its failure to oppose
 repression of freedom of the press.
 The Government owns and operates the Tunisian Radio and Television Establish-
 ment (ERTT). The ERTT's coverage of government news is taken directly from the
 official news agency, TAP. In May ERTT began broadcasting a live public debate
 program entitled "Face to Face," which gave ordinary citizens the opportunity to de-
 bate public affairs issues with government officials. Human rights activists de-
 scribed the program as progress toward greater freedom of expression. There are
 several government-owned regional radio stations and one national television chan-
 neL Bilateral agreements with France and Italy permit citizens to receive the
 French television channel France 2 and the Italian Rai-Uno, but the Government
 
 
 1816
 
 blocked transmission of Rai-Uno from July until November after the channel broad-
 cast an interview with London-based banned An-Nahda party- leader Rachid
 Ghannouchi. The Government claimed that Rai-Uno broadcasts were ended for
 "technical reasons." Recent estimates put the number of satellite dishes in country
 at 100,000. After blocking sales for several years, the Government instituted regula-
 tions in 1996 to govern their sale and installation. Dishes smuggled from Algeria
 also are available on the black market in many areas.
 The Government encouraged greater use of the Internet, lowered Internet user
 fees and telephone connection fees, and abolished customs duties on computers in
 order to achieve its goal of 10,000 Internet users by the end of the year. On Septem-
 ber 1, the Government announced that 6,000 users already were on-line. However,
 the Government reportedly blocked access to web sites produced by some inter-
 national human rights groups (see Section 4).
 Like journalists, university professors indicated that they sometimes practiced
 self-censorship by avoiding classroom criticism of the Government or statements
 supportive of the Islamist An-Nahda movement. Professors alleged that the Govern-
 ment utilized the threat of tax audits, control over university positions, and strict
 publishing rules to encourage self-censorship. The presence of police on campuses
 also discouraged dissent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the Government imposes some restrictions on this right.
 Groups that wish to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must obtain a permit
 from the Ministry of Interior. The authorities routinely approve such permits for
 groups that support government positions, but refuse permission for groups that ex-
 press dissenting views. In January for example, the Government refused permission
 to a coalition of eight associations, including the Young Lawyers Association, the
 Democratic Women s Association, and the LTDH, to organize a march to express
 their solidarity with the citizens of Algeria. Similarly, LTDH members reportedly
 were unable to obtain government permission to use public spaces for their meet-
 ings. In December the Government canceled a -public meeting organized by five inde-
 pendent associations to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration
 of Human Rights, after the associations neglected to inform the Ministry of Interior
 of the meeting 3 days in advance. Also in December, the Government arrested seven
 university students who participated in public rallies organized by the UGET. The
 seven students were tried and convicted on assault charges, which human rights ac-
 tivists said were based on questionable evidence. The Government prohibited Am-
 nesty International from holding public meetings in September and December (see
 Section 4).
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of association, the Government re-
 stricts this right by barring membership in political parties organized by religion,
 race, or region. On these grounds, the Government prosecutes members of the illegal
 Islamist movement An-Nahda. Human rights activists alleged that the Government
 extended its prosecution of Islamist activists to include family members who were
 not politically active (see Sections 1.d. and 1.f.). The Government opened a criminal
 investigation against former MDS opposition party leader Mohamed Moaada on
 these charges after he reportedly met with An-Nahda leaders in Europe (see Sec-
 tions 1.d., 2.a., and-2.d.).
 The Government bans organizations that threaten disruption of the public order
 and uses this proscription to prosecute members of the illegal Communist Workers
 Party. In February and March, the Government arrested 16 students and labor ac-
 tivists on PCOT membership charges and issued arrest warrants for 4 other PCOT
 leaders, including PCOT head Hamma Hammami, who remained in hiding. The
 Government named human rights lawyer Radhia Nasraoui and labor activist
 Abdelmajid Sahraoni as codefendants in the case. Among other charges, the Govern-
 ment also reportedly accused the group of attempting to organize an unauthorized
 student strike to protest changes in university policies. The case is under investiga-
 tion by the examining magistrate and no trial date has been set. The Government
 maintained that the group was being prosecuted in accordance with the law (see
 Sections 1.c., 2.a., and 2.d.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion and, although the Government
 generally permits the practice of other religions, it does not permit proselytizing,
 and partially limits the religious freedom of Baha'is. The Government controls
 mosques and pays the salaries of prayer leaders. The 1988 Law on Mosques pro-
 vides that only personnel appointed by the Government may lead activities in the
 mosques.   .
 The Government regards the Baha'i faith as a heretical sect of Islam and permits
 its 150 adherents to practice their faith only in private. The Government reportedly
 pressures Baha'is to eschew organized religious activities.
 
 
 1817
 
 With 1,800 adherents, the Jewish community is the country's largest indigenous
 religious minority. The Government assures the Jewish community freedom of wor-
 ship and pays the salary of the Grand Rabbi. The Government permits the Jewish
 community to operate private religious schools and allows Jewish children on the
 island of Jerba to split their academic day between secular public schools and pri-
 vate religious schools. The Government also encouraged Jewish emigres to return
 for the annual Jewish pilgrimage to the historic El-Ghriba synagogue on the island
 of Jerba.
 The Christian community, estimated at about 2,000, is composed mainly of for-
 eigners. It freely holds church services and operates a small number of schools. In
 general, the Government does not permit Christian groups to establish new church-
 es.
 The Government views proselytizing as an act against the public order. Authori-
 ties ask foreigners suspected of proselytizing to depart the country and do not per-
 mit them to return. There were no reported cases of official action against persons
 suspected of proselytizing.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights. Persons are free to change
 their place of residence or work at will. In practice, however, the Government re-
 stricts the freedom of movement and foreign travel of those critical of the adminis-
 tration.
 The Government amended the passport law in October, transferring authority to
 withhold or revoke passports from the Ministry of Interior to judges. However, the
 amended law contains broad provisions that permit passport seizure on undefined
 national security grounds and denies citizens the right either to present their case
 against seizure or to appeal the judges' decision. Under the amended law, the Min-
 istry of Interior must submit requests to seize or withhold a citizen's passport
 through the Public Prosecutor.
 Human rights monitors complain that the Government arbitrarily withholds pass-
 ports from citizens. Although in 1997 the Government returned passports to several
 prominent activists, such as Mohamed Moaada, and issued passports to the families
 of many Islamist activists, it continued to withhold the passports of many other citi-
 zens, including Moncef Marzouki, Mustapha Ben Jaafar, and Siheme Ben Sedrine
 (see Section 4). Human rights groups reported that the Government continued to
 withhold the passports of the family members of Islamist activists who live abroad.
 In December 1997, and later in March and May, respectively, the Government or-
 dered activists Mohamed Moaada, Radhia Nasraoui, and Abdelmajid Sahraoui to re-
 main in Tunis pending the outcome of criminal investigations. Human rights law-
 yers confirmed that there was no legal limit on either the investigations or the ac-
 companying restrictions on the activists' freedom of movement. The Government
 stated that judicial authorities imposed the restrictions in order to avoid remanding
 the three to preventive detention (see Sections 2.a., 2.b., 4, and 6).
 On May 26, the Government convicted Radhia Aouididi on charges of association
 with An-Nahda and utilization of a false passport, and sentenced her to 3 2 years
 in prison and 5 years of post-incarceration administrative controls. Aouididi had at-
 tempted to leave the country on a false passport in November 1996, after the Gov-
 ernment reportedly refused to issue a passport to her. Human rights activists
 claimed that the Government illegally withheld Aouididi's passport because her
 fiancee, who lives abroad, was accused of membership in An-Nahda. The Govern-
 ment maintained that Aouididi was tried and convicted in accordance with the law
 (see Section 1.c.).
 Police routinely stop motorists for no apparent reason to examine their personal
 identification and vehicular documents (see Section 1.f.).
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in assisting refugees. The Government acknowledged
 UNHCR determination of refugee status that was accorded to 200 individuals dur-
 ing the year. Approximately 100 cases await determination by the UNHOR. The
 Government provides first asylum for refugees, based on UNHCR recommendations.
 There is no pattern of abuse of refugees. Although a few refugees were deported
 during the year, none were forced to return to countries where they feared persecu-
 tion.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides that the citizenry shall elect the President and mem-
 bers of the legislature for 5-year terms; however, the ability of citizens to change
 their government through democratic means has yet to be demonstrated. The ruling
 RCD party and its direct predecessor parties have controlled the political arena
 
 
 1818
 since independence in 1956. The party dominates the Cabinet, the Chamber of Dep-
 uties, and regional and local governments. The President appoints the Cabinet and
 the 23 governors. The Government and the party are integrated closely; the Presi-
 dent of the Republic is also the President of the party, and the party's Secretary
 General holds the rank of minister.
 President Ben Ali was reelected for a 5-year term in 1994. Under the Constitu-
 tion, he can stand for reelection in November 1999 for the last time. Candidates for
 President must receive the endorsement of 30 sitting deputies or municipal council
 presidents to launch a campaign. The 163-seat Chamber of Deputies does not func-
 tion as an effective counterweight to the executive branch. The Electoral Code in-
 cludes a census-based formula that provides for a winner-take-all process for most
 of the seats, with the remainder reserved for candidates from unsuccessful parties.
 The ruling party won all 144 directly-elected district seats in the 1994 parliamen-
 tary elections. Nineteen additional national seats were divided among 4 opposition
 parties. In October the Government amended the electoral code to increase the pro-
 portion of seats to be distributed nationally to unsuccessful parties to about 20 per-
 cent in the upcoming 1999 parliamentary elections. All legal parties are free to
 present candidates. In September the Government held a special election to fill a
 seat vacated by an RCD deputy who resigned to take a government post. An RCD
 candidate won a freely contested election against a candidate from the MDS opposi-
 tion party.
 The most vocal and active of the opposition parties, the MDS remained weakened
 following a split in its ranks after the 1996 conviction, imprisonment, and release
 of party president Mohamed Moaada and party vice president Khemais Chammari
 in 1996. The Government continued to recognize Ismail Boulahia as the new official
 MDS president. A separate MDS faction contended that it retained the support of
 a majority of the MDS ruling council and refused to recognize Boulahia as its lead-
 er.
 The Government began providing public financing to political parties, as called for
 in legislation adopted in 1997. Under the legislation, each party represented in the
 Chamber of Deputies received an annual public subsidy of approximately $54,000
 (60,000 dinars), plus an additional payment of $4,500 (5,000 dinars) per deputy. Al-
 though opposition parties welcomed the legislation as an important step toward
 greater political pluralism, several parties continued to criticize the Government for
 restricting the subsidies to those parties already represented in Parliament. Others
 argued that the legislation reinforced the favored position of the ruling party, which
 holds 144 of the 163 seats in Parliament and has received $700,000 (780,000 dinars)
 of the total $1,000,000 (1,115,000 dinars) government subsidy.
 Women participate in politics, but they are underrepresented in senior govern-
 ment positions. Twelve of the 163 members of the Chamber of Deputies are women.
 In addition, a woman is the junior minister for Women and Family Affairs in the
 Prime Minister's office.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Tunisian Human Rights League is the most active independent advocacy or-
 ganization, with branches in many parts of the country. The organization receives
 and researches complaints and protests individual and systemic abuses. The Gov-
 ernment has refused to meet with LTDH officials since August 1997, when the Gov-
 ernment accused the League of prompting members of the International Human
 Rights Federation to give inaccurate testimony regarding Tunisia before the U.N.
 Human Rights Commission (UNHRC). LTDH officials reported that the Government
 had not provided any written responses to League inquiries since 1994.
 The Government continued to place significant obstacles in the way of the
 League's effective operation. LTDH members and other human rights activists re-
 ported government harassment, interrogation, property loss or damage, unauthor-
 ized home entry, and denial of passports. Local newspapers continued to refuse to
 publish LTDH communiques, and LTDH chapters reported that they were unable
 to hold meetings in public spaces or privately-owned meeting rooms.
 On February 11, the Government convicted LTDH vice president Khemais Ksila
 on defamation charges and sentenced him to 3 years in prison and a $900 (1,000
 dinar) fine (see Sections 1.c. and 2.a.).
 On February 12, the law office of human rights attorney Radhia Nasraoui was
 ransacked and Nasraoui reported that all of her legal files were stolen. Human
 rights activists accused the government security services of responsibility for the
 break-in. The Government opened an investigation of the break-in, but did not iden-
 tify any suspects. In the weeks following the theft, the press conducted a campaign
 of criticism against Nasraoui, alleging in cartoons and articles that Nasraoui orches-
 
 
 1819
 trated the break-in to gain support in the upcoming National Bar Association elec-
 tions. The cartoons also contained assaults on Nasraoui's character. Nasraoui suf-
 fered a similar break-in in April 1997, but she reported that she did not lose any
 of her legal files at that time.
 On February 19, government prosecutors summoned LTDH president Taoufik
 Bouderbala for questioning after the League's National Council issued a commu-
 nique that protested the Government's prosecution and conviction of Khemais Ksila
 and called upon the Government to conduct an investigation of the break-in at
 Nasraoui's law office. The Government did not press charges against Bouderbala;
 the questioning was conducted in accordance with the law, which permits prosecu-
 tors to question any citizen at any time, even if he or she is not under criminal in-
 vestigation.
 On March 6, the Government named Nasraoui as a codefendant in the ongoing
 criminal investigation of the illegal Communist Workers Party. The Government ac-
 cused Nasraoui of holding PCOT meetings in her law office and assisting PCOT
 members in their attempts to escape justice. Human rights activists alleged that the
 Government implicated Nasraoui in the case after it forced other defendants in the
 case to sign statements that they were not permitted to read. Nasraoui appeared
 for questioning by the examining magistrate on March 30, and remains under court
 order prohibiting her from leaving Tunis for the duration of the investigation. Her
 husband, Hamma Hammami, is the head of the illegal PCOT, and reportedly re-
 mains in biding. The Government maintained that Nasraoui, like other defendants
 facing PCOT charges, was being treated in accordance with the law (see Sections
 1.c., 2.a., 2.b., and 6).
 Twelve human rights activists, including several LTDH board members, reported
 that they were under 24-hour police surveillance for 3 weeks in March and April.
 Many activists believed that the Government imposed the surveillance as part of its
 investigation of PCOT activities. Several human rights lawyers reported that they
 remained under sporadic but heavy police surveillance throughout the year. The
 Government denied these charges.
 Throughout the spring and summer, the press conducted a campaign of criticism
 against the Tunisian Democratic Women's Association (AFTD) after the AFTD orga-
 nized a meeting of the International Network of Independent Arab Women's Groups
 (AISHA), which was held in the West Bank in March. The press alleged in cartoons
 and articles that the group consisted of lesbians with lax moral standards. Human
 rights activists alleged that the Government prompted newspapers to criticize the
 group because the ATFD and the other Arab groups excluded government-funded
 groups from the independent, privately-funded network.
 In July an anonymous source sent a glossy, four-page letter to attorneys and for-
 eign embassies, accusing human rights attorney Alya Chammari of prostitution. Ac-
 tivists alleged that the Government wrote and circulated the letter after
 Chammari's husband, former MDS opposition party leader Khemais Chammari, or-
 ganized a public meeting in France at which several activists criticized the Govern-
 ment's policies.
 Human rights activist and former LTDH president Moncef Marzouki claimed that
 he suffered government retaliation for his human rights activism. Marzouki alleged
 that the Government continued to withhold his passport and deny him permission
 to receive and treat patients at the government hospital where he is employed. The
 Government stated that Marzouki remained under a judicial order prohibiting him
 from leaving the country for the duration of a criminal investigation that was initi-
 ated in 1994, after Marzouki reportedly criticized the Government in an interview
 published in a Spanish newspaper. The Government claimed that the length of the
 restrictions on Marzouki's freedom of movement was due to diplomatic procedures
 required to obtain information from the newspaper in which Marzouki's interview
 was published.
 The Arab Institute for Human Rights, headquartered in Tunis, was founded in
 1989 by the LTDH, the Arab Organization for Human rights, and the Union of Arab
 lawyers. It is an information, rather than an advocacy, organization, and the Gov-
 ernment supports its activities.
 Amnesty International (A) continued to maintain a Tunisian chapter. Its mem-
 bers complained that the Tunis office suffered repeated loss of telephone and fac-
 simile service. Hechmi Jegham, who served as president of the chapter until June,
 was questioned by Ministry of Interior- officials in February, following a meeting of
 Al's National Council. Other AI officials reported that they were under periodic po-
 lice surveillance. The Government continued to deny entry to a London-based AI re-
 searcher responsible for Tunisian affairs, claiming that she has an anti-Tunisia bias.
 However, in March the Government permitted representatives from AI to attend a
 human rights seminar that was sponsored by the Arab Institute for Human Rights
 
 
 1820
 and Huridocs, an international nongovernmental organization (NGO). The Govern-
 ment prohibited AI from holding public meetings in September and December, but
 in October permitted the organization to hold a public reception honoring former
 Tunisian section president Mahmoud Ben Rhomdane, who was elected as the world-
 wide president of AL.
 In August the Government permitted a researcher from Human Rights Watch to
 visit the country. He reported that the Government facilitated his visit, permitted
 him to work freely and arranged visits with high-ranking officials.
 Throughout the year, the Government permitted observers from AI, the Inter-
 national Human Rights Federation, and other-international human rights organiza-
 tions to monitor trials. The observers reported that the Government permitted them
 to conduct their work freely. However, the Government reportedly blocked access to
 the Internet web sites produced by some of these organizations and the web site
 produced by the Committee to Protect Journalists (see Section 2.a.).
 Human rights offices in certain ministries and a governmental body, the Higher
 Commission on Human Rights and Basic Freedoms, address and sometimes resolve
 human rights complaints. The Higher Commission submits confidential reports di-
 rectly to President Ben All and, in July, also released a public report for the period
 1995-1996, which highlighted the Government's social and economic achievements,
 as well as its human rights-oriented legislative reforms. The report did not address
 specific human rights abuses.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides that all citizens shall have equal rights and responsibil-
 ities and be equal under the law. The Government generally observes this in prac-
 tice. Legal or societal discrimination is not prevalent, apart from that experienced
 by women in certain areas, including employment.
 Women.-Violence against women occurs, but there are no reliable statistics to
 measure its extent. The Tunisian Democratic Women's Association operates the
 country's only counseling center for women who are victims of domestic violence.
 The center, located in Tunis, assists approximately 20 women per month. Instances
 of rape or assault by someone unknown to the victim are rare. Battered women first
 seek help from family members. Police intervention is often ineffective because po-
 lice officers and the courts tend to regard domestic violence as a problem to be han-
 dled by the family. Nonetheless, there are stiff penalties for spouse abuse. Both the
 fine and imprisonment for battery or violence committed by a spouse or family mem-
 ber are double those for the same crimes committed by an individual not related
 to the victim.
 Women enjoy substantial rights and the Government has made serious efforts to
 advance those rights, especially in the areas of property ownership practices and
 support to divorced women. In March the President issued a decree creating a na-
 tional fund to protect the rights of divorced women, ensuring that the State would
 provide financial support to women whose former husbands refused to make ali-
 mony payments. In October the Government enacted legislation requiring civil au-
 thorities to advise couples of the merits of including provisions for joint property in
 marriage contracts. Nonetheless, most property acquired during marriage, including
 property acquired solely by the wife, still is held in the name of the husband. Inher-
 itance law, based on Shari'a (Islamic law) and tradition, discriminates against
 women, and women still face societal and economic discrimination in certain areas,
 such as employment. The Government made significant efforts to change property
 ownership practices and provide financial support to divorced women.
 Women in increasing numbers are entering the work force, employed particularly
 in the textile, manufacturing, health, and agricultural sectors. According to 1994
 government statistics, women constituted 25 percent of the work force; excluding the
 agricultural sector, they accounted for 44 percent. Women represent 44 percent of
 workers in the industrial sector and 46.1 percent of workers in the health sector.
 There are an estimated 2,000 businesses headed by women. Women represent one-
 third of the civil service, employed primarily in the fields of health, education, and
 social affairs at the middle or lower levels. Women represent 60 percent of all judges
 in the capital and 25 percent of the nation's total jurists. Approximately 43 percent
 of the university students enrolled in the 1997-98 academic year were women. On
 the other hand, while the rate of illiteracy has dropped markedly in both rural and
 urban areas, the rate of female illiteracy in all categories is at least double that of
 men. Among 10- to 14-year-old children, 5.5 percent of urban girls are illiterate,
 compared with 2.2 percent of urban boys, and 27 percent of rural girls, compared
 with less than 7 percent of rural boys.
 
 
 1821
 
 Several active NGO's focus, in whole or in part, on women's advocacy, or research
 women's issues, and a cadre of attorneys represent women in domestic cases. Media
 attention focuses on women's economic and academic accomplishments, and usually
 omits reference to culturally sensitive issues. The Government funded several stud-
 ies and projects designed to improve the role of women in the media.
 The Ministry for Women and Family Affairs, part of the Prime Minister's office,
 oversees programs to ensure the legal rights of women. The Government supports
 and provides funding to the National Women's Union, women's professional associa-
 tions, and the Government's Women's Research Center.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates a strong commitment to public edu-
 cation, which is compulsory until age 16. Primary school enrollment for the 1997-
 98 scholastic year was roughly the same as the preceding year; secondary school en-
 rollment showed an 8 percent increase. The Government reported that 98 percent
 of children attend school full-time. The Government offers a maternal and child
 health program, providing pre- and post-natal services. It sponsors an immunization
 program targeting preschool-aged children, and reports that over 95 percent of chil-
 dren are vaccinated.
 In 1995 the Government promulgated laws to constitute a Code for the Protection
 of Children. The Code proscribes child abuse, abandonment, and sexual or economic
 exploitation. Penalties for convictions for abandonment and assault on minors are
 severe. There is a Ministry for Children and Youths and a Presidential Delegate to
 Safeguard the Rights and Welfare of Children.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination based on disability
 and mandates that at least 1 percent of the public and private sector jobs be re-
 served for the disabled. All public buildings constructed since 1991 must be acces-
 sible to physically disabled persons. Many cities, including the capital, have begun
 to install wheelchair access ramps on city sidewalks. There is a general trend to-
 ward making public transportation more accessible to disabled persons. The Govern-
 ment issues special cards to the disabled for benefits such as unrestricted parking,
 priority medical services, preferential seating on public transportation, and con-
 sumer discounts.
 Indigenous People.-The Government estimates that a small Berber minority con-
 stitutes less than 3 percent of the population. Some older Berbers have retained
 their native language, but the younger generation has been assimilated into Tuni-
 sian culture through schooling and marriage. Berbers are free to participate in poli-
 tics and to express themselves culturally.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The Tunisian General Federation of Labor is the
 country's only labor federation. About 15 percent of the work force, including civil
 servants and employees of state-owned enterprises, are members, and a consider-
 ably larger proportion of the work force is covered by union contracts. There is no
 legal prohibition against the establishment of other labor federations. A union may
 be dissolved only by court order.
 The UGTT and its member unions are legally independent of the Government and
 the ruling party but operate under regulations that restrict their freedom of action.
 The UGTT's membership includes persons associated with all political tendencies,
 although Islamists have been removed from union offices. The current UGTT leader-
 ship follows a policy of cooperation with the Government and its economic reform
 program. There are credible reports that the UGTT receives substantial government
 subsidies to supplement modest union dues and funding from the National Social
 Security Account. Labor activists were among the 16 persons arrested in February
 and March on charges of defamation, dissemination of false information and associa-
 tion with the illegal Communist Workers Party (see Section 2.a.). Four UGTT mem-
 bers who were arrested and released in 1997 for signing a petition that criticized
 the UGTT secretary general continued to face possible criminal charges, as the legal
 case against them remained open (see Section 2.a.).
 Unions, including those representing civil servants, have the right to strike, pro-
 vided they give 10 days' advance notice to the UGTT and it approves of the strike.
 However, this advance approval rarely is sought in practice. There were several
 short-lived strikes over pay and conditions. While the majority of these were tech-
 nically illegal, the Government did not prosecute workers for illegal strike activity,
 and the strikes were covered objectively in the press. The International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) has characterized the requirement for prior
 UGTT approval of strikes as a violation of worker rights. The law prohibits retribu-
 tion against strikers, but there have been cases of employers punishing them never-
 
 
 1822
 theless, forcing the strikers to pursue costly and time-consuming legal remedies to
 protect their rights.
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels in which labor and manage-
 ment are equally represented. Tripartite regional arbitration commissions settle in-
 dustrial disputes when conciliation fails. Unions are free to associate with inter-
 national bodies.
 Unions are free to associate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and observed in practice. Wages and working
 conditions are set by triennial negotiations between the UGTT member unions and
 employers. Forty-seven collective bargaining agreements set standards for industries
 in the private sector and cover 80 percent of the total private sector work force.
 Each accord is negotiated by representatives of unions and employers in the area
 it covered. The Government's role in these negotiations is minimal, consisting main-
 ly of lending its good offices if talks appear to be stalled. However, the Government
 must approve, but may not modify, the agreements. When approved, the agreements
 set standards for all employees, both union and nonunion, in the areas they cover.
 Preparations for the 1999 triennial negotiations began in September, and the actual
 negotiations were expected to conclude in May 1999.
 The UGTT also negotiates wages and work conditions of civil servants and em-
 ployees of state-owned enterprises.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. However, the UGTT is
 concerned about antiunion activity among private sector employers, especially the
 firing of union activists and the use of temporary workers to avoid unionization. In
 certain industries, such as textiles and construction, temporary workers account for
 a large majority of the work force. The Labor Code protects temporary workers, but
 enforcement is more difficult than in the case of permanent workers. The UGTT un-
 dertook discussions with the Government on this issue. A committee chaired by an
 officer from the Labor Inspectorate of the Office of the Inspector General of the Min-
 istry of Social Affairs, and including a labor representative and an Employers' Asso-
 ciation representative, approves all worker dismissals.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Tunisia abolished compulsory
 labor in 1989. The law prohibits forced or compulsory labor by either adults or chil-
 dren, and it is not known to occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment in manufacturing is 16 years. The minimum age for light
 work in agriculture and some other nonindustrial sectors is 13 years. The law also
 requires children to attend school until age 16. Workers between the ages of 14 and
 18 must have 12 hours of rest per day, which include the hours between 10 p.m.
 and 6 a.m. Children between the ages of 14 and 16 may work no more than 2 hours
 per day. The total time that they spend in school and work may not exceed 7 hours
 per day. Inspectors of the Ministry of Social Affairs examine the records of employ-
 ees to verify that employers comply with the minimum age law. Nonetheless, young
 children often perform agricultural work in rural areas and work as vendors in
 urban areas, primarily during the summer vacation from school.
 The UGTT has expressed concern that child labor continues to exist disguised as
 apprenticeship, particularly in the handicraft industry, and in the cases of teenage
 girls whose families place them as household domestics in order to collect their
 wages. Although there are no reliable statistics on the extent of this phenomenon,
 anecdotal evidence indicates that the use of older teenage girls as household domes-
 tics is common. The law prohibits forced and bonded child labor, and the Govern-
 ment enforces this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages, which are set by a commission of represent-
 atives from the Ministries of Social Affairs, Planning, Finance, and National Econ-
 omy in consultation with the UGTT and the Employers' Association. The President
 approves the commission's recommendations. The minimum wage was adjusted in
 August. The industrial minimum wage is $162 (172.5 dinars) per month for a 48-
 hour workweek and $143 (151.5 dinars) per month for a 40-hour workweek. The ag-
 ricultural minimum wage is $5.00 (5.3 dinars) per day. When supplemented by
 transportation and family allowances, the minimum wage covers only essential costs
 for a worker and family.
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards. They inspect
 most firms about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the .minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of
 
 
 1823
 
 the economy. Moreover, more than 240,000 workers are employed in the informal
 sector, which falls outside the purview of labor legislation.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has responsibility for enforcing health and safety
 standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations covering such
 hazardous occupations as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction. Working
 conditions and standards tend to be better in firms that are export oriented than
 in those producing exclusively for the domestic market. Workers are free to remove
 themselves from dangerous situations without jeopardizing their employment, and
 they may take legal action against employers who retaliate against them for exercis-
 ing this right.
