 TUNISIA
 The Republic of Tunisia is dominated by President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and
 the Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD). Ben Ali was elected to a second &year
 term in March. He ran unopposed. The President appoints the Prime Minister, Cab-
 inet, and 23 Governors. In the March election, the RCD won 144 out of the 163
 seats in Parliament. Four nominal opposition parties hold the remaining 19 seats.
 In 1992 the Government banned the Islamist party, An-Nahda, after a court sen-
 tenced 265 of its members to prison for allegely plotting to assassinate the Presi-
 dent and overthrow the Government.
 The internal security forces include a paramilitary national guard organized with-
 in the Ministry of Interior. The security services continued to be responsible for
 human rights abuses, including torture, though the number of known cases appears
 
 
 1181
 to have declined significantly in 1994. They were allegedly responsible for the
 deaths of three persons in their custody.
 The major sectors of the economy include agriculture, tourism, petroleum, textiles,
 clothing, and other manufactured exports, and remittances from workers abroad.
 Despite a severe drought, the economy continued its noninflationary growth in 1994,
 led by a 17.7-percent jump in tourism.
 Complaints of police abuse, including torture, declined significantly in 1994, due
 in part to government efforts to educate its police force and prosecute offending offi-
 cers. The security forces also made fewer security-related arrests compared to 1993.
 However, significant human rights abuses continued. The Government imprisoned
 two self-proclaimed presidential candidates, as well as an opposition candidate for
 Parliament who complained to a foreign journalist about the results of the national
 elections.
 The Government also stifled freedom of speech and the press. The authorities dis-
 missed a journalist from his government job for providing an interview with one of
 the unofficial presidential candidates to a foreign publication; banned two French
 newspapers indefinitely for criticizing the Government; declined to renew the resi-
 dency of a foreign correspondent, requiring him to depart the country; denied an
 entry visa to another foreign journalist to cover the elections; and interrupted tele-
 phone service to one foreign press service for 1 week and instructed its resident cor-
 respondent to depart the country.
 The police harassed several of the 117 women who signed a petition asking the
 Government to move more quickly on human rights reforms. Additionally, the Gov-
 ernment continued to seek out and arrest suspected members of An-Nahda and the
 banned Communist Worker's Party (POCT) and to harass their relatives and
 friends, including repeated interrogations and home searches without warrants.
 Other significant human rights problems include: incommunicado detention, the
 Government's refusal to publish information on the punishment of security person-
 nel who have abused prisoners, and governmental interference with the right to pri-
 vacy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Three reports of deaths in custody
 came to light in 1994. On February 27, the police arrested Lotfi Ben Mohammed
 Guelaa, a student in Paris and a leader in an Islamic student group, after his arriv-
 al at Djerba airport. In early March, Guelaa died in his police cell.The Government
 says he committed suicide by hanging himself, The authorities arrested Ismail
 Khmira in 1991 for his suspected involvement with An-Nahda. He died in prison
 on February 25 of pneumonia according to the Government. The National Guard ar-
 rested Ammar Beji on November 9 after he became involved in an argument with
 a government official near Sfax. The guard said Beji hanged himself in his police
 cell on November 10. The Government has not made public its investigations into
 the deaths of Guelaa, Khmira, or Beji. A possible fourth death in custody remained
 unconfirmed at ear's end. Sources reported that Ezzedine Ben Aiche allegedly died
 in August near Sousse while in police custody.
 In 1994 the Government concluded its investigations into five cases of persons
 who died in police custody dating to 1991-Faisal Barakat, Abdelaziz Mehouachi,
 Ameur Degachi, Fethi Khiari, and Rachid Chammahk. In each case, the official in-
 vestigation concluded there was no evidence of police malfeasance. Investigations
 continue in two other deaths in custody from 1991.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While the law prohibits the mistreatment of detainees, there continued to be credi-
 ble reports that security forces mistreat suspected Islamists, leftists and other per-
 sons suspected of antigovernment activities. Many accused Islamists have claimed
 in court that the police extracted their confessions by torture.
 The Government denies that torture is practiced as a matter of policy but ac-
 knowledges that security officials have abused detainees in some cases. According
 to the Government, the courts convicted 24 police officers in 1992 for human rights-
 related violations. In 1993 the Government accused 17 police officers of human
 rights violations. The Government has not identified them by name or indicated the
 nature of their offense or their punishment.
 The Government has taken a number of steps in response to concerns about
 human rights abuses, including training for police, who are now required to sign a
 statement that they are aware of Tunisian and international human rights stand-
 ards and will abide by them. Manuals containing human rights documents and di-
 
 
 1182
 rectives are provided to police officers. Government officials claim the educational
 level of police recruits has increased, and veteran officers continue to undergo train-
 "a. A..,udgs and proscutors receive a two-semester course on the scope and ap-
 pnfcabity of international human rights treaties and conventions as part of their
 training at the Magistrates' Institute. In October the Government authorized the
 Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH) to conduct prison visits._
 Prison conditions meet internationally recognized minimum standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exil-The law authorizes the police to make
 arrests without warrants for suspected felonies and crimes in progress and to hold
 suspects in prearraignent detention for a maximum of 10 days. Attorneys, human
 rights monitors, and former detainees maintain that the authorities circumvent the
 10-day limit by delaying the registration of the date of arrest.
 Detainees have the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest before question-
 ing and to be represented by counsel during their arraignment hearings. Detainees
 do not have the right to a lawer during prearraignment detention but may request
 an examination by a medical doctor. Otherwise they are held incommunicado during
 this period. The Government provides legal representation to indigents.
 The examining magistrate at the arraignment may decide to release the accused
 or remand him to pretrial detention. In cases involving serious felonies or national
 security, the accused may be held for 6 months in pretrial detention, renewable by
 court order for two additional 4-month periods. There were credible reports that
 some detainees have been held in pretrial detention longer than the maximum 14
 months. There is a system of bail, but it is rarely used.
 Exile is prohibited by law and not practiced by the Government.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-The court system comprises the regular civil and
 criminal courts, including a Court of Appeals, a Supreme Court, and a Military Tri-
 bunal. The judiciary is not independent of the executive branch. The latter appoints,
 assigns, grants tenure to, and transfers judges, a situation that makes judges sus-
 ceptible to pressure in politically sensitive cases.
 In general, defendants in criminal cases receive due process. They have the rights
 to be present at their trials, represented by counsel, question witnesses, and appeal
 verdicts. However, because the presiding judge dominates the trial, the role of the
 defense attorney in questioning witnesses is minimal. In 1994 some defense lawyers
 complained that the courts did not grant them sufficient time to prepare their cases.
 Although trials in the regular courts are open to the public, judges have restricted
 access in cases involving accused Islamists or leftists. Family members and other
 interested parties must obtain police approval to attend such trials. In 1994 the
 Government denied an entry visa to an Amnesty International (Al) researcher who
 sought to observe the trial of a prominent leftist dissident, Hamma Hamami, the
 leader of the banned Tunisian Communist Workers Party. The AI researcher had
 previously written reports critical of the Government.
 Hamami's trial was not fair by international standards: his lawyers did not have
 sufficient access to their client or time to prepare their defense; the police had phys-
 ically mistreated Hamami while in pretrial detention; the court did not conduct a
 complete investigation prior to going to trial; and the court handed down a sentence
 that was not comensurate with his alleged crime.
 The Military Tribunal tries cases involving military personnel and civilians ac-
 cused of national security crimes. The Tribunal consists of a civilian judge from the
 Court of Cassation and four military judges. Defendants may appeal the Tribunal's
 verdicts to the Court of Cassation, but the review is limited to matters of law and
 procedure, not the facts of the case.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person and the home and for the
 privacy of correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law." Police must
 have a search warrant, but this requirement is sometimes ignored in cases in which
 the authorities consider that state security is involved or in which a "flagrant crime"
 is deemed to have been committed.
 The authorities continued to monitor the activities of Islamists and leftists and
 searched their homes without warrants. They frequently harassed the relatives and
 associates of such persons by repeatedly interrogating them. During the year, sev-
 eral human rights monitors and oppositionists accused the Government of harass-
 ment and intimidation. Police presence in urban areas is heavy. Traffic officers rou-
 tinely stop motorists to examine their identity and vehicular documents.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of
 thought, expression, and the press. In practice, however, the exercise of these free-
 doms is limited, as several government actions during 1994 demonstrated. The
 
 
 1183
 Press Code includes broad provisions addressing subversion and defamation, neither
 of which is clearly defined or subject to judicial review. The Government has used
 these provisions for arresting political opponents and bringing suits against the
 media.
 In March police arrested two self-proclaimed presidential candidates who had
 criticized the Government: Moncef Marzouki and Abderrahmane El-Hani. The Gov-
 ernment charged Marzouki, a former president of the Tunisian Human Rights
 League, with spreading false information and defaming judicial authorities in an
 interview with a Spanish newspaper. They detained Marzouki for 4 months before
 releasing him, but his case is still under official investigation. The authorities
 charged EI-Hani, a lawyer, with membership in an unauthorized organization and
 spreading false information and held him in detention for 2 months; his trial date
 is pnding.
 oin March, the authorities detained for 5 days Boujemaa Remili, a defeated
 opposition party candidate in the parliamentary election. Remili had complained
 that the national elections were neither free nor fair. He was later convicted of
 spreading false information and given an 8-month suspended sentence.
 In May, 117 women signed a petition asking the Government to accelerate the
 pace of human rights reform. The authorities later harassed and intimidated several
 of them at work and at home.
 Restrictive laws and practices limit freedom of the press. Journalists and writers
 generally censor themselves because they fear government retribution if they pub-
 lish overly critical articles.
 The Government amended the Press Code in 1993 to expand the definition of def-
 amation to include the expression of opinions based on racism, regionalism, or reli-
 gious extremism. Journalists express concern about the vague language, fearing
 that it gives the Government additional grounds for legal suits.
 The Government exerts considerable control over editorials by providing official
 texts on major domestic and international events. The daily newspapers routinely
 carry policy announcements verbatim. Editorials do not criticize the President or
 other senior government officials. Publishers and editors have been reprimanded
 when government guidelines were not followed, encouraging further self-censorship.
 The Government requires domestic printers to deposit copies of all publications
 destined for public sale in Tunisia with the secretary of state for information and
 with the Ministries of Interior and Justice prior to public release. The authorities
 may seize a publication without compensation.
 The Government also showed intolerance of criticism in the foreign media. In Feb-
 ruary the Government refused to renew the residence visa of a Tunis-based British
 Broadcasting Corporation correspondent who had interviewed a Tunisian dissident
 about his presidential aspirations and broadcast an interview with London-based
 An-Nahda leader Rachid Ghannouchi approving of the dissident's candidacy. Also in
 February, the Government temporarily interrupted telephone service to the office of
 the Kuwaiti News Agency and told its correspondent to leave Tunisia after he re-
 ported an interview with Ghannouchi.
 In March the Government denied an entry visa to cover the national elections to
 a reporter for the French newspaper Le Monde. The reporter had previously written
 articles deemed offensive by the Government. Also in March, the authorities dis-
 missed a Tunisian journalist from his job with the government-controlled Tunisian
 News Agency (TAP). The journalist worked as a stringer for a French newspaper
 and had submitted an interview with a Tunisian dissident to that publication. Later
 the Government prohibited indefinitely the importation of two French publications,
 Le Monde and Liberation, after they published articles critical of the Government
 and the President.
 The Ministry of Interior censors all imported publication prior to public release.
 In 1994 the Ministry prevented editions of the French magazines Le Point and
 Jeune Afrique from distribution onto the market and prohibited the entry of some
 Amnesty International publications.
 The Government owns and operates the Tunisian Radio and Television Establish-
 ment (ERTT). Broadcast media coverage of the Government is taken directly from
 TAP. There are two television channels and several regional radio stations. Under
 bilateral agreements with France and Italy, citizens are able to receive the French
 channel France 2 and the Italian station Rai Uno. However, in accordance with its
 agreement with France, the Government replaces the prime-time news program on
 France 2 with a news broadcast produced by the ERT1.
 More than 30 000 homes and multifamily dwellings have satellite receiving
 dishes. In Decemiber the Government imposeda temporary halt on the granting of
 new licenses for the dishes.
 
 
 1184
 Like journalists, university professors practice a form of self-censorship, avoiding
 classroom criticisms of the Government or statements supportive of the Islamist An-
 Nahda party. The presence of police on campuses also discourages dissent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Associaton.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly. Groups wishing to hold a public meeting, rally, or march must
 obtain a permit from the lMinistry of the Interior. The Government normally ap-
 proves such permits, except in cases involving proscribed political parties or associa-
 tions.
 In March 1992, the Government amended the Law on Associations to prohibit an
 officer of a political party from serving as an officer of an association and to prohibit
 associations from rejecting prospective new members. The amendment had a direct
 impact on the Tunisian  u       Rights League (LTDH), as some of its officers were
 also officers in political parties, and the League maintained a policy of closed mem-
 bership to the general public. Not wishing to violate the new law, LTDH did not
 hold a meeting for more than a year.
 In 1993 the League negotiated a partial arrangement with the Government,
 agreeing to prohibit League officers from also holding office in a political party-
 but maintaining its policy of closed membership. That settlement permitted the
 League to hold an election for its governing board in February. Afterwards, the
 League conducted its normal activities, although it and the Government continue
 to discuss the membership issue. There is no available information indicating that
 the Government has applied the amendment to the Law of Associations to other
 groups. Local human rights monitors fear that the law increases government influ-
 ence over all organizations.
 The law on political parties stipulates that parties must reject all forms of vio-
 lence, including fanaticism, racism, and other types of discrimination. No political
 party may be based on religion, race, sex, or region, or receive funds from a foreign
 party or aid from foreign governments and citizens. All party members must be citi-
 zens for at least 5 years.
 There are seven legal political parties. In addition, there are a few unrecognized
 parties, including the Islamist An-Nadha Party, which aspire to recognition, and the
 Maoist Tunisian Communist Workers' Party, which remains underground. The Gov-
 ernment states that An-Nahda is ineligible for recognition because it is based on re-
 ligion.
 The Government uses its authority to license political parties as a means to con-
 trol the political environment. It does not grant legal recognition to parties deemed
 to be a threat to the existing political order. Aspiring political parties file for reg-
 istration with the Ministry of Interior. In 1994 a new group-the Democratic Forum
 for Labor and Liberties-attempted to register itself as a political party. The Gov-
 ernment has so far refused to accept the application.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion, but the Government permits
 the practice of other religions. The Government regards the Baha'i faith as a hereti-
 cal sect of Islam. Adherents may practice their faith in private only. However, the
 Government appears to have eased some other restrictions, which in the past in-
 cluded the demal of passports to Bahai's.
 With a population of 2,500, Jews are the country's largest indigenous religious mi-
 nority. The Government assures the Jewish community the freedom of worship,
 safeguards its security, and pays the salary of the GrandRabbi. The small Christian
 community is mainly composed of foreigners. They are free to attend church serv-
 ices.
 The Government views proselytizing as a provocative act against "public order."
 Authorities ask foreigners suspected of prose3ytizing to depart the country and do
 not permit them to return. In 1994 no persons were known to have been arrested
 for proselytizing. However, the authorities did not renew the residency permits of
 some foreigners suspected of proselytizing.
 The Government controls the mosques and pays the salaries of the prayer leaders.
 According to the 1988 law on mosques, only government-appointed personnel may
 lead activities in the mosques, except with permission from the Prime Minister's of-
 fice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within The Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There is freedom of movement within Tunisia, and people are free to
 change their place of residence or work at will.
 In 1994 there were credible complaints that the Government withheld or limited
 passports in certain cases. Islamists continued to report difficulties in obtaining
 passports. The Government stated it denies passports only to persons with legal
 problems at home or abroad and to those who are not likely to use them for tourist
 purposes. However, lawyers who have defended Islamist clients and persons associ-
 
 
 1185
 ated with leftist or opposition causes also reported that they and their family mem-
 bers were unable to obtain or renew passports.
 There is no arbitrary restriction on emigration or repatriation. The Government
 does not accept refugees for permanent resettlement. There were no reported cases
 in 1994 of forced repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The ability of citizens to change their government through democratic means has
 yet to be demonstrated. The rung Constitutional Democratic Rally (RCD) Party,
 and its direct predecessor parties, have controlled the political arena since independ-
 ence. The RCD controls the Cabinet, the Chamber of Deputies, regional and local
 governments, and the security apparatus. The President appoints the Prime Min-
 ister, the Cabinet, and the 23 Governors. The President and the RCD dominate poli-
 tics at the national regional, and local levels. The Government and the RCD are
 closely integrate  he President of the Republic is also the p resident of the RCD,
 and the RCD's Secretary-General holds the rank of Minister of State.
 The largest opposition party, the proscribed Islamist An-Nahda Party, received 12
 percent of the vote in the 1989 legislative elections, when the Government permitted
 its candidates to run as independents. However, the party is in disarray following
 the conviction in 1992 of near y all of its leaders for plotting to overthrow the Gov-
 ernment. In 1992 a court sentenced in absentia Rachid Ghannouchi, the nominal
 head of the party, to life in prison. Ghannouchi was granted political asylum in Brit-
 ain in 1993.
 The Chamber of Deputies has 163 seats. It has yet to establish itself as an effec-
 tive counterweight to executive authority. The electoral code provides for a winner-
 take-all formula in legislative elections but the Government amended the law in
 1993 to add 19 additional seats in the hamber of Deputies for parties that do not
 win seats. Four opposition parties that participated in the March legislative election
 were apportioned those seats. Elections for the Presidency and the Chamber of Dep-
 uties are held every 5 years. Voting is by secret ballot. All legal parties are free to
 present candidates.
 Presidential candidates must obtain the signatures of at least 30 members of the
 Chamber of Deputies or presidents of municipalities-all but one of whom were
 members of the ruling RCD party in 1994. Two persons who were not affiliated with
 any political party tried to announce their candidacies for the presidency even
 though they were unable to obtain the requisite signatures. The authorities detained
 beth of them for several months (see Section 2.a.). None of the six legal opposition
 parties offered a candidate for president, and all endorsed President Ben Ali for re-
 election.
 Women may participate in politics. Eleven women won seats in the March legisla-
 tive election. Nevertheless, women remain underrepresented in government and
 hold few senior government posts. One woman holds ministerial rank, and a woman
 is the second vice president of the Chamber of Deputies. In municipal councils, 19
 percent of the member are women. Twenty-five percent of Tunisian magistrates are
 women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government recognizes several local human rights organizations but subjects
 them to a variety of restrictions. The most active is the Tunisian Human Rights
 League (LTDH). It resumed activities in 1993 after the Government passed restric-
 tive amendments to the Associations Law in 1992 (see Section 2.b.). In 1994 LTDH
 held its first congress since 1989, released a credible report on the conduct of the
 national election, published communiques on specific cases, and provided legal coun-
 sel for defendants in some cases.
 The Arab Institute of Human Rights, founded in 1989, is a collaborative effort of
 the Tunisian Human Rights League, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, and
 the Union of Arab Lawyers. The Higher Committee for Human Rights and Basic
 Freedoms, established by the President in 1991, continued to advise the President
 on human rights issues but did not make public any of its findings or recommenda-
 tions.
 The Government in 1992 created offices in the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Jus-
 tice, Interior, and Social Affairs to coordinate human rights concerns. These offices
 advise policymakers, coordinate human rights training, and investigate citizens
 complaints.
 In 1994 relations between the Government and Amnesty International (AI) re-
 mained poor (see Sections i.e. and 2.a.).
 
 
 1186
 Section 5. Discrimination based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Although women still face discrimination in certain legal and social
 matters, the Government has made serious efforts to advance women's rights. In
 1993 the Chamber of Deputies expanded women's rights by amending the 1956 Per-
 sonal Status Code. The Government has also ensured equal employment rights for
 women by institutin. changes in the Labor Code and signing various international
 treaties and conventions. In 1994 the Government enacted a law to subsidize the
 child-care costs for mothers employed outside the home.
 There is a significant trend toward greater educational and professional opportu-
 nities for women. In 1994 the National Union of Tunisian Women (UNFT) was
 awarded UNESCO's top prize worldwide for its work in the fight against female il-
 literacy in Tunisia. The number of women in the medical, legal, and other profes-
 sions continued to grow steadily. Women comprise an estimated 25 percent of the
 work force, a figure which probably underestimates their presence as many women
 are employed in the informal sector as well as seasonally in agriculture. According
 to government figures, women comprise 26 percent of the civil service, employed
 mainly in the fields of education, health, and social affairs at the middle or lower
 levels.
 Violence against women is known to occur, but there are no statistics on its ex-
 tent. In recent years, the media have reported on this subject, stressing that vio-
 lence against women is a serious social problem. The Tunisian Association of Demo-
 cratic Women operates a walk-in counseling service in Tunis for battered women,
 assisting about 20 women a month. Battered women generally first seek assistance
 from family members. Human rights monitors have said that police intervention is
 often ineffective because officers tend to regard incidents as family problems to be
 handed by family members. Few cases of spousal violence are brouqht to trial. In
 1993 the Chamber of Deputies strengthened criminal penalties for wife beating, re-
 quiringjudges to issue more severe sentences.
 Children.-Laws protecting the rights of children are included in statutes govern-
 ing education, health, inheritance, adoption, and child custody. The Government is
 committed to upholding these laws. The personal status code provides protection for
 children in adoption or custody cases, or in cases of the death or incapacitation of
 the children. There is no pattern of societal abuse against children. Criminal pen-
 alties for persons convictedof child abuse or neglect are severe. Education is manda-
 tory until age 16, though approximately 10 percent of students leave school before
 that time.
 Indigenous People.-The small Berber minority constitutes under 3 percent of the
 population. Some older Berbers have retained their native language. Younger Ber-
 bers have been assimilated into Tunisian culture through schooling and marriage.
 Berbers are free to participate in Tunisia's political process and express themselves
 culturally.
 People With Disabiities.-A law enacted in 1981 prohibits discrimination based
 on disabilities and mandates that disabled persons comprise at least 1 percent of
 public ageny and private sector employees.
 All public buildings constructed since 1991 must guarantee accessibility to phys-
 ically disabled persons. Many cities, including Tunis, have begun o i    wheel-
 chair access ramps on city sidewalks. There is a general trend toward making public
 transportation more accessible to disabled persons. The Government issues special
 cards to the disabled for benefits such as unrestricted parking, priority medical serv-
 ice, preferential seating on public transportation, and some consumer discounts.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and the Labor Code stipulate the
 right of workers to form unions. The Tunisian General Federation of Labor (UGTT)
 is the country's only labor federation and claims about 15 percent of the work force
 as members, including civil servants and employees of state-owned enterprises.
 There is no legal prohibition against the establishment of other labor federations.
 A union may be dissolved only by court order.
 The UGTT and its member unions are legally independent of the Government and
 the ruingp arty but operate under regulations which restrict their freedom of ac-
 tion. The UGTT's membership includes persons associated with all political ten-
 dencies, although Islamists have been removed from union offices. The current
 UGT]' leadership follows a policy of cooperation with the Government and its eco-
 nomic reform program. However, there are credible reports that the UGTT receives
 substantial government subsidies to supplement the modest union dues and funding
 from the National Social Security Account.
 
 
 1187
 Unions, including civil servants, have the right to strike, provided they give 10
 days' advance notice and the UGTf approves of the strike. These restrictions, how-
 ever, are rarely observed in practice. In recent years, the majority of strikes were
 illegal because the UGTT did not approve them in advance. The Government does
 not prosecute workers involved in illegal strike activity. In 1994 there were 202 ille-
 gal and 42 legal strikes. The law prohibits retribution against strikers, but some
 employers punish strikers who are then forced to pursue costly and time-consuming
 leg alrem edes to protect their rights.
 Labor disputes are settled through conciliation panels on which labor and man-
 agement are equally represented. The 1994 Labor Code reform set up tripartite re-
 gional arbitration commissions, which settle industrial disputes when conciliation
 fails, to replace the former single arbiter system.
 Unions are free to associate with international bodies.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is protected by law and practiced throughout the country. Wages
 and working conditions in Tunisia are set through negotiation by the UGTT member
 federations and employer representatives. Approximately 47 collective bargaining
 agreements set standards for industries in the private sector and cover 80 percent
 of the total private sector work force. The Government's role in these negotiations
 is minimal, consisting mainly of lending its good offices if talks appear to be stalled.
 However, the Government must approve of, but not modify, the agreements which
 must be published in the official journal before they become legally binding.
 The UGTT also negotiates with the various ministries and 208 state-ran enter-
 prises on behalf of public sector employees. By 1994, the UGTr had concluded 3-
 year public and private sector collective bargaining agreements calling for an aver-
 age 5-percent annual wage increase.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. The UGIT claims, how-
 ever, that there is increasing antiunion activity among private sector employers, es-
 pecially the alleged firing of union activists and the use of temporary workers to
 avoid a unionized work site. In certain industries, such as textiles, temporary work-
 ers account for 80 percent of the work force. The Labor Code protects temporary
 workers, but enforcement is more difficult than in the case of permanent workers.
 A 1994 labor code revision established a committee to hear cases involving alleged
 unLustified firing of workers.
 There are two export processing zones, but they have not yet begun operations.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law does not specifically pro-
 hibit compulsory labor, but there have been no reports of its practive in recent
 years. In 1994 the International Labor Organizations (ILO) Committee of Experts
 stated that the Government may violate ILO Convention 29 on forced labor but
 noted the President's intention to abolish the criminal penalty of "rehabilitation
 through work" on state worksites. At year's end, the Chamber of Deputies was con-
 sidering a draft bill on the issue. The practice of sentencing convicts to 'rehabilita-
 tion through work" dates to the Penal Code of 1912.
 d. Minimum Age For Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employ-
 ment in manufacturing is 15 years, in agriculture 13 years. The Government re-
 quires children to attend school until age 16. Workers between the ages of 14 and
 18 are prohibited from working from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Children over the age of 14
 may work a maximum of 4.5 hours a day. The combination of school and work may
 not exceed 7 hours. Inspectors of the Ministry of Social Affairs examine the records
 of employees to verify that employers comply with the minimum age law. Nonethe-
 less, young children often perform agricultural work in rural areas and work as ven-
 dors in urban areas.
 The UGIT has expressed concern that child labor-frequently disguised as ap-
 prenticeship-still exists, principally in the handicraft industry. In other instances,
 young rural girls are sometimes placed as domestics in urban homes by their fa-
 thers who collect the child's wages.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code provides for a range of admin-
 istratively determined minimum wages. The minimum wage levels are determined
 by a commission of representatives from the the Ministries of Social Affairs, Plan-
 ning, Finance, and National Economy. During the ourse of its deliberations, the
 commission consults with the UGT and the Employers Union. The President ap-
 proves the commissions' recommendations. When supplemented by transportation
 and family allowances, the minimum wage covres oniy essential costs for a worker
 and his family. In August the commission raised the minimum monthly industrial
 wage to about $130 for a 40-hour workweek and the daily minimum agricultural
 wage at nearly $4.50.
 
 
 1188
 
 The Labor Code sets a standard 48-hour workweek for most sectors and requires
 one 24-hour rest period. The workweek is 40 hours for those in the energy, transpor-
 tation, petrochemical, and metallurgy industries.
 Regional labor inspectors are responsible for enforcing standards, they inspect
 most firms about once every 2 years. However, the Government often encounters dif-
 ficulty in enforcing the minimum wage law, particularly in nonunionized sectors of
 the economy. Moreover, according to a 1992 study, some 240,000 workers are em-
 ployed in the informal sector, which falls outside ofthe purview of labor legislation.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has responsibility for improving health and safety
 standards in the workplace. There are special government regulations covering such
 hazardous occupations as mining, petroleum engineering, and construction. Working
 conditions and standards tend to be better in firms that are export-oriented than
 in those producing for the domestic market. Reported workplace accidents during
 the first 6 months of 1994 (latest data available) indicate a 0.9 percent decline in
 mishaps over the same period in 1993. However, the total workdays lost due to acci-
 dents during the same period were up 6.5 percent over 1993. Work-related deaths
 increased to 82 in the first 6 months of 1994, compared to 76 for the same period
 in 1993. Workers are free to remove themselves from dangerous situations without
 jeopardizing their employment, and they may take legal action against employers
 who retaliate for exercising their right.
