 TUNISIA
 Zine El Abidine Ben Ali assumed the office of president in
 November 1987 peacefully and in accord with Tunisia's
 Constitution. During 1988 the Government legalized three new
 political parties, promulgated a major prison-reform decree,
 opened a dialog with domestic and international human rights
 organizations, and in general began to bring Tunisian
 political practice more into line with the precepts of the
 democratic system called for by the Constitution. In the
 context of a national pact signed by Tunisia's various
 political forces on November 7, 1988, the President advanced
 parliamentary and presidential elections from 1991 to 1989.
 However, at year's end the severe beating of two political
 party representatives by unknown assailants and two cases of
 press censorship marred this general progress on human rights.
 The internal security of Tunisia continues to be maintained by
 civilian services, backed up by the armed forces in times of
 crisis. Since the change in government in 1987, these
 services have generally adhered to the law and have not used
 repressive measures to maintain internal security.
 Easing trade restrictions and moving toward privatizing some
 industries, the Government deepened Tunisia's commitment to
 structural adjustment. Tax reform, including a successful tax
 amnesty program, instilled greater confidence in the economy.
 Revenues from tourism, textile exports, and resumed trade with
 Libya improved Tunisia's balance of payments. Yet, while 1987
 had been a bumper year owing to good crops and relatively high
 oil prices, in 1988 oil prices were soft and agriculture was
 hit hard by drought and an infestation of locusts. The high
 rate of youth unemployment as well as the erosion of buying
 power continued to trouble the economy.
 The Government took a number of positive steps in 1988 to
 improve the human rights situation. President Ben Ali
 declared in conjunction with a pardon of 79 political
 prisoners in November that Tunisian prisons are now empty of
 political prisoners, an achievement which was affirmed and
 commended by the Tunisian Human Rights League. During his
 first year in office, he ordered the release of more than
 3,000 political prisoners, including Islamic Tendency Movement
 (MTI) leader Rachid Ghannouchi in May. The total number of
 pardoned political and common prisoners reached 8,000 by
 year's end.
 The 1987 law limiting prearraignment and pretrial detention
 was effectively applied. In September two new opposition
 parties and two major student associations became legal under
 the terms of new laws on parties and associations which were
 enacted in July. A third new party was legalized in
 November. Amnesty International (Ai) was given permission to
 open a Tunis office, and the Chamber of Deputies ratified the
 U.N. Convention on Torture in July without reservation.
 Political exiles--including MTI leader Abdelfattah Mourou,
 former ministers Ahmed Ben Salah, Mohamed Masmoudi, and Driss
 Guiga, and political personalities Wassilla Ben Ammar and
 Sophia Ben Youssef--returned to Tunisia at a steady rate.
 
 
 1521
 TUNISIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 '-Treatment or Punishment.
 As noted above, the Chamber of Deputies in July ratified
 without reservation the 1984 U.N. Convention on Torture. In
 October the Court of Jendouba, in a decision without precedent.
 in Tunisian courts, honored a lawyer's request for an accused
 person to have a medical checkup, owing to evidence of
 torture. In a second case, an MTI member was reportedly
 beaten after his arrest in Siliana in October. He claimed in
 a letter to President Ben Ali that he was later taken to the
 Interior Ministry in Tunis and tortured again. Both of these
 cases received wide press coverage. There were other
 occasional reports of police beatings of prisoners, and the
 Tunisian Human Rights League expressed its concern to the
 Government that the Convention on Torture ha not been
 adequately complied with in police stations.
 In November the Government issued a special decree
 establishing detailed rights of Tunisian prisoners in such
 areas as health, nutrition, hygiene, exercise, work, visits,
 consultation with lawyers, and education. The decree grants a
 prisoner the right to talk to his lawyer without the presence
 of prison officials. It sets the maximal disciplinary measure
 at 10 days' solitary confinement. The Human Rights League,
 which had long pressed for prison reforms, greeted the decree
 as a positive step.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were no reported cases of arbitrary arrest, detention,
 or exile.
 The perpetrators of the bombing of four tourist hotels in 1987
 remain in prison. Similarly, several dozen persons have been
 in detention since November 1987 on the grounds of plotting
 the violent overthrow of the Government. One member of the
 November 16 plot reportedly died while under detention.
 Tunisia's two major human rights organizations have asked
 Government officials to ensure the full legal rights of the
 November 16 detainees. Several of the detainees were released
 on the first anniversary of the November 7, 1987, change of
 government.
 Under the previous Government the authorities could extend
 prearraignment detention indefinitely. A law adopted by the
 new Government in November 1987 limits prearraignment
 detention to between 4 and 10 days. A detainee may request an
 examination by a medical doctor, but may otherwise be held
 incommunicado. All detainees have the right to a lawyer for
 arraignment; the Government provides legal assistance to
 indigent detainees. Pretrial detention is limited to 6
 
 
 1522
 TUNISIA
 months, renewable by an arraignment judge for up to two
 additional 6-month periods in the case of felony indictments.
 Human rights organizations reported few cases of abuse of the
 new law in 1988. The Tunisian League of Human Rights,
 reporting that it now has open channels to the Interior
 Ministry regarding detainees, has publicly supported a further
 reduction in prearraignment detention.
 Many exiles returned to Tunisia in 1988. Among those
 returning were MTI leaders Abdelfattah Mourou, Hamadi Jebali,
 and Hachemi Hamdi; former Minister of Foreign Affairs
 Mohamed Masmoudi; former Minister of the Interior Driss Guiga;
 Bourguiba's ex-wife Wassila Ben Ammar; and Salah Ben Youssef's
 widow.
 President Ben Ali also acceded to the request of former
 president Habib Bourguiba, who had been under medical
 supervision at a private residence outside Tunis, to move to
 his home town Monastir.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tunisia's court system is highly centralized under the Justice
 Ministry. Trials are normally open to the public, and both
 domestic and foreign observers are able to attend. No secret
 trials were held in 1988. Prison sentences are usually
 divided into two categories: confinement in prison and
 confinement at forced labor.
 Having abolished the position of General Prosecutor of the
 Republic and the State Security Court in 1987, President
 Ben Ali continued in 1988 to give public support for a more
 independent judiciary. His stance reflected the widespread
 sentiment, even at the highest levels of the Justice Ministry,
 that magistrates, whose career paths are controlled by the
 Ministry, do not act independently of the executive branch.
 Changes which human rights activists suggest as ways to
 increase judicial independence (and lessen corruption) include
 higher pay and a tenuring system making it impossible for the
 Justice Ministry to banish out-of-favor judges to remote areas
 of the country. However, many Tunisians emphasize the need
 for a change in attitude--they think that the legal structure
 to foster independence is essentially in place, but that
 judges have yet to show initiative.
 Of 55 MTI members convicted by the State Security Court in
 September 1987 for seeking to overthrow the Government, the
 President pardoned 21 in July. In September a Tunisian
 appeals court significantly reduced--to 5 years--the sentences
 of 12 others. The President pardoned the latter 12 in
 November, although their political rights remain suspended.
 He has also pardoned more than 5,000 common prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of the person
 as well as the inviolability of the home and privacy in
 correspondence, "except in exceptional cases defined by law."
 Since the disbanding of the ruling party's militias and the
 restricting of activities of the security forces after the
 change of government, human rights organizations report that
 the privacy of the individual and of the home have been
 generally respected. There have, however, been some reports
 that correspondence and telephones are sometimes monitored.
 
 
 1523
 TUNISIA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While in practice there has been some relaxation of government
 censorship of the press, a new press code, relatively severe
 in its terms, was adopted in 1988. For example, all
 publications must be submitted to the censor at the Interior
 Ministry. The level of criticism to be permitted is under
 discussion by the Information Ministry and the Tunisian
 Journalists Association.
 Tunisian law requires that-the first copy of each edition of
 all periodicals and of all published books be submitted to a
 censorship authority. This body has the power to censor,
 either partially or completely, any publication it receives.
 However, several changes in the new code are favorable. The
 right of the Interior Ministry to suspend publications has
 been restricted. Due process and the decision of a judge are
 now necessary prior to action to suspend, and suspensions may
 apply only to a single issue of a paper. Previously,
 suspensions could be indefinite. The Ministry still has an
 escape clause allowing it to suspend publications that "risk
 harming public'security," but in this case, only the offending
 article can be suppressed. The Ministry must rule on
 publication within 3 days.
 The crime of defamation has been limited in that the author of
 an article which a deputy, civil servant, or other public
 official deems defamatory can now assert the truth of the
 article as a defense.
 Since the cIange in government, there have been at least four
 instances of interference with freedom of the press. In the
 first case, in December 1987, the weekly Les Annonces was
 suspended for 3 months because of an issue featuring a cartoon
 that satirized former President Bourguiba. Upon appeal in
 January 1988, the court at Tunis reduced this sentence to 1
 month.
 In the second case, the influential independent
 Arabic-language journal Er Rai, which had stopped publication
 under pressure in early 1987, voluntarily withdrew from
 circulation the issue which was to celebrate its rebirth in
 early 1988. A commentary in this issue challenged the new
 Government in a highly critical tone to prove its commitment
 to press freedom by discouraging media aggrandizement of the
 leadership. The Government's role in Er Rai's decision to
 cease publication is not clear. However, the decision did
 signify an informal limit on press freedom.
 In the third case, the Interior Ministry seized a November
 issue of the weekly El Mawqif for "diffusion of information
 concerning unrecognized political parties." The Human Rights
 League declared that the seizure had no convincing legal basis
 and set a dangerous precedent.
 In the fourth case, the Government ordered a mid-December
 issue of the weekly Realites removed from the newsstands
 because it contained an editorial criticizing the lack of
 independence of judges. The succeeding issue of Realites
 failed to appear. The editor of Realites and author of the
 editorial were to appear in court at the end of December to
 answer charges of defamation of the courts. At the same time,
 there was no interference with an issue of the weekly Maghreb
 
 
 1524
 TUNISIA
 which sharply criticized the Government's action against
 Realites.
 In the midst of these cases of interference, previously banned
 publications, such as Le Phare, continued to reappear
 throughout 1988 (although the failure of Le Phare to appear in
 mid-December raised speculation that it had run into
 government obstruction). Newspapers, including government
 organs, carried debate and dissent on official positions.
 Opposition politicians were given some access to television,
 which continues to be government owned. Furthermore, the
 Cultural Affairs Ministry announced in December that it will
 no longer require issuance of a permit for publication of
 scripts for the theatre. However, the Ministry will continue
 to view plays before they are allowed to open.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly, but any
 group wishing to organize must obtain authorization. Under
 the law, recognized organizations must also obtain permission
 to hold mass meetings. Before November 1987, the Government
 kept a tight rein on political activity. In contrast the new
 Government passed laws on parties and organizations which
 paved the way for new opposition parties and student
 associations to become legal.
 In contrast to 1987, when campuses were focal points for
 unrest and police raids, the new Government granted
 recognition in September to two major student organizations,
 the Tunisian Students' Union (UGET) and the Union of Tunisian
 Students (UGTE). Preceding official recognition, the UGET
 reorganized its political activities at a conference in
 March--its first conference since 1972.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Islam as the state religion, but
 also provides for the free practice of other religions.
 However, proselytizing for religions other than Islam is
 prohibited. The Constitution calls on all political parties
 to respect and defend Tunisia's Arab-Muslim identity. The
 President and his parents and grandparents must be Muslim.
 Under President Ben Ali, Islam has been given more prominence
 in public life. Prayers are broadcast on television and
 radio. Islamists have not been subject to arrest since the
 change of government. Twelve Islamists exiled under former
 President Bourguiba were tried in September under existing
 indictments when they returned to Tunisia. Although found
 guilty, they received suspended sentences and were pardoned
 shortly thereafter by the President.
 Tunisia's Jews comprise the largest religious minority in the
 country, with an aging population of under 2,200. The Jewish
 community worships freely and maintains its own organizations
 with official sanction. Christians, mostly expatriate, freely
 attend church services. Under an agreement between the
 Vatican and the Tunisian Government, several Roman Catholic
 religious orders remain active. The official ban on'Baha'i
 religious meetings, imposed in 1984, is still in effect.
 
 
 1525
 TUNISIA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement in Tunisia, but all citizens must
 carry identity cards. The Government opened Tunisia's border
 with Libya in 1988, and Tunisia and Libya are designing a
 common identification card. At a Maghreb conference in Tunis
 in October, Algeria, Mauritania, and Morocco confirmed their
 interest in adopting this common identification card as a step
 toward alignment of social policies and promotion of freedom
 of movement throughout the Maghreb. Passports for foreign
 travel are readily available. In October the Human Rights
 League reported that relatively few passports withheld by the
 Bourguiba government in 1987 still had not been returned. MTI
 leader Rachid Ghannouchi and former trade unionist Taieb
 Baccouche were among those whose passports were returned
 toward the end of the year. Ostensibly because of the large
 foreign presence in Tunisia, including the Palestine
 Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Arab League, the
 Interior Ministry still carried out random roadblocks and
 identity checks in 1988.
 There is no restriction on emigration or repatriation,
 although foreign-exchange restrictions and a high departure
 tax make travel more difficult. The Government took steps in
 1988 to ease the financial burden for-returning emigres by,
 for instance, greatly reducing the tax on the import of the
 personal vehicle of any emigre returning from.France.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Under the former Bourguiba regime, citizens did not have the
 right peacefully and democratically to change the Government.
 The passage of legislation amounted to the rubberstamping of
 executive decisions, and in 1987 the Chamber of Deputies
 contained only members of the ruling party.
 The Constitution provides for a parliamentary democracy with
 separation of executive, legislative, and judicial powers. A
 unicameral legislature, the Chamber of Deputies, is elected
 every 5 years and is the lawmaking authority.
 Throughout 1988, President Ben Ali publicly supported
 democratization. In June the leading opposition party, the
 Movement of Social Democrats (MDS), was permitted to celebrate
 its 10th anniversary with a major convention, prominently
 placed banners in Tunis, and brief access to government-
 controlled Tunisian television for a statement by MDS
 Secretary General Ahmed Mestiri. In September Ben Ali
 launched a debate among all political movements, recognized
 and unrecognized, to shape a national consensus--a "national
 pact"--to define the principles of Tunisia's evolving
 political system.
 The pact included a broad cross-section of Tunisia's political
 forces: the recognized political parties, MTI, Tunisian Trade
 Union Federation (UGTT), Chamber of Commerce, and student and
 women's organizations. Signed on November 7, the pact is
 considered by opposition parties and the 4TI to be a positive
 step. It proclaims that the political groups which signed it
 will work together toward a democratic government. It
 reiterates Tunisia's commitment to women's rights, calls for
 respect for human rights and political tolerance, endorses an
 
 
 1526
 TUNISIA
 equitable sharing of the burdens of economic development, and
 reaffirms Tunisia's Arab and Islamic identity.
 The new law on parties stipulates that every political party
 must reject violence in all forms, including fanaticism,
 racism, and other forms of discrimination. No party can
 receive funds from a foreign party or material aid directly or
 indirectly from foreign countries or from foreigners resident
 in Tunisia. All adherents to a party must have been Tunisian
 citizens for at least 5 years. Furthermore, no party can
 claim to represent a religion, race, sex, or region. The
 Government licensed three new parties: the Socialist
 Progressive Party, the Party for Social Progress, and the Arab
 Unionist Party. At the end of the year there were 7 legal
 parties, with some 15 parties aspiring to recognition.
 The MTI expressed its support for the Government, and
 indicated it was considering a change in its name and
 political approach in order to comply with the new standards
 and thus be officially recognized as a party. The MTI's major
 complaint was said to be the absence of a legal framework
 enabling Islamists to campaign and organize openly. MTI
 members were reportedly unhappy with the legal restrictions
 imposed on their leader, Rachid Ghannouchi, who was not
 permitted to engage in politics (although he did hold
 audiences for MTI supporters).
 Progress toward more open political debate was marred in
 November and December by several cases of harassment of both
 recognized and unrecognized political parties. The Human
 Rights League took up each case immediately and vociferously
 in the press. The cases included: the severe beating of
 Belhaj Ali, a member of the politburo of the newly legalized
 Party for Social Progress, by an unidentified band; the severe
 beating by unidentified men of Bechir Essid, a lawyer known to
 be a member of an illegal Arab nationalist, pro-Libyan party;
 and the Interior Ministry's order to Hamma Hammami, leader of
 the unrecognized Tunisian Communist Workers' Party, to stop
 his illegal political activities.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged violations
 of Human Rights
 The Tunisian League of Human Rights is one of the oldest and
 most respected human rights organizations in the Arab world.
 Under fire from the government-controlled press before the
 change of government in 1987, the League was vindicated in
 1988. Saadeddine Zmerli, former League president, was named
 Public Health Minister. Other League members were named to
 the Economic and Social Council, and the League's current
 president, Mohamed Charfi, met with President Ben Ali in
 September. Arrested in 1987 for defamation, Khemais Chamari,
 Vice President of the Tunisian League of Human Rights as well
 as Vice President of the Paris-based International Federation
 of Human Rights, had his own political rights restored.
 The League applauded the Government for its human rights
 record in 1988, and urged further progress toward such goals
 as a general legislative pardon to restore full civil and
 political rights to beneficiaries of presidential pardons.
 The League also pressed for a change in the legal status of
 judges and encouraged more independence on the part of the
 judiciary (see Section l.e.). The League held periodic open
 conferences around the country to educate citizens about human
 
 
 1527
 TUNISIA
 rights and the democratic process and received wide radio and
 television coverage in programs on human rights. The
 Government responded in part by using Human Rights Day
 (December 10) to launch a nationwide human rights education
 campaign. The subject of human rights is now being integrated
 into the Tunisian school curriculum.
 Another human rights organization, the Association for the
 Defense of Human Rights and Civil Liberties, was'created in
 1987 with the encouragement of the previous government. It
 continued to operate in 1988 under its original president,
 Dr. Dhaoui Hannablia. The Association still has little
 structure outside of Tunis and has been focusing broadly on
 the promotion of human rights education. Both the League and
 the Association are recognized by the Government.
 The Government also demonstrated its desire to cooperate with
 international human rights organizations. Between 1981 and
 1986, Amnesty International (AI) had requested permission five
 times to open a Tunis office. In 1988 the Government granted
 this permission, a first in the Arab world. The U.N. and the
 Arab Organization of Human Rights have also chosen Tunisia as
 the seat for a new Arab-African Institute for Human Rights.
 The International Federation of Human Rights continues, with
 government permission, to carry out human rights activities,
 such as observation of the judicial system in Tunisia.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Personal Status Code, enacted in 1957, calls for equal
 rights for men and women, including equal rights in divorce
 and child custody. Despite fears that the new Government
 might underinire the Code, it haj openly supported equality for
 women. However, tradition remains a strong force in Tunisian
 family life.
 Equal access of men and women to education is stipulated by
 law. According to 1984 census statistics, 58.1 percent of
 females over the age of 10 were classified illiterate,
 compared to 34.6 percent of males. However, the number of
 females finishing primary and secondary education has
 increased. For example, 35.3 percent of the students
 finishing secondary school were female, according to a 1980
 census, while 39.7 percent were female in 1984.
 The number of women in the work force is increasing at a
 moderate pace. While 6.1 percent of women were formally
 employed in 1966, 21.4 percent were so employed in 1984.
 Women are best represented in the fields of medicine,
 journalism, and teaching. However, outside of the civil
 service, working women in Tunisia generally earn less than
 men, in part because much female labor takes place in the
 unregulated informal sector, and because traditional Arab
 culture gives men the responsibility for earning a living.
 While 24.5 percent of civil servants were female as of the
 1984 census, women generally have difficulty obtaining high
 government positions. One woman is serving at the level of
 junior minister, and two have been appointed as ambassadors.
 Forty-three percent of the female work force have jobs in the
 low-paying textile or leather industries, and women in the
 industrial work force usually hold the lowest paying jobs.
 Twenty-six percent of employed women manage their own
 buginesses, and about 25 percent are officially estimated to
 
 
 1528
 TUNISIA
 work in agriculture, where they reportedly earn about half the
 wages of their male counterparts.
 Tunisia's population is largely homogeneous, and there is very
 little racial, linguistic, or social discrimination.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Tunisia's Constitution stipulates the right to organize a
 union and to strike. The roughly 20 percent of Tunisia's work
 force that is unionized includes most public sector workers
 and those in large private establishments.
 Tunisia's tradition of free trade unions came under attack
 under the previous government, and by 1987 government pressure
 had led to the removal of the executive board of the General
 Union of Tunisian Workers (UGTT) and the installation of a new
 board. The deposed members were loyal to the labor leader
 Habib Achour, who was at the time under house arrest. The new
 board adopted a charter that sought to restrict collective
 bargaining and strikes. The new procedure for sanctioning
 strikes requires a majority vote of all UGTT member unions,
 not just the affected syndicate as before. This procedure
 remains on the books but is often ignored. Many UGTT-member
 local unions stage short wildcat strikes without interference
 from the Government.
 In 1988 the UGTT began to normalize its operations and its
 relations with international labor organizations, notably
 including its membership in the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions. At the end of the year, the UGTT was
 preparing for shop elections, leading to an extraordinary
 congress scheduled for January 1989. In the interim, a mixed
 labor commission was examining labor issues, and bipartisan
 sectoral and regional commissions were established to oversee
 the elections,
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Many UGTT-member local unions engage in collective bargaining
 at the shop level without interference from the Government.
 Export promotion zones per se do not exist. The Government
 does offer, however, fiscal incentives to firms producing for
 export. The labor law is the same for exporters and
 nonexporters, but exporters--emboldened by the government
 favor they enjoy--are more likely to challenge unionizing and
 collective bargaining. Unionized workers deem managers of
 exporting companies recalcitrant, and a number of strikes have
 occurred against such firms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under Tunisian judicial practice, prison sentences may include
 confinement at forced labor. In 1981 the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) criticized Tunisia for this practice.
 While Tunisia continues to use compulsory labor as a sentence,
 it reportedly resolved ILO concerns on this issue in 1983 in a
 comprehensive report. The ILO has continued to urge Tunisia
 to bring its legislation on rehabilitation work and civic
 service into conformity with the Convention on Forced Labor.
 In November President Ben Ali stated his intention to submit
 draft legislation to abolish forced labor.
 
 
 1529
 TUNISIA
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor is prohibited prior to the age of 16. The
 Ministry of Social Affairs oversees the provisions affecting
 child labor. However, children perform a great deal of the
 agricultural work in rural areas, and children in Tunis can
 also be seen vending food and other goods.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Tunisia has a labor code, dating from independence in 1956,
 that sets standards, including a 48-hour workweek and minimum
 wage, for some 60 percent of the labor force working in the
 civil service, public sector companies, and professions such
 as teaching. A considerable amount of labor, however, takes
 place in the informal economy outside the Government's
 control. Such labor includes both moonlighting in occupations
 covered by the labor code and activities such as residential
 construction falling outside the code's purview. Work
 standards in the informal sector are often below government
 norms. The-labor code also serves as an indirect model for
 the larger private sector companies. However, in general the
 Government does not enforce the minimum wage law, particularly
 in the nonunionized sectors of the economy.
 Employees who are covered by the minimum wage law should also
 receive other benefits, including social security, disability
 and health insurance, transportation and family allowances,
 and paid leave, but sometimes do not. The labor code requires
 employers to pay overtime, a night work differential, and
 holiday pay. In the major urban areas, a minimum wage
 employee with a family of four nets between $170-210 per month
 when allowances are included. In agriculture the base wage
 was increased to about $3.85 per day, although this directly
 applies only to 37 percent of the agricultural work force and
 does not cover migrant agricultural workers. Supplemented by
 the benefits listed above, the minimum wage is adequate to
 provide a decent living for workers and their families. Over
 the past several years, however, inflation has outstripped
 increases in the minimum wage, thereby eroding the standard of
 living.
 The Ministry of Social Affairs has an office with
 responsibility for improving health and safety standards in
 the workplace. In many hazardous jobs--i.e., mining,
 petroleum engineering, and construction--the Government has
 established new regulations. These regulations are enforced
 more strictly in Tunis than in the rest of the country, where
 much work, especially in construction, is done in the informal
 sector. It is estimated that there are about 3 work-related
 deaths per week in Tunisia, 300 cases of workers suffering
 disabling injuries each year, and 250,000 workdays per year
 lost due to work-related accidents.
 
 
 1530
