Tunisia
President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and the ruling party, the Constitutional
Democratic Assembly, dominate political life in Tunisia. The government uses the
threat of terrorism and religious extremism as a pretext to crack down on peaceful
dissent. There are continuous and credible reports of torture and ill-treatment
being used to obtain statements from suspects in custody. Sentenced prisoners
also face deliberate ill-treatment.
The government tolerates small opposition parties up to a point. On October 1,
2007, in a ruling that appeared politically motivated, a court in Tunis ordered the
eviction of the Progressive Democratic Party’s weekly organ al-Mawkef from its
premises of 13 years on the grounds that the party had been using the office as a
headquarters, in violation of the lease. The PDP is one of the rare outspoken legal
parties. Authorities denied any role in what they said was a private dispute.
However, the publication was spared eviction after President Ben Ali reportedly
urged the landlord to resolve the dispute, following a month of domestic and
international protests in support of al-Mawkef.
In July Ben Ali pardoned or conditionally released 21 political prisoners, and
another 10 in November. Most were leaders of the banned Islamist party al-
Nahdha who had been in prison since the early 1990s, when a military court convicted
265 party members and sympathizers on dubious charges of plotting to
topple the state. Despite these releases the number of political prisoners continued
to grow, as authorities arrested scores of young men in sweeps around the
country and charged them under the 2003 anti-terror law. Authorities made life
difficult for released political prisoners, monitoring them closely, denying them
passports and most jobs, and threatening to rearrest some who spoke out on
human rights or politics.
Human Rights Defenders
Authorities have refused to grant legal recognition to every truly independent
human rights organization that has applied over the past decade. They then
invoke the organization’s “illegal” status to hamper its activities. For example, on
June 6, 2007, police encircled the Tunis office of the non-recognized National Council on Liberties in Tunisia and blocked entry to representatives of civil society
who had come to show solidarity with the Council. Police also blocked meetings
by the non-recognized International Association of Solidarity with Political
Prisoners.
The independent Tunisian Human Rights League, a legally recognized group, continued
to face lawsuits filed by dissident members. The broader context showed
these supposedly private suits to be part of a pattern of repression: the courts
ruled systematically in favor of the plaintiffs, providing a legal veneer for largescale
police operations to prevent most League meetings at its branches around
the country.
Human rights defenders and dissidents are subject to heavy surveillance, arbitrary
travel bans, dismissal from work, interruptions in phone service, physical
assaults, harassment of relatives, suspicious acts of vandalism and theft, and
slander campaigns in the press. On July 24 authorities freed on parole lawyer
Mohamed Abbou, who had served two-thirds of a three-and-a-half year sentence
that was imposed after he published harsh critiques of President Ben Ali in online
forums. As of November, authorities were refusing to let Abbou travel abroad. In
June authorities arbitrarily extended by two years a five-year-old order banishing
released political prisoner Abdallah Zouari to a remote region 500 kilometers
from his family’s home in Tunis. Zouari is an outspoken government critic and
human rights activist.
The Justice System
The judiciary lacks independence. Prosecutors and judges usually turn a blind
eye to torture allegations, even when the subject of formal complaints submitted
by lawyers. Trial judges convict defendants solely or predominantly on the basis
of coerced confessions, or on the testimony of witnesses whom the defendant
does not have the opportunity to confront in court.
The International Committee of the Red Cross continued its program of visiting
Tunisian prisons. However, authorities refuse to allow access by independent
human rights organizations. During 2007 prison authorities placed a small number of inmates in prolonged solitary confinement, an abusive practice that had
reportedly stopped after the government pledged in 2005 to end it.
Detainees report a range of methods of torture and ill-treatment during police
interrogation. Most common, according to human rights lawyers and organizations,
are sleep deprivation; threats to rape the detainee or women family members;
beatings, especially on the soles of the feet (falaka); and tying and suspending
detainees from the ceiling or from a rod in the “roast chicken” (poulet
rôti ) position.
Tunisia has ratified the Convention against Torture and enacted strong legislation
defining and criminalizing acts of torture. However, despite the submission of formal
complaints by lawyers on behalf of defendants in hundreds of cases in recent
years, no case has come to public attention of a state agent being held accountable
for torturing persons held for politically motivated offenses.
Media Freedom
None of the domestic print and broadcast media offers critical coverage of government
policies, apart from a few low-circulation magazines that are subject to
occasional confiscation. Tunisia has privately-owned radio and television stations,
but private ownership is not synonymous with editorial independence. The
government blocks certain domestic and international political or human rights
websites featuring critical coverage of Tunisia.
Authorities have refused to accredit the correspondent of the Arabic satellite television
channel Al Jazeera, Lotfi Hajji. Plainclothes police prevented Hajji from
attending several news events during the year. Hajji is also president of the independent
Tunisian Journalists Syndicate, which authorities have refused to legalize.
Counterterrorism Measures
Since 1991 there has been one deadly terrorist attack in Tunisia: an April 2002
truck bomb that targeted a synagogue on the island of Djerba, for which al Qaeda
claimed responsibility. Tunisian authorities claim that they have long been at the forefront of combating terrorism and extremism. The 2003 Law in Support of
“International Efforts to Fight Terrorism and the Repression of Money-Laundering”
contains a broad definition of terrorism. Like that found in the Penal Code, the
definition encompasses “acts of incitement to racial or religious hatred or fanaticism
regardless of the means employed,” thereby leaving open the possibility of
prosecuting political opinion or association as crimes of terrorism.
Since the law’s enactment, authorities have rounded up hundreds of youths in
towns around the country and charged them under its provisions. The government
never accuses the majority of those whom it subsequently convicts of having
planned or committed specific acts of violence; rather, it charges them with planning
to join jihadist movements abroad or inciting others to join. Authorities routinely
deprive suspects detained under this law of their rights. Many are held in
pre-arraignment incommunicado police custody (garde à vue) beyond the six-day
legal limit. The police subject many to torture and other mistreatment.
Investigating judges question many defendants without informing them of their
right to a lawyer at this stage, and routinely ignore their requests for a medical
examination to check for evidence of mistreatment.
Between December 2006 and January 2007 security forces clashed with an armed
insurgent group outside the capital, the first such incident in Tunisia in recent
memory.
On June 18 the US sent to Tunisia two Tunisian nationals, Abdallah Hajji and Lotfi
Lagha, who had been held for five years as suspected terrorists in the
Guantanamo Bay detention facility. Tunisia immediately transferred them to
detention—Lagha to face new charges of serving a terrorist organization while
abroad, and Hajji to face a retrial after having been convicted in absentia on similar
charges. Hajji accused the police of slapping and threatening him upon his
arrival. Both spent their first six weeks in strict solitary confinement. A civilian
court sentenced Lagha on October 24 to three years in prison and a military court
on November 14 sentenced Hajji to seven years in prison.
Key International Actors
The United States enjoys good relations with Tunisia, while urging human rights
progress there more vocally than in most other countries in the region. While the
US gives minimal financial aid to Tunisia, the Department of Defense provides
counterterrorism training and exchange programs for the military.
The US embassy frequently sends diplomats to observe political trials and to
meet civil society activists. The State Department report “Supporting Human
Rights and Democracy: The U.S. Record” notes, “U.S. officials … urged the government
to respect freedoms of assembly and association after observing first-hand
incidents where the government prevented human rights organizations from conducting
meetings.” Ambassador Richard C. Godec on September 28 visited PDP
party members who were hunger-striking to protest al-Mawkef’s threatened eviction.
With respect to the transfer of security detainees held at Guantanamo Bay,
Ambassador Godec said, “We would not transfer individuals where it is more likely
than not they would be tortured or mistreated.” However, neither he nor other
US officials commented on Tunisia’s imprisonment and alleged mistreatment of
Abdallah Hajji and Lotfi Lagha after their transfer from US custody.
The European Union-Tunisia Association Agreement continues to be in force,
despite the government’s human rights record and its blocking of EU grants to
some nongovernmental organizations. EU officials occasionally criticize their partner’s
rights record, while taking pains to praise the state of bilateral relations
overall.
France remains Tunisia’s leading trade partner and foreign investor, and in 2007
provided Tunisia with more development aid per capita than it gave any other
country. On July 10 newly elected French President Nicolas Sarkozy visited Tunisia,
in the company of Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Human Rights Rama Yade. Sarkozy had nothing but praise for
the Tunisian authorities in his public comments, but told journalists he had
raised some human rights cases in private with President Ben Ali, including that
of Mohamed Abbou. On this first visit, the French president did little to distance himself from the staunch support that his predecessor, Jacques Chirac, had
shown for President Ben Ali in spite of the latter’s human rights practices.