Turkey
' I "*he 1996 Department of State report on the human rights situation in the Republic of Turkey, like its predecessors, is thorough, detailed and, on the whole, accurate; the diligence of its drafters is to be commended. The report emphasizes two important developments: first, the government was "unable to sustain improvements" made in past years, making 1996 an "uneven" year in which human rights conditions "deteriorated in some respects"; and second, human rights issues became slightly more of a mainstream issue with the public. However, in part due to significant changes that occurred since its publication, the report fails to give a stark enough picture of the current state of human rights in Turkey. In some respects, the report also downplays or misreads significant human rights problems.
In most respects Turkey is, as the report states, a functioning constitutional republic. However, in light of recent events, the statement that "[t]he Government neither coerces nor forbids membership in any political organization" is somewhat misleading. The Turkish security apparatus plays an all-too-active role in the governance of the country, and there has been a rather concerted effort first to remove the Islamist government from power, and then to forbid the participation of the Islamist Refah party in Turkish politics. On the first point, on several occasions the military summoned then-Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan to meetings in which he was berated and received thinly veiled threats of being deposed. These threats were taken seriously in Turkey and abroad; the Clinton administration eventually issued a warning of its own to the military not to intervene. The army also publicly briefed judges and prosecutors on its view of the proper role of Islam in public life and in the justice system; the briefing was well-attended and greeted with some degree of enthusiasm by many members of the bar. More recently, it appears that the army played an influential role in the change of government which ended the coalition government of Refah and the Dogm Vol ("True Path") party. While this change was accomplished without bloodshed, the strong pressure from the military calls into question the strength of Turkish democracy.
On the second point, since the report was released, the chief prosecutor of the Republican Appellate Court Prosecutorial Office has
241
Critique 1996
indicted and sougbit to close Refah. The prosecutor, Vural Savas, claims that Refah can be banned under Articles 68 and 69 of the Turkish Constitution because of an alleged plan to increase the scope of religious activity in public life. This prosecution is the first to be brought against Refah on such grounds in the almost two decades of its existence {in various forms). While Refah's intentions have been a subject of spirited debate in Turkey, it is far from dear that Refah poses a direct threat to the secular nature of the state. The prosecution, coming on the heels of the army's pressure to change the government, raises doubts about the motivations behind it.
The military's intervention in politics has not received enough scrutiny in this or past years. This may be attributable to the fact that both the U.S. government — and, unfortunately, progressive Turkish institutions — appear to have accepted the military's actions against Refah. While the U.S. government warned the military against direct intervention, it did not speak out generally against the influence of the military on dvilian life. Whatever Refah's intentions, there is little doubt that the army — with some public support — has used fears of Refah to drive a wedge between civil liberties groups. Some of this can be laid at Refah's feet, since the party's interest in the human rights problems of others appears limited. The Refah justice minister did, however, attempt to discourage lawyers and prosecutors from attending the army's briefing — a directive that was largely ignored. This triangular tension between Islamists, the army, and secular institutions is not likely to ease.
Obviously, the authors cannot be taken to task for disregarding events that took place after the report's publication. However, it is open to the criticism that this year, as in the past, it downplays the role of the army's constant presence in Turkish democracy and the damage it inflicts. The continuing question of the role of the Turkish armed forces in the rights of Turks to elect their government should be addressed in next year's report.
The report notes the increase in the prosecution of members of the security forces for extrajudicial crimes, and correcdy notes the "climate of impunity" reflected in the conviction rate. Unfortunately, that rate appears to be closer to zero than to a "relatively small number." The
242
Turkey
report does not cite a single important conviction. Major trials appear to be delayed after the indictment is handed down. The trial of the officers who allegedly murdered journalist Metin Goktepe has been shifted from court to court with no effective progress.The report points out that only a public outcry led to the suspension of officers who are on trial for murdering Goktepe, and they have not even been detained, despite a recent court order to that effect. Members of the security forces who are on trial, even for capital crimes, often do not appear for the initial hearings, and in general, suspension of officials against whom charges are pending appears to be the exception rather than the rule. Again in Goktepe's case, the accused have not even been detained, despite a recent court order to that effect.
Similarly, none of the defendants in the Diyarbakir prison case mentioned in the report have been detained, despite the fact that ten persons were killed. The report implies that the murders resulted from attempts to "quell a disturbance," and there was in fact a riot prior to the killings. However, a parliamentary investigation appointed several doctors to examine the corpses, and they found that there was no evidence of injury to the arms or legs of the victims. Instead, they had been killed by blows to the head, and there were indications that the prisoners had been bound or otherwise immobilized before being killed. Despite these findings, there have not even been any effective administrative demotions of the prison officials in charge during the riots that led up to these killings.
While the report discusses these abuses, it fails to draw the link between the near-immunity of security forces and another disturbing trend: the growing presence of illegal gangs within the state apparatus. While the report cites the Catli case (in which rightist militant Abdallah Catli died in a car crash), it understates the problem of gangs or rogue military units, particularly in the southeast. Part of the difficulty in prosecuting security officials is the uncertainty as to who, if anyone, exercises control over the perpetrators of human rights violations.
Since the State Department report was released in January 1997, the government has enacted reductions in the pre-trial detention periods. In some cases, pre-trial detention apparently still is a problem due to
243
Critique 1996
falsification of the date on which imprisonment began. There have been only minor improvements in the quality of medical examinations of prisoners for evidence of torture. In some cases, torture is discovered by prison doctors after a conviction has been secured, at which point it is very difficult to raise the issue. While the government's actions are a welcome step, the Turldsh government must talce further measures if it is to reduce substantially the incidence of torture in pre-trial detention.
The report notes that Mustafa Cinkilic, of the Adana branch of the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey (HRFT), and Dr. Tufan Kose have faced charges for operating a torture rehabilitation center. The case seems to have been designed to interfere with the internationally respected work of the HRFT in human rights documentation and torture treatment. Cinldlic was subsequently acquitted, but Kose has been convicted of charges that included operating an unlicensed health facility. The HRFT is appealing the conviction.
The government's use of informants' testimony to indict and convict persons under Articles 159 and 160 of the penal code is one of the worst examples of due process deficiencies in Turkey. While the testimony of informants is an acceptable part of a criminal process, Turkish prosecutors and judges routinely proceed with indictments merely because a defendant's name is mentioned by an informer. Often neither dates nor events are provided. Unfortunately, under the procedural rules of the State Security Court informants are permitted to testify outside of the trial to a court official. Thus, defendants may be convicted based on vague accusations by paid government informants who are never cross-examined.
Turldsh lawyers reported improvements brought about by proceedings of the European Commission on Human Rights, even though, as the report notes, people who filed applications with the commission continued to complain of harassment. While the report mentions the hunger strikes of Turldsh prisoners, it does not note that one of the effects of the strikes has been increased harassment of lawyers meeting with their imprisoned clients. In its section on illegal searches, the report fails to note that the Turkish national law on the legal profession requires that the Ministry of Justice authorize the search of a lawyer's office, and
244
Turkey
that a lawyer may only be questioned by a prosecutor. These rules apparently are circumvented or ignored in many cases. In one case, an officer reportedly even investigated a lawyer who had sought to indict the same officer in another matter. Similar incidents of harassment discourage most lawyers from representing clients charged with political crimes.
Regarding the practices of Turkish courts in cases involving freedom of speech, the report states that this right is upheld by judges who "examine evidence rigorously" and dismiss many charges. This may be true, but it does little to help those charged with speech crimes who must take the time and expense to defend themselves against such charges. Nor is it certain that judges are as independent as the report suggests. While Article 138 of the Turkish Constitution guarantees the independence of the judiciary, a prosecutor recently challenged this in public on a television news program. He has been indicted for insulting the judiciary.
The report does a good job of highlighting the persecution of human rights groups. Unfortunately, these practices have continued since the report was released, particularly against the Human Rights Association (HRA) branches throughout Turkey. Mahmut Sakar, a director of the Diyarbakir Human Rights Association, was detained and still faces charges; HRA's office in Diyarbakir has been shut down, as have HRA branches in other cities, including Izmir, Malatya and Konya. The Izmir Bar Association has opened a human rights center with European Union funding, and so far seems to have escaped direct persecution; the Istanbul bar plans to open a similar center soon.
While the report for 1996 is on the whole quite good, it leaves out some of the most troubling issues. It contains nothing about the use of U.S. technology, weaponry and funding in the government's actions against the population in the Southeast Kurdish region. U.S. policy remains uniformly behind the Turkish government in its battle against the Kurdistan Workers Party (PICIC), and the report correctly singles out the PIGC as a major human rights violator for using children as soldiers, attacldng schools and engaging in a number of terrorist acts.
Unfortunately, the report mirrors U.S. policy in its failure to put the Turkish government's disproportionate reaction to the PIGC in perspective. Turldsh authorities are directly responsible for numerous
245
Critique 1996
human rights violations that grow out of the struggle against the PIGC, the worst being the depopulation and burning of villages. As in past reports, the Turkish government's culpability in depriving a large portion of southeast Turkey's population of their land and livelihood is understated. The resettlement attempts of the government are not "inadequate," as the report calls them; rather, they are a disaster. Providing 15,000 persons with housing when anywhere from 500,000 to 2,000,000 have lost everything, in large part due to government action, is a travesty. More subtly, but perhaps even more crudal to real reform, the fight against the PI<JC has expanded into an attack on the rule of law. Military courts periodically try non-military personnel. The State Security Courts continue to apply harsher sentences than would be handed for the same actions in other courts.
Future reports should build on the strong foundation of the 1996 report. They should acknowledge the close connection between U.S. and Turkish foreign policy, and should indicate what, if anything, the United States is doing to address continuing human rights concerns in Turkey.
246
