TURKEY
The State Department's report on Turkey contains a more accurate description of Turkey's human rights problems than most reports issued during the last decade. Nevertheless, it continues to understate the severity and extent of those problems, including the frequency of incommunicado detention, the frequency of torture, the inadequate response of the Turkish legal system to allegations of torture, the inability to obtain a fair trial, problems in freedom of expression, association and assembly, and the prosecution of Kurds and others with Kurdish affiliations.
Instead of commending Turkey for continued progress in the area of human rights as it did in 1986, 1987 and 1988, this year's report begins with the acknowledgement that "continuing instances of torture were the principal human rights problem in 1989." It correctly states that additional human rights problems include incommunicado detention, the use of excessive force against noncombatants, restrictions on freedom of expression and various forms of discrimination against Kurds.
The report accurately describes routine methods of torture to which individuals detained prior to their arrest are subject, and cites to one allegation of death under torture. It does not attempt to explain incidents of torture as random examples of police brutality as it has in past years.
The report refers to complaints by villagers in the Kurdish areas that Jandarma (police) searching for PKK members (Kurdish Workers' Party, an ethnic separatist organization) and evidence of local support for the PKK have beaten, tortured and arbitrarily killed innocent civilians. It cites several examples of such brutality, including the torture of civilians in Yesilyurt, an incident that received significant domestic and international press attention.
In a welcome departure from prior reports, this year's report contains a fairly accurate estimate of the number of people currently held under laws that restrict speech and political activities. Last year's report merely noted that "some human rights observers continue to assert that Turkish detention facilities contain many political prisoners or prisoners of conscience." This year's report estimates that there are 5,000 such prisoners, including 26 editors and 2,792 writers, translators and journalists. A U.S. congressional delegation that
226
Turkey
visited Turkey in August concluded that there were an estimated 6,000 political prisoners.
In its sections on torture and inhuman treatment and arbitrary detention, however, the report understates the use of pre-arrest incommunicado detention by Turkish police and prosecutors. It correctly states that a prosecutor may order that someone be detained prior to his or her formal arrest and that under present legislation this order "can lead to fifteen days of detention," or 30 days in the provinces currently under a state of emergency. The report fails to state, however, that almost all individuals detained for political crimes are detained for the maximum number of days allowed by law. In fact Amnesty International received reports during 1989 indicating that many individuals had been detained longer than the maximum time period.
The report also fails to state that during this detention an individual is almost always held incommunicado, denied access to lawyers, family, doctors and friends. In many instances the police will not inform the detainee's family of the detainee's whereabouts until the detainee is formally arrested.
Additionally, the report understates the extent to which detainees held incommunicado are tortured. Although the report correctly notes that allegations of torture are frequent among detainees held incommunicado at police stations prior to their arrest, Turkish lawyers and human rights activists contend that 90% of those charged with political crimes are tortured and 50% of those charged with ordinary crimes are tortured. According to Amnesty International more than 500 political prisoners claim to have been tortured in 1989. Ten of those are reported to have died in custody.
The report does not discuss fully the failure of the Turkish legal system to adequately address allegations of torture. The report states, as it did last year, that allegations of torture are difficult "to prove or disprove." A recent report by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York, however, concluded that the Turkish legal system's response to allegations of torture is "almost a complete failure."
Although Turkish law requires prosecutors to investigate all complaints of torture whenever reasonable grounds exist to believe that torture has occurred, many prosecutors will not pursue such complaints unless the victim can produce medical evidence of the
227
Turkey
abuse. Under the current legal system, however, it is almost impossible to obtain such evidence. As the report correctly notes, because most detainees are held incommunicado for such a long period of time, signs of abuse often fade before the detainee is released from detention. The report does not mention, however, that: 1) the methods of torture most commonly used, such as electric shocks, the Palestinian hanger (hanging a victim by the hands and/or feet on a cross) and the use of a pressurized ice water hose, often do not leave visible marks; 2) government doctors who examine individuals released from incommunicado detention frequently ignore and refuse to document signs of torture; 3) police often threaten and intimidate detainees so that they will not report torture, sometimes remaining in the examination room while a torture victim is examined by a doctor; and 4) prosecutors will often not accept reports of torture from doctors not employed by the government. The President of the Istanbul Bar Association has estimated that only one out of 1,000 torture victims is able to obtain medical evidence of his or her torture.
Moreover, even if a victim obtains a substantiating medical report, many allegations of torture are not investigated because the detainee cannot identify the police officers responsible. In almost all instances, detainees are blindfolded when tortured. Although every interrogation report is supposed to contain the name and signature of the police officer responsible for the interrogation, the interrogators use code names and numbers. Their real names are almost never revealed to defense lawyers or torture victims.
Instead of commending the Turkish government for its prosecution of torturers as it has in past years, the report correctly notes that compared to the nature and number of torture allegations, the number of prosecutions is low and sentences are disproportionately mild. While it cites to one incident in which police officers were sentenced to four years and three months for a torture death, figures compiled by Amnesty International indicate that the Turkish government's failure to prosecute is much more severe than that one example would indicate. In 1988 Amnesty International concluded that of the 9,962 police officers the government claimed that it prosecuted for torture since 1980, only 84 had been sentenced to more than six months' imprisonment.
Lenient sentences do not result only from prosecutors failing to seek and judges failing to impose the maximum sentence available under the law. The maximum penalties available under the Turkish
228
Turkey
Criminal Code for torture fail to reflect the gravity of the crime and fall far short of the requirements of the United Nations Convention Against Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which Turkey ratified in August 1988. For example, the penalty for writing a poem critical of the State exceeds the penalty for torture, unless the torture results in death or permanent disability.
The report mentions two reforms recently proposed by the Turkish government concerning incommunicado detention, but fails to discuss fully the inadequacy of these proposals. The report states that the effect of an October clarification of a Prime Ministry circular ordering prosecutors to allow detainees immediate access to legal counsel has been unclear. Turkish human rights advocates and lawyers, however, contend that the clarification of the circular has had little or no effect. Although some lawyers in Istanbul have been permitted to see clients in police custody, none of them were allowed to be present during their clients' interrogation. In other areas of Turkey, Turkish lawyers report that attempts made by lawyers to see clients are almost always denied.
The report also notes that in September, the Turkish Council of Ministers introduced a bill to reduce the period a suspect could be detained prior to formal arraignment from a maximum of 15 days to a maximum of 10 days. The report fails to state that the bill does not appear to alter legislation still in effect pursuant to which the maximum period of detention can be doubled under certain circumstances. If detainees continue to be held incommunicado, even the shortest period permitted under the new legislation violates recognized international and regional standards. For example, the United Nations Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons Under Any Form of Detention or Imprisonment, Principle 15, states that communication of the detained or imprisoned person with the outside world "shall not be denied for more than a matter of days." The European Commission of Human Rights has held that denying detainees access to their spouses for a period of 45 hours violated their right to family under the European Convention of Human Rights, a treaty to which Turkey is a party.
With respect to Turkish prisons, the report correctly notes that prisoners have been beaten by Jandarma and guards, and that two prisoners participating in a hunger strike recently died. The report does not mention, however, that 2,000 inmates in 16 prisons joined that hunger strike to protest prison conditions, that it was only one of many hunger strikes in 1989, and that conditions in Turkish
229
Turkey
prisons are generally cruel and inhuman. According to the Turkish Human Rights Association, not one prison in Turkey meets the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and related recommendations. In August, a report released by Helsinki Watch documented serious problems in Turkish prisons, including: gross overcrowding, inadequate ventilation, oppressive cold or heat, rat and insect infestation, inadequate and inedible food, poor medical care, discrimination against political prisoners and pervasive corruption among prison staff.
In its section on denial of the right to fair public trials, the report correctly notes that trials often drag on for years and that the defendant is frequently imprisoned during this period. It does not mention, however, other difficulties in obtaining a fair public trial, such as the problem with the independence of the judiciary. Judges in non-military courts are appointed, promoted, transferred and dismissed by the Supreme Council of Judges and Public Prosecutors, a group of 12 appointed by the Turkish President. The Minister of Justice is president of the Council and functions as its secretariat. According to Turkish lawyers and academics, he is able to influence prosecutors and judges through this position. Similarly, military judges are appointed and dismissed by the Minister of Defense, acting in consultation with the Chief of the General Staff. In practice, the Turkish government has transferred to less influential courts, without explanation, some judges who have voted to convict police officers of torture.
The report does not mention that lawyers who defend political prisoners have been harassed and that their work has been impeded by the government. Most lawyers interviewed by a delegation from the Association of the Bar of the City of New York who had defended individuals charged with political crimes in Diyarbakir, a town located in one of the eight provinces still under a state of emergency, had been detained and tortured. As a result, the number of lawyers who continue to represent those charged with such crimes in that area has declined, and, according to local lawyers, only 20% of those charged with political crimes in Diyarbakir are represented by counsel.
The report also does not mention that a defendant's right to prepare a defense is limited by both Turkish law and practice. Turkish law generally does not permit defense lawyers to see the government's investigative files before the start of trial. Moreover,
230
Turkey
defense lawyers have complained that prosecutors do not permit them sufficient access to their clients prior to the start of trial.
Additionally, the report does not state that statements extracted under torture are routinely admitted into evidence. In July, for example, the Ankara military court sentenced seven people to death, 39 to life imprisonment, and 346 to prison sentences from 2 years and 9 months to 20 years in a mass trial of over 700 alleged members of Devrimci Yol (Revolutionary Path), an illegal organization. The defendants claim that the charges against them were based on confessions extracted under torture and that four had died as a result of torture used during the investigation. Amnesty International had stated throughout the lengthy trial that there were credible reports that statements extracted under torture had been presented to the court.
With respect to freedom of speech and press, the report correctly notes that prosecutors continue to aggressively apply laws restricting freedom of speech, but understates the extent to which they do so. Although the report cites one example of a journalist who had been prosecuted under laws restricting freedom of speech, the Turkish English language newspaper, Dateline Turkey, reported that 183 criminal cases had been brought against nearly 400 journalists in 1989 and that court cases against the print media had reached a record level that year. The report fails to disclose that dozens of writers and publishers of books haven been detained, charged and tried for political writings during 1989.
In its section on the right to peacefully assemble and associate, the report correctly notes that assemblies are only permitted with prior approval from the authorities. It states that requests for such assemblies are "generally granted," but neglects to discuss the dozens of situations in which they were not, and the manner in which police have broken up peaceful demonstrations and detained demonstrators, sometimes for months.
The report does not discuss the harassment of human rights activists; at least 62 such activists were harassed in 1989, including many who were detained, charged and prosecuted. In April, for example, the Turkish government refused to grant permission to TAYAD, a prisoners' families group, to hold a panel discussion on Turkey's recent ratification of the United Nations Convention Against Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
231
Turkey
Punishment. When people who had not heard that the event had been cancelled arrived, the police dispersed them with force.
Similarly, the Turkish government refused to grant labor organizations the right to celebrate Labor Day, May 1. Several organizations celebrated the day anyway and on May 1, over 1,000 people were detained for participating in those demonstrations. Only 300 of those were ever brought before a prosecutor. Most were detained for 15 days.
One individual was shot to death during that demonstration, allegedly by a plainclothes police officer. Several journalists who attended the funeral of that individual were assaulted and beaten by the police. When they complained to the Turkish government, then Prime Minister Turgut Ozal told them to "learn karate."
The report states that Turkish citizens have the right and ability to change their government peacefully, within certain legal constraints. It neglects to mention, however, that many political groups, including the Turkish communist party, which has never used or adopted a policy of violence, are considered illegal and their members prosecuted. In September, for example, a group of exiles returned to Turkey after publicly announcing their intention to do so and declaring that they were members of the United Turkish Communist Party. They were detained upon arrival.
The report states that Turkish citizens are generally free to travel abroad. Reliable estimates indicate, however, that as many as 370,000 Turkish citizens have been denied passports since the military coup of 1980. Human rights advocates still maintain that anyone for whom the police have a file has great difficulty obtaining a passport.
The report mentions that Turkey has received 35,000 Iraqi Kurdish refugees in detention camps in the southeast. It does not mention, however, that 20,000 of those refugees are said to be children and that international and domestic sources have questioned the conditions in those camps. According to the President of the Diyarbakir Medical Association, the refugees are forbidden to leave the camps without permission. Twenty-eight to 34 people reside in houses measuring approximately 700 square feet (60 to 65 square meters). The camps lack sufficient running water, and diseases, such as malaria and typhus, are widespread. Between 250 and 300 individuals, including children, are said to have died during the 1988-89 winter from disease and cold weather.
232
Turkey
As the report correctly notes, Turkey has declined to grant refugee status to these Kurds. The report neglects to mention that Turkey has also declined assistance from the International Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Observers claim that Turkey does not wish to acknowledge the Iraqi Kurds as refugees because it does not wish to accord them the rights available to such refugees under relevant international agreements, including the right to schooling in Kurdish.
In its section on discrimination based on race, sex and religion, the report seriously understates the extent to which Turkey continues to prosecute those with Kurdish affiliations and to confiscate materials making reference to Kurds. The report merely notes that there have been some "instances of the arrest of entertainers for singing songs or performing in Kurdish." It makes no mention of the dozens of editors, lawyers, professionals and even school children detained and arrested in 1989 for publicly discussing what has been referred to as the "Kurdish issue," and does not mention the numerous publications that have been confiscated for the same reason.
In April, for example, a 17-year-old schoolgirl from Konya was imprisoned for two months for stating that she was of Kurdish origin. Similarly, on July 23, Dr. Nuray Ozkan was detained at Diyarbakir and taken to Ankara where she was charged on July 24 with promulgating "separatist propaganda" in an address on the situation of Kurdish women.
Likewise, Husnu Ondul, a lawyer and contributor to Toplumsal Kurtulus was indicted for an article he wrote in the February issue of the journal about southeast Turkey where most of the Kurdish population lives. The editor of that journal, Ilhan Akalin, is currently on trial for spreading communist and separatist propaganda in two unsigned articles appearing in the journal, one of which discussed the establishment of a Kurdish PEN center.
According to Index on Censorship, the travel guide books Insight Guide to Istanbul and Insight Guide to Turkey were both banned because of references to the Kurds. An issue of the West German publication Geo dealing with Turkey was confiscated in April as "separatist propaganda" because it contained a map of Kurdistan. Moreover, Turkey has confiscated Amnesty International publications critical of the government. Anyone bringing these reports into Turkey faces up to a year in jail or a fine.
233
Turkey
Lastly, the report states that "[t]here are no restrictions placed on representatives of private organizations who wish to monitor human rights in Turkey" and that such groups "are free to speak with private citizens." It does not mention that when the delegation from the Association of the Bar of the City of New York visited Diyarbakir, a town in the Kurdish region of Turkey in June, it was followed continually by secret security policemen, who apparently wished to intimidate those who might wish to speak with the delegation. The policemen never formally announced themselves to the delegation and formal protests to the Turkish government and the United States government went unanswered.
The report also does not mention that at least one other individual sent by the State Department to speak to human rights advocates in Ankara and Istanbul was also followed by the secret security police. Although he ultimately gave his speech, he only did so because he was informed that Turkish law permitted the police to require recording of public speeches. At one point, the police refused to let him give a scheduled speech because the equipment with which they intended to record his speech had broken.
234
