 TURKEY
 Turkey has a military Government which is in the process of
 restoring parliamentary democracy. On November 7, 1982,
 Turkish voters approved by a vast majority a new Constitution
 which was submitted to a national referendum by the ruling
 National Security Council. The new Constitution provides for
 basic human rights, many of which are presently curtailed.
 The military commanders assumed power in a bloodless coup in
 September 1980 after a long period of mounting terrorist
 violence from both the extreme right and left, and political
 stalemate. Following the imposition of pre-existing martial
 law regulations over the entire country on September 12, 1980,
 the military authorities apprehended members and supporters of
 the heavily armed terrorist groups--more than 700,000 weapons,
 worth more than a billion dollars, were seized or collected--
 which had been responsible for more than 20 murders daily in
 Turkey. The Government of Turkey has acknowledged that there
 have been cases of torture of those arrested under martial
 law. The government has prosecuted a number of security
 personnel for inflicting torture.
 The military Government also abolished Parliament and banned
 all political activity. In the fall of 1981, Head of State
 General Evren convoked a civilian Consultative Assembly to draw
 up a new Constitution and to function as a legislative body.
 In his 1982 New Year's message President Evren announced a
 timetable for a return to parliamentary Government, stating
 that following the November 1982 constitutional referendum,
 elections for Parliament would be held in the fall of 1983 or
 spring of 1984. The vote approving the Constitution in
 November also endorsed General Evren, whose candidacy was
 unopposed, as President for a seven year term. The next step
 is the enactment of laws for the formation of new political
 parties and for the election of Parliament. The new
 Constitution prohibits political activity by the former leaders
 of major political parties for a period of ten years, and bans
 members of the last parliament from forming new parties or
 holding any executive office in the new parties for a period of
 five years.
 Since the September 12, 1980, military takeover, there has been
 a significant reduction in human rights violations due to
 terrorist activity. While some 32,893 acts of political
 violence occurred between December 1978 and the military
 takeover of September 12, 1980, only 6,959 such incidents
 occurred between September 12, 1980, and September 12, 1982.
 In January 1980, Turkey's last civilian Government launched an
 economic stabilization program in response to the severe
 economic crisis. Later endorsed by the military Government,
 the program involved a realistic exchange rate for the Turkish
 lira, tight credit and monetary controls to fight inflation,
 and heavy emphasis on exports. As a result of the program,
 inflation has been reduced from over 100 percent to about 30
 percent, and Turkey's economy has pulled out of its downward
 spiral and resumed a moderate rate of growth--a 4.4 Gross
 National Product (GNP) growth is expected for 1982.
 Martial law continues in effect, giving martial law commanders
 broad powers over the press and other media, trade unions, and
 
 
 1008
 the right to assemble. Political freedom has been heavily
 curtailed, and several individuals, including former Prime
 Minister Bulent Ecevit, have been arrested and brought to trial
 for illegal political activity. Following the publication of
 the draft Constitution in July, however, both the press and
 most public speakers were able to exercise considerable freedom
 in criticizing the draft and the work of the Consultative
 Assembly until shortly before the referendum, when public
 criticism of the Provisional (i.e., transitional) Articles, but
 not of the draft Constitution, was prohibited. Political
 activity is banned until the enactment of new legislation on
 political parties and elections.
 In light of the Turkish military intervention in 1974 and the
 continued presence of Turkish armed forces in northern Cyprus,
 Turkey plays a role in the human rights situation on that
 island. The report relating to Cyprus addresses this question.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There are no reports of the Turkish Government killing its
 opponents, except in the course of fire fights between security
 forces and armed terrorist groups, and, very rarely, the
 killing of a prisoner while attempting escape. Reports of
 dying while in custody will be treated below.
 Politically motivated killings by private groups were very
 common before the military Government came, to power in 1980.
 Such killings have now virtually stopped. Government
 statistics indicate that from December 26, 1978, (when martial
 law was first imposed in some provinces), until the takeover on
 September 12, 1980, for example, 3,546 persons, including 164
 security officers and 146 terrorists, were killed. During the
 two years since the military takeover such deaths dropped to
 285 persons, including 72 security officers. During the past
 year, press reports indicate that violent clashes between
 security forces and armed terrorist groups and politically
 related killings have continued, but at a much reduced level.
 Specific numbers are unavailable, but the estimated number of
 deaths during the past year is 75. For instance, in May 1982 a
 professor in Diyarbakir was shot to death in his office, and in
 June, a Palestinian of Jordanian nationality resident in Ankara
 was shot to death, in cases likely reflecting political
 motivation.
 Armenian terrorist organizations have been active in killings
 both inside and outside Turkey. On August 10, two terrorists
 attacked persons waiting in the departure lounge at Ankara's
 Esenboga airport. That attack resulted in ten dead, including
 one American citizen. Lethal attacks against Turkish diplomats
 abroad--more than 20 Turkish diplomats have perished since
 1973--increased in 1982, claiming the lives of 5 diplomats,
 -including two in the United States.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no disappearances caused by eithercGovernment
 or opposition elements.
 
 
 1009
 c. Torture
 The Turkish criminal code and the new Constitution, as well as
 that of 1961, forbid torture and prescribe severe punishment
 for violators. In March 1982, the Turkish Government issued a
 statement that "The September 12 (military) administration had
 been careful to stay within the rules of law. In spite of
 this, from time to time, instances of torture occur. The
 Government of the Republic of Turkey never approved of
 torturing those arrested and closely investigates every
 instance."
 Some light is cast on the incidence of torture and the
 Government's efforts to halt it by the most recent Turkish
 Government report on anti-terrorist activities, issued in
 October 1982, which states that 540 allegations concerning
 torture or mistreatment of prisoners have come under
 investigation since the September 1980 military takeover
 through October 4, 1982; of these, 316 cases are continuing
 under investigation; 171 cases have been dismissed as
 groundless; 37 cases have been referred to the courts for
 prosecution; 16 cases have been completed. Seventeen persons
 are under arrest in such cases; 76 persons are at liberty
 pending completion of their cases; 34 have been acquitted; and
 15 have been convicted. Further, according to the report,
 investigation of claims that 204 persons have died of torture
 between September 12, 1980, and October 4, 1982, shows four
 persons to have died as result of torture and 70 deaths from
 other causes. Investigations and judicial proceedings in 117
 cases concerning these allegations are under way, and cases
 either for torture or mistreatment of prisoners have been
 opened against 108 security personnel. The present Government
 is believed to be the first in Turkish history publicly to
 admit that torture--a practice that existed under past civilian
 regimes--had occurred and to punish offenders. A recent
 example of government efforts to punish those involved in
 torture was the sentencing, announced in early December, of
 five Izmir policemen to 26-month terms.
 In January 1982, Amnesty International issued a report that 70
 persons had died from torture since the advent of the military
 regime. In March, the Turkish Government replied to Amnesty's
 presentation, admitting that 15 persons had died of torture and
 accounting for the others on the Amnesty International list.
 According to the Government statement, eleven cases in
 connection with the matter were under way while three cases,
 resulting in prison terms for nine security officers, had been
 completed. In a related development, the Minister of Justice
 announced reforms in penal administration, including special
 training for guards and other prison personnel.
 Allegations of torture at Istanbul's Metris military prison in
 June 1982 and elsewhere, continue to be made. Amnesty
 International, the Council of Europe, and others have expressed
 concern over such reports. Torture does not seem to be tacitly
 condoned by the authorities. Turkish authorities have
 continued to investigate allegations of torture and publish
 their updated findings.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The 1982 Constitution closely follows the 1961 Consti:tution in
 stipulating that, "no punishment or ill-treatment incompatible
 
 
 1010
 �withihuman dignity shall be inflicted." There appears to be no
 different treatment accorded prisoners on the basis of the type
 of crimes committed, or on the basis of social class, race,
 sex, orreligion. According to reports in June 1982, several
 hundred-prisoners, both rightest and leftist, at the Metris
 .militaryprison in .Istanbul went on a hunger strike to protest
 torture, mistreatment,.and bad prison conditions.
 Prisons in rurkey are inadequate. The continuation of the
 counter-terrorism campaign may add to this difficulty.
 Official Government statistics indicate the dimensions of the
 extra demand.on.Turkish prison capacity caused by this
 campa-ign. According to one report, the normal capacity of
 Turkish prisons is said to be about 50,000, while they now
 contain-a -totaL inmate population of 82,000. The Minister of
 -Justice has. reported efforts to alleviate overcrowding and
 other inadequacies of the prison system, in part through the
 construction of -additional penitentiaries.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest-and Imprisonment
 -The new Constitution.provides-that a person taken into custody
 must be-charged:,within 48 hours, but this period may be
 extended under astate of emergency or martial law. Martial
 law, regul-ations presently in effect provide that a person may
 be detained without charge for a period of 30 days, which can
 be extended to 45 days. Previously the maximum period was 90
 days. A recent report states that 56,486 persons have been
 detained-for violating martial law provisions since the
 beginning of martial law in 1978. Of these, 52,788 were
 reported arraigned on charges, in Turkish legal usage
 "arrested"; 26,399 have been sentenced; 17,540 are currently
 under arrest with their cases at various'stages in the judicial
 process; and 6,512 are now serving sentences. Turkish
 Government statistics indicate that nearly 37,000 have been
 arrested since the military takeover; this number includes an
 estimated 7,000 arrested during the past year. Most of the
 arrests are reportedly for terrorism or support of terrorist or
 extremist organizations.
 While Turkish law has no explicit provision for habeas corpus,
 the rights of the arrested person in the new Constitution,
 including the right to arraignment, trial, or release within a
 reasonable time, and the notification of next of kin, and
 indemnification in the event of violation of these guarantees,
 serve similar functions. As in the old Constitution, the new
 Constitution permits investigatory detention in certain cases.
 Article 19 states: "Individuals, against whom there exists a
 strong presumption of guilt, can be arrested by court order for
 the purposes of preventing escape, or destruction or distortion
 of evidence, as well as in similar cases which necessitate
 detention, and in other circumstances specified by law.
 Apprehending an individual without a court order may be
 resorted to only in 'flagrante delicto' or in cases where delay
 is likely to thwart justice; the conditions for such detentions
 shall be stipulated by law." Recent Turkish Government
 statistics indicate that about 500 persons are under detention,
 that is, being held pending arraignment, subject to the 45-day
 maximum period of detention.
 f. Denial of Pair Public Trial
 The 1982 Constitution, like the 1961 Constitution, spells out
 every person's right to a speedy trial. Several other
 
 
 1011
 protections for the individual in the judicial process are
 stipulated. Over most of the past year, trials have been
 conducted under the regulations based on the old Constitution
 and martial law provisions. Trials in civil and military
 courts generally are conducted under the same procedural
 rules. Trials are open, and defendants are allowed to have
 lawyers of their own choice. Convictions in either system may
 be appealed, to civil appeals courts and military appeals
 courts, respectively. Some appeals, as in capital cases, are
 automatic and go through several instances, including the high
 court of military appeals and the civilian supreme court of
 appeals, through the Consultative Assembly and finally the
 National Security Council. Some martial law cases have been
 reversed on appeal. Under the 1982 Constitution, the President
 will not receive appeals, but the Parliament will review all
 death sentences. The implementation of an amendment to the
 1971 martial law act, providing that only martial law court
 sentences of three years or more may be appealed, had drawn
 protest. The minimum length of sentence subject to appeal has
 now been reduced to six months. Under martial law, all persons
 accused of terrorism are tried in military courts. Martial law
 court judges normally have law degrees and observe the same
 professional standards as their civilian colleagues. They may
 not be transferred at the discretion of military commanders.
 Under both the old and new Constitutions, the court system is
 independent. The high board of judges and public prosecutors
 appointed by the President selects judges and prosecutors for
 the higher courts and oversees those of the lower court
 system. Reports that the military court of appeals has
 overturned convictions on grounds of improper process in at
 least two cases due to improperly obtained confessions supports
 the impression that the court system follows due process.
 Judges have also disqualified themselves in some cases.
 Turkish military prosecutors have sought the death penalty in
 hundreds of cases. However, according to a recent Government
 report, out of 26,000 sentencings since the imposition of
 martial law in 1978, there have been only 143 death sentences.
 Of. these, 21 executions, all involving convictions for murder,
 reportedly have been carried out.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Immunity of domicile, guaranteed under the old Constitution,
 has been retained under Article 21 of the new Constitution.
 Searches require a court judgement or, in emergency situations,
 action by proper authorities. Martial law regulations
 authorize the search of private homes without a warrant in the
 interest of national security. There have been no reports of
 widespread abuse of this authority or allegations of widespread
 electronic surveillance.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Article 26 of the new Constitution guarantees the right to
 express and disseminate thought in any medium, but continued a
 long-standing restriction by excluding "banned languages"
 (Kurdish) from protections afforded these rights. The new
 Constitution also provides that "the press is free and any form
 of censorship is prohibited."
 Martial law has significantly limited the exercise of freedom
 
 
 1012
 of speech and the press. September 1980 amendments to the
 Martial Law Act of 1971 authorize martial law commanders to
 exercise control over all publications and communications
 carried out orally, in writing, in pictures, recordings,
 letters, telegrams, and all other postal material. A September
 1981 amendment requires martial law authorities' permission for
 new publications. Commentary on security operations against
 terrorists, political or labor leaders on trial or under
 investigation, and, with Martial Law Decree Number 52, Turkey's
 past and future politics, was forbidden. This stricture was
 modified by Decree Number 70 in mid-1982 to permit comment on
 the draft Constitution. After the publication of the draft in
 July, both the press and public speakers exercised considerable
 freedom in criticising the draft and the Consultative Assembly
 debates on it. In October, however, the National Security
 Council decreed that neither the Provisional Articles nor
 pronouncements on the Constitution by the Head of State were to
 be criticized.
 Prior censorship of the media has not been imposed; rather, the
 press has exercised a system of self-censorship including
 guidelines from and consultations with the authorities. The
 state-owned Turkish radio and television broadcasting system,
 under the control of a military officer, has a nominally
 independent editorial policy. Some observers suggest it has
 avoided censorship through careful handling of the news.
 In general, publications of the extreme right and left have
 been most affected by martial law. National publications have
 been allowed considerable freedom in some areas of news
 coverage, although they, too, have suffered temporary
 suspensions of publication and occasional arrests and trials of
 writers or editors. Publications may be suspended by local
 martial law commanders, subject to subsequent approval by a
 judge. In'March 1982, for example, "Arayis," a magazine
 founded by former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, was closed. In
 August 1982, the newspaper "Gunes," which had just begun
 publication in March, was suspended for one week.
 In 1982 the daily "Tercuman's" columnist Nazli Ilicak served a
 three-month sentence for violation of Martial Law Decree 52.
 Ecevit served three brief sentences during 1982 for publishing
 critical articles in Western European media. Earlier this year
 the journal "Aydinlik's" publisher, Leyla Yurdakul, was
 sentenced to two years for "insulting the armed forces." A
 reporter for the daily "Milli Gazete" was given a jail sentence
 on charges of "advocating a religious regime." A number of
 small, mostly weekly newspapers published by sympathizers of
 extremist groups have been closed. These include the leftist
 newspaper "Politika" which was accused of publishing communist
 propaganda.
 A number of books have been removed from bookstores, probably
 for the political or religious ideology they contained or
 espoused. Cases of prohibition of entry of foreign published
 matter have been reported.
 Turkish institutions of higher education are operated by the
 State. They had become highly politicized in the period before
 1980 and were the scene of numerous terrorist acts. Since 1980
 the authorities have imposed closer, more centralized control
 over these institutions under the new Council on Higher
 Education. The new Constitution forbids the involvement of
 faculty in political parties. The power to fire-and transfer
 
 
 1013
 teachers has been enhanced and used in a number of cases.
 However, tenure at and above the level of associate professor
 exists now as well as before 1980. There are no reports of
 widespread violations of academic freedom under these powers,
 although it was reported in November 1982 that nearly 200
 university teachers and research personnel have not had their
 contracts renewed for various reasons.
 There have been no allegations of widespread electronic
 surveillance. Nor have there been any reports of mail
 censorship, operations of informer networks, or other
 widespread surreptitious means of political intimidation.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under martial law, permission must be obtained for marches and
 rallies. Meetings of associations, which were at first banned,
 are permitted on approval by local martial law authorities for
 those associations, including service clubs and professional
 associations, "which work within their statutes and.. .are for
 the good of the community." Political parties have been
 abolished, although new ones are to be formed after the
 adoption of the Political Parties Law early in 1983.
 Martial law authorities have the power to prohibit strikes, to
 impose a permit requirement for unions to strike, and also to
 prevent worker boycotts, slowdowns, or employer lockouts.
 The new Constitution, in Articles 51-54, guarantees the right
 of workers to form unions and the right of employers to form
 associations, the right of the unions to engage in collective
 bargaining with the employers, and the right to strike.
 Article 68 guarantees the right to establish political
 parties. Article 33 guarantees the right of association.
 Article 34 grants the right of assembly and to engage in
 peaceful demonstration marches without prior authorization.
 Labor unions are not permitted to engage in political
 activities, receive support from abroad, nor financially
 support political parties.
 The major centrist labor confederation, Turk-Is, has continued
 in operation under martial law. Some of the features of the
 draft Constitution which Turk-Is argued hampered trade union
 activity were deleted or changed by the National Security
 Council prior to the referendum. Such deleted features
 included the legalization of lock-out, a ban on payroll
 deduction of union dues, and certain limitations on the right
 to strike.
 The far rightist labor confederation, MISK (Confederation of
 Unions of Nationalist Workers), and the far leftist labor
 confederation, DISK (The Confederation of Revolutionary Trade
 Unions), have been closed down since the military takeover,
 their assets taken under supervision, and their leaders
 arrested. While most of the MISK leaders have since been
 released, the DISK President and fifty-one other leaders of
 DISK were put on trial in December 1981 for seeking to
 overthrow the social and constitutional order by force. The
 prosecution is seeking the death penalty. Former Istanbul
 Mayor Ahmet Isvan was subsequently added to the docket. In
 September 1982, nineteen more defendants were added from a DISK
 advisory body known as the "DISK Research Institute"; lesser
 sentences will be sought for some of these latter defendants.
 
 
 1014
 Another trial which has drawn international attention is that
 of the 44 administrators of the leftist "Peace Association",
 who have also been accused of working for the overthrow of the
 state and society and of supporting terrorism, on the basis of
 links.with the communist-front World Peace Council. To date 39
 Peace Association members have been apprehended and brought to
 trial. The prosecution asked the death penalty for all the
 defendants. Some of the defendents were released in January
 1983.
 As of January 1983, all Peace Association defendants, eight
 DISK defendants, and defendants in other trials, including that
 of the Turkish Labor Party, have been released from custody
 while their trials continue.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Turkey has been a secular state since Ataturk led the struggle
 for Turkey's independence following the collapse of the Ottoman
 Empire during World War I. One of the purposes of the 1980
 military intervention in politics was to preserve Turkey's
 secular character. The new Constitution states that "every
 individual has freedom of conscience, religious faith, and
 opinion." The Constitution, however, makes religious
 instruction, under the supervision of the state, compulsory
 except for non-Muslims. While Turkey is predominantly a Muslim
 country, there are Greek Orthodox, Armenian Orthodox, Jewish,
 and Catholic minorities. There are also Islamic minority
 religious groups. Alevis, or Shi'ites, are said to comprise a
 large fraction of the population. For the Greeks and
 Armenians, further guarantees of religious and other minority
 rights are contained in the Lausanne Treaty of 1923.
 There have been complaints among minority religous groups
 concerning taxation, slow administrative procedures, and petty
 harassment by local officials in matters relating to schools.
 The religious minorities, however, have reportedly obtained
 relief from the five percent Muslim foundations tax. Armenian
 terrorist activities may have heightened anxiety among the
 Armenian community. Enhanced security measures to protect the
 Armenians were reported to have been taken following the recent
 Armenian terrorist incidents.
 Available evidence does not appear to support allegations of
 official persecution of non-Turkish religious minorities.
 There have been complaints, but relations between the higher
 authorities and the minority communities are generally good,
 and appear to have improved since the military takeover because
 of the better security situation.
 Among Muslim groups, the minority that seeks the overthrow of
 the secular state was hit hard by martial law. Its political
 arm, the National Salvation Party, was dissolved. In 1982,
 there have been reports of arrests among right-wing Muslim
 groups who reportedly oppose the new Constitution on grounds it
 may lead to the formation of an "Atheist" state. According to
 reports, other conservative groups have had their books
 confiscated, but the balance of evidence is that the state has
 sought to conciliate rather than persecute them. Dervish
 orders were briefly prohibited in the twenties, but were soon
 allowed to meet privately. In the seventies they were again
 allowed to give public performances.
 
 
 1015
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Turkey continues to accept refugees from Iran and Afghanistan,
 both for transit to resettlement elsewhere and for permanent
 settlement in Turkey.  More than 4,000 Afghan farmers and
 herdsmen were brought by the Government of Turkey from refugee
 camps in Pakistan in August 1982. Turkey has assumed
 responsibility for providing basic literacy education,
 vocational training, shelter, and economic assistance to help
 them reestablish their lives outside their former homeland.
 There is freedom of movement within Turkey, subject only to
 martial law restrictions. Present law provides for denial of
 passports to persons who have been accused of crimes against
 the "moral personality" or secular foundations of the state and
 whose departure would be detrimental to state security.
 Article 23 of the new Constitution guarantees freedom of travel
 and residence, subject to the purposes of investigation,
 prosecution, or prevention of crime and orderly social,
 economic, and urban development. Similarly, the right not to
 be deported, not to be denied entry to the country, nor to be
 extradited, is guaranteed to citizens who shall also enjoy the
 right to travel abroad.
 Article 62 of the new Constitution guarantees the rights of
 persons living abroad and their families to return home.
 Based on amendments to the 1964 citizenship law, several
 persons abroad who are wanted in Turkey to face legal charges
 have been deprived of their citizenship for failure to return
 to the country within a prescribed period. Article 66 of the
 new Constitution guarantees that no Turk may be deprived of
 citizenship except for actions incompatible with loyalty to the
 state and to the nation, and that all such deprivations shall
 be subject to legal recourse.
 Because of foreign exchange shortages, foreign travel for
 tourism has been limited to one trip abroad every year.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Turkey is in transition from military rule to parliamentary
 democracy. The Government is directed by the Chiefs of the
 Armed Forces, the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Gendarmerie who
 constitute the National Security Council (NSC) under the
 chairmanship of the Chief of the Turkish General Staff, General
 Kenan Evren. General Evren became President of the Republic
 with the vote for the Constitution in the November 7
 referendum. The NSC is scheduled to continue in existence
 until the first elections, at which time it will become a
 "Presidential Council." The civilian bureaucracy is headed by
 a Prime Minister, retired Admiral Bulend Ulusu, and a civilian
 Council of Ministers.
 The Government began the process of return to democracy with
 the referendum on a new Constitution in November 1982. Prior
 to this, an appointed Consultative Assembly, which had the duty
 of drawing up the draft Constitution, was convoked in late
 1981. It shares the legislative function with the NSC. The
 NSC promulgated the "law of the constituent assembly" in June
 1981. That law provided for a constituent assembly consisting
 of a 160-member "Consultative Assembly" and the five-member NBC
 
 
 1016
 acting as the higher chamber. The NSC selected 120 members of
 the CA from lists of candidates put forward by the provincial
 governors and directly appointed the remaining 40 members.
 Membership in the Assembly required that a candidate not have
 been a member of a political party at the time of the military
 takeover. In September 1982, the Government held a nationwide
 voter registration for the constitutional referendum. The
 referendum was held on November 7, and the new Constitution was
 approved by approximately 92 percent of the voters. All
 citizens over 21 years of age were required to register and to
 vote in the referendum under penalty of losing the right to
 vote or to run for election for a period of five years. Over
 90 percent of eligible voters participated in the referendum.
 Contrary to some Western news reports, persons failing to vote
 were not subject to imprisonment.
 The 1961 Constitution created a strong Parliament and a weak
 President. Under this Constitution deadlock in Parliament was
 experienced. Proportional representation had the effect of
 making it impossible for either of the two major parties to put
 together a majority without small extremist parties, particu-
 larly of the right.
 The new Constitution greatly strengthens the Executive and
 strengthens the larger parties by altering the previous system
 of proportional representation in the Parliament. Laws
 governing elections and the formation of parties are to be
 drawn up prior to national parliamentary elections.
 Temporary Articles of the Constitution, however, stringently
 limit political participation by politicians influential in the
 former parties. They will ban participation in party politics
 for most former party leaders for a period of ten years.
 According to one estimate, this ban covers 116 persons.
 Similarly, persons who were members of Parliament on January 1,
 1980, will not be able to form new parties or to hold party
 office for a period of five years, but may run for Parliament.
 Article 68 of the new Constitution forbids political parties to
 establish auxiliary bodies such as youth or women's
 organizations. It also prohibits political party membership by
 civil servants, students, members of the armed forces, and
 judges.
 Until the NSC's schedule for the return to democracy is
 completed, major restrictions on political participation remain
 in force. Under NSC Decree Number 52 of June 1981, "all
 political activities at every level," including debates on
 martial law command decisions, meetings, demonstrations, and
 the writing of articles by persons who were members of
 Parliament at the time of the takeover are forbidden. The
 abolition of political parties continues in effect until the
 passage of the new laws on political parties, expected in early
 1983.
 Former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit has twice been sentenced to
 jail, and once acquitted, on charges of violating martial law
 regulations by giving interviews or publishing articles abroad
 on forbidden political topics. Former Prime Minister Suleyman
 Demirel has been investigated, and exonerated, of election law
 irregularities. Trials of other former politicians continue,
 including, prominently, Alparslan Turkes, leader of the extreme
 rightist Nationalist Action Party and 673 of his colleagues in
 the party and its affiliates, on charges of trying to undermine
 
 
 1017
 the state through acts of violence and assassination, and
 Necmettin Erbakan, head of the religious National Salvation
 Party, and 33 of his followers, for trying to change the
 secular nature of the Turkish state. According to a recent
 press report, 203 former members of Parliament have been
 subject to investigation or prosecution. Of these, 12,
 including three former Ministers, are imprisoned. Another 160
 are at liberty pending completion of investigation or
 prosecution of their cases.
 Equal rights for women, including political rights, was a
 fundamental element in the transformation of Turkish life
 enacted by Ataturk. Women in Turkish society, although subject
 to a certain amount of social and economic discrimination, have
 the same political rights as men. Prior to the takeover, women
 held ministerial positions and seats in the Parliament. 'No
 woman is a member of Turkey's present Cabinet. However, five
 women are members of the Consultative Assembly, and a woman
 holds the position of Director of the legal section of the
 Assembly's executive office.
 Members of the non-Muslim minorities face no legal restrictions
 on political participation; there are some Armenians who occupy
 high judicial posts. The large Kurdish minority can
 participate freely as long as they accept a Turkish national
 identity; Kurdish-language publication and autonomist movements
 are forbidden.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Government of Turkey permits governmental and
 non-governmental foreign organizations and representatives
 concerned with human rights to make visits to Turkey. Several
 such visits have taken place. During the past year, these have
 included the Council of Europe, the International Labor
 Organization, the Western European Union, the North Atlantic
 Assembly, and a staff delegation of the United States Joint
 Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
 The Council of Europe sent observers to the Turkish con-
 stitutional referendum on November 7, although General Evren
 had stated in February 1982, following a Council resolution
 critical of Turkey, that no further Council delegations would
 be officially received. It should be noted that a decree also
 issued at that time stipulated that all invitations from
 Turkish organizations to official or unofficial foreign
 representatives or delegations were subject to permission by
 martial law authorities, and that contacts between such foreign
 representatives or delegations could be conducted only by
 obtaining permission of the martial law authorities. In a
 speech shortly before the referendum, Prime Minister Bulend
 Ulusu stated that, while no international organizations or
 foreign press representatives had been invited to observe the
 referendum, they were free to come, and that all necessary
 arrangements would be made to facilitate their visit.
 Foreign observers who came to Turkey to observe the referendum,
 including Council of Europe representatives, United Kingdom
 parliamentarians, and foreign correspondents reportedly were
 given full cooperation by government officials. Reports issued
 
 
 1018
 by such observers stated that the referendum was fair and
 honest.
 Representatives of foreign organizations and delegations have
 apparently encountered little difficulty in making contact in
 Turkey with officials and other persons whom they have wished
 to meet. An exception is persons in prison. Turkish
 regulations permit such meetings only for the prisoners' family
 members and attorneys.
 The Council of Europe and the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions adopted resolutions critical of Turkey's
 human rights performance during 1982. In July. France, the
 Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden brought a human rights
 complaint against Turkey before the Council of Europe's
 European Human Rights Commission. The examination of that
 complaint, which normally would have begun within three months,
 has been postponed until January 1983, at Turkey's request.
 Amnesty International has a section in Turkey which, like other
 associations was closed at the time of the military takeover.
 The chapter has apparently not requested permission to reopen
 and has remained inactive. In September, Amnesty International
 reported that it had received no response from the Turkish
 Government to its request to send a team to a military hospital
 to investigate reports that almost 100 Kurdish prisoners were
 in poor health. Other groups in Turkey speak out on human
 rights concerns, including, for example, the Adana Bar
 Association which called in January 1982 for the retention in
 the new Constitution of basic human rights guaranteed in the
 old Constitution, including the ban on torture.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Turkey in the late 1970's experienced severe economic
 problems. Essential imports, especially oil, could not be
 sustained as the country's balance of payments went deeply into
 the red. Inflation soared to over 100 percent, and real growth
 and income declined. In January 1980, Turkey's last civilian
 Government launched an economic program in conjunction with the
 IMP, World Bank, and the OECD aimed at a fundamental
 restructuring of Turkey's economy. That program, endorsed and
 reinforced by the current Government, has succeeded in lowering
 inflation from 120 percent to around 35 percent, in greatly
 expanding exports and in laying the foundation for sustained
 economic growth.
 GNP is again increasing, at about 4 percent this year. GNP per
 capita is $1,456 in 1980 dollars. However, serious problems
 remain. Domestic demand is flat. Unemployment, abetted by a
 high population growth rate, remains very high, and wages and
 salaries have not kept pace with inflation. Nonetheless,
 Turkish citizens are able to meet basic needs of nutrition,
 health, and education. Turkey enjoys self-sufficiency in food
 production, and generally produces a surplus for export.
 According to 1977 data, the ratio of available caloric supply
 relative to nutritional requirements is 131 percent. The
 percentage of the population with access to safe water is 75.
 Rapid and unplanned urban growth is a special problem for
 Turkey, whose population of 46,000,000 is increasing by an
 
 
 1019
 annual rate of 2.2 percent. The Government aims to achieve a
 better rural-urban balance by decentralizing industry and
 providing better social facilities in remote areas to stem the
 flood of young people to the big cities. At the same time, the
 Government continues to extend city services to those who
 migrate to the cities and settle in shanty-towns on the
 outskirts of the cities.
 In the area of health, a 1981 law requires physicians to serve
 two years in the developing parts of the country where there is
 a shortage of doctors. According to a 1981 estimate, there is
 a national average of one doctor for every 1,646 persons in
 Turkey. The number of doctors (specialists and practitioners)
 increased by 100 percent from 1967 to 1977. The number of
 registered nurses more than tripled during that period. Life
 expectancy at birth for the average Turk is 61.8 years. The
 infant mortality rate is 122 per 1000 live births, according to
 1980 statistics.
 Primary schooling is compulsory. Education through the high
 school level is free. University tuition is subsidized. There
 are, however, difficult entrance examinations for universities,
 since the number of applications greatly exceeds the present
 capacity of the 18 institutions of higher learning. In the
 decade of rapid development from 1965 to 1975, the rate of
 literacy increased from 48 percent to 60.3 percent and stands
 at 70 percent, according to government estimates. The
 Government's new literacy campaign had an enrollment in 1981 of
 1.2 million persons. The primary school enrollment ratio,
 defined as "students enrolled in primary education as a
 percentage of the population in the appropriate age group,"
 probably greatly exceeds the figure of 105 percent given in
 1978 statistics and means that older persons as well may be
 pursuing primary education. Even so, according to one
 estimate, about 50 percent of adult Turkish women and about 20
 percent of adult Turkish men are classified as illiterate.
 There is no known discrimination which prevents Turks of any
 particular background from gaining the fruits of their labors.
 Men and women have equal legal rights. Since the adoption of
 the Turkish civil code in 1926, Turks may have only one spouse
 at a time. Divorce is permitted, and women act as plaintiffs
 as often as men.
 Both men and women have access to the universities. Many women
 have become heads of departments and deans, and, in at least
 one case, rector of a university. They have entered the
 medical, legal, journalistic, engineering, banking, and other
 professions. Some have risen to high responsible positions and
 national prominence. The Turkish Government has integrated
 women into the police force and has just appointed its first
 woman ambassador abroad. Nevertheless, women are subject to
 social and cultural restraints which keep them from full
 equality. Such restraints are more pronounced in rural areas.
 
 
 1020
 U.S.VERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OSLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YTARS - AILLIVJS Of DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1930     1931     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..        198.1    701.0    301.1
 LOANS ................  123.0     66.0    100.0
 GRANTS ...............    75.1    135.0    201.1
 A.AID  .................  ..  196.0    700.0   .300.0
 LOANS ................... 123.3      66.0    100.0
 GRANTS................   75.0    134.0    200.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSST.),,,       193.0    VUO.O    300.0
 b.FOOJ FOR PEACE .......        0.1      0.0      0.1
 LOANS .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS... .............    0.1      0.0      0.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. 14 $-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 rAY..IN FOR.,CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TUTAL ..... ..       0.1      0.0      0.1
 E.RELIEF.C.OEV & WFP,         0.1      0.0      0.1
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 COTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      1.0      1.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS................     0.0      1.0      1.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS .........       0.0      1.0     .1.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...     .202.3    252.8    403.0
 LOANS .....  .....    ....,02.9   250.0    343.0
 GRANTS ..............      5.4      2.8     60.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        4.0      1.1     57.0
 B.CR6OIT SALES-F4S ....      2U2.9    250.0    343.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....         1.4      1.7     13.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTIER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. I MIL...       406.4    453.8    704.1
 LOANS ..............  .... 325.9   316.0    443.0
 GRANTS. ..............    80.5    137.8    261.1
 OTHER US LOANS .........         0.6      9.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.6      8.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE PROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1930     1981     1982     1946-82
 TOTAL........   514.1    377.3    712.1   4898.5
 IBRO             460.0    722.0    647.8   3762.2
 IFC                5.6     13.5     14.8    240.5
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    196.2
 l08                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               2.5      1.8      0.0     62.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.5     11.7
 EEC               46.0    135.0     49.0    525.0
 
 
 1021
