 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliament
 which elects the president. In the October parliamentary
 elections the center-right Correct Way Party (DYP) obtained a
 plurality of 27 percent of the national vote and its leader,
 Suleyman Demirel, formed a coalition government with the Social
 Democratic Populist Party (SHP).
 The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma
 (Gendarmerie) in the countryside are responsible for
 maintaining public order. Reflecting the concern within Turkey
 and internationally about the past actions of these security
 organs, Prime Minister Demirel arnounced his Government's
 commitment to establishing a state of law based upon human
 rights and democratic freedoms. Admitting that allegations
 about Turkey's use of torture had hurt its image, he called
 torture a crime against humanity and promised to bring an end
 to such charges. Within days of its formation, the new
 GoVernment appointed a State Minister for Human Rights and
 closed a prison where torture allegedly occurred.
 A state of emergency declared in 1987, at the time martial law
 was rescinded, continued in 10 southeastern provinces where the
 Government faced increasing violence in its efforts to combat
 Kurdish separatist terrorists. In addition, three adjacent
 provinces remained under the authority of the regional governor
 for security purposes. The state of emergency allows civilian
 governors to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers,
 including restrictions on the press and control or prohibition
 of labor union activities. Government decrees renewed in
 November 1991 retained stringent security measures in the area
 under the state of emergency.
 Turkey's economy has a strong, free market orientation,
 although state-owned enterprises still account for an estimated
 42 percent bf manufacturing. The industrial sector in
 particular has .grown considerably, and approximately 80 percent
 of Turkey's exports are industrial sector goods. The Persian
 Gulf war took a great toll on the economy: energy prices
 doubled, tourism plummeted, and Turkey sustained substantial
 losses in trade and related services as a result of sanctions
 against Iraq. Inflation in Turkey was running at an annual
 rate of 71 percent through November 1991.
 Although Turkey has signed several international conventions
 against torture, it has not succeeded in reducing the incidence
 of torture of persons in police custody. Other problems
 include political killings and other terrorist acts by an armed
 separatist movement and leftwing extremists, the use of
 excessive force against noncombatants in the southeast  y
 security forces trying to suppress terrorism, some rest ictions
 on freedom of expression, and the absence of the right cf
 detained persons to'have an attorney present during
 interrogation. Parliament passed an Anti-Terror Law in April
 1991 whiph quashed previously stipulated capital sentences,
 amnestied thousands of prisoners, commuted sentences,
 decriminalized the use of the Kurdish language and nullified
 Articles 141, 142, and 163 of the Penal Code (the so-called
 thought crimes articles).
 However, the Anti-Terror Law also introduced a broad and
 ambiguous definition of "terrorist" activities that could
 invite abuses of power by security authorities. Portions of.
 the new law have been submitted to the Constitutional Court for
 review as to their constitutionality. Parliament has not yet
 
 
 1248
 TURKEY
 acted on proposed legislation to improve access to legal
 counsel or to shorten the permissible detention period before a
 suspect must be brought before a court.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known political killings attributable to the
 Government, but political murder by terrorists occurred with
 dismaying frequency, and there were 18 deaths in official
 custody in 1991, at least some of which may have been due to
 police torture (see Section l.c.).
 The murder of Vedat Aydin, a prominent Kurdish politician and
 human rights activist, remains unsolved. Aydin was taken from
 his Diyarbakir home on July 5 by men who said they were police;
 his body was found by a roadside 40 miles away several days
 later. The authorities say he was never in their custody. No
 one claimed responsibility for the killing. The investigation
 into the disappearance and murder has yielded no results.
 Some of the victims killed by terrorists in shooting and
 bombing incidents during the year included: five retired
 generals assasinated by terrorists; an American civilian
 employee at Incirlik air base outside Adana;.an American shot
 at his Istanbul office; a Jandarma commander; a British
 insurance executive; a prominent Turkish archeologist and his
 student; a U.S. Air Force staff sergeant killed in a car bomb
 blast (a similar explosion the same day cost an Egyptian
 diplomat his legs); and an Istanbul deputy police chief and his
 driver. In most cases, police have not identified those
 responsible, although the terrorist group Dev-Sol
 (Devrimci-Sol, the revolutionary left) claimed to have
 committed many of the killings, and the Kurdish Workers' Party
 (PKK), a separatist and terrorist organization in the
 southeast, may have been responsible for others.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances known to have been caused by
 government forces. However, disappearances did occur.in 1991.
 Huseyin Toraman, reportedly a member of Dev Sol, vanished
 October 27 while buying bread in Istanbul; press reports said
 eyewitnesses saw him forced into a car by three gunmen "who
 said they were from the police." Istanbul police denied that
 Toraman was ever in their custody. The disappearance of
 People's Workers' Party (HEP) member Muharrem Bozan, missing
 since July 25 when he was seen leaving the party headquarters
 in Diyarbakir, has not been explained. So far as is known,
 Bozan's case has never been officially investigated, nor has
 any further information come to light. Other cases of
 disappearance in which the police were said to be involved
 include those of Yusuf Eristi, whom an unnamed witness claimed
 to have seen in detention (while police deny having detained
 him) and Haydar Altun, whom the Human Rights Foundation says
 was either a PKK training camp commander or a PKK unit
 commander.
 PKK terrorists continued to abduct local villagers, teachers,
 and security officials in the southeast. The PKK also targeted
 foreigners in 1991. kidnaping 19 of them. In September PKK
 
 
 1249
 TURKEY
 spokesmen warned foreigners not to travel in eastern Turkey
 without first obtaining a "visa" from the PKK.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution outlaws torture, and Turkey is a signatory to
 inter alia, the European Convention Against Torture. As Turkey
 has recognized the compulsory jurisdiction of the European
 Court of Human Rights, Turks are free to file applications with
 the European Commission on Human Rights, and several have done
 so. Early in 1991, the Grand National Assembly established a
 multiparty Human Rights Commission and empowered it to
 investigate allegations of human rights abuses that are
 submitted to it. In September the Justice and Interior
 Ministries announced that each of them was setting up a human
 rights section. The Parliament sponsored an October symposium
 on "International Protection of Human Rights." The police .
 academy announced in October that human rights is being taught
 as the first course in.its fall semester. Nevertheless,
 despite these public commitments, pervasive and credible
 reports of torture persisted throughout Turkey. The European
 Parliament's human rights report approved on September 13 cited
 Turkey as a country with cases of "death caused by torture."
 Prime Minister Demirel appointed Mehmet Kahraman as the first
 ever Minister of State for Human Rights. On November 22,
 Kahraman and Justice Minister Seyfi Oktay, accompanied--at
 their request--by Nevzat Helvaci, president of the Turkish
 Human Rights'Association (HRA), went to Eskisehir maximum
 security prison to investigate allegations of torture. Earlier
 in November, the escape of two suspected Dev-Sol assassins from
 Ankara central prison during a holiday visitation by families
 had prompted authorities to transfer about 200 political-
 offenders to Eskisehir.from prisons elsewhere in Turkey.
 Physicians certified that many of the inmates, after their
 arrival at Eskisehir, bore signs of torture. Whether the
 torture was inflicted while the prisoners were en route to
 Eskisehir or after their arrival remains uncertain. Eskisehir
 province's chief prosecutor immediately began an
 investigation. After visiting Eskisehir, the Ministers
 obtained a full cabinet decision to close down the prison, and
 this was accomplished within a matter of a few days.
 Knowledgeable observers contended that most persons charged
 with--or merely suspected of--politica-l crimes are tortured,
 while significant numbers of those detained for ordinary crimes
 are subjected to police brutality. This mistreatment continues
 to occur in police stations, largely during periods of
 incommunicado detention before a suspect is brought before 'a
 court.
 Figures compiled by the HRA show that, in the year to December,
 18 persons had died while in police custody. -Several deaths'
 resulted when youthful suspects committed "suicide" by'
 plummeting from third- and fourth-story windows of police
 stations, two of them in Gaziantep. In Istanbul, Ali Reza
 Agdogan died after jumping or being pushed from the fourth
 story of the Beyoglu police station. Doctors reportedly found
 evidence of trauma to the soles of Agdogan's feet,-although he
 died from a head-first fall. Birtan Altinbas, who was detained
 'for 15 days at the political section of:Ankara police
 headquarters, died January 16 at Gulhane Military Hospital,
 allegedly as a result of torture. Haydar Arman died after
 detention at the Ankara Security Directorate, and the head of
 
 
 1250
 the Diyarbakir HRA attributed the death of Remzi Ii to brain
 hemorrhage as a result of torture by Diyarbakir police. A
 police raid seeking Dev-Sol recruiters at Istanbul's Mimar
 Sinan University culminated in the death of Seher Sahin, a
 third-year student who either fell or was pushed from a
 window. Senar Turgut, producer of the movie "Siyabed U Xeco"
 based on a Kurdish legend, was detained in Van, and the Human
 Rights Foundation reported that Turgut's attorney, Senay Gun,
 stated her client was tortured while in custody.
 Credible reports indicate that high-pressure cold water hoses,
 electric shocks, beating of the genitalia, and hanging by the
 arms are methods commonly employed. Systematic beatings,
 including beatings on the soles of the feet, also occur;
 however, a person claiming to have been tortured at Ankara
 police headquarters in 1991 said that beating has fallen from
 favor because it leaves marks. Psychological abuse in the form
 of verbal intimidation and threats is said to be common, as is
 the practice of keeping the detainee blindfolded.
 The United Nations Human Rights Commission's Special Rapporteur
 on Torture reports that detainees, including children, were
 often forced to listen to the torture of family members.
 Dr. Cemal Kahraman, president of Nusaybin's HRA, told observers
 at his June trial in Diyarbakir that he had been suspended by
 his arms with his wrists tied behind his back for up to an hour
 at a time, beaten on the soles of his feet, subjected to a mock
 execution, and forced to undergo psychological torture,
 including threats to rape his wife. Yeni Ulke journalist Mecit
 Akgun, also a member of the Nusaybin HRA, alleged he was
 tortured in March and April during incommunicado detention at
 Jandarma regimental headquarters in Mardin. Tempo magazine
 published a graphic story in September on beatings suffered by
 Istanbul transvestites rounded up by police. The head of
 Istanbul's chapter of the HRA alleged that after the
 transvestites publicized their mistreatment they were again
 taken into custody and beaten in reprisal.
 Other former detainees give similar descriptions of methods
 employed by police. Although the Government asserted that
 medical examinations occur once during detention and a second
 time before either arraignment or release, former detainees
 assert that some government-ordered medical examinations take
 place too long after the event to allow any definitive
 findings, some examinations are cursory in nature, and some are
 done in the intimidating presence of police officials.
 According to government-provided figures, 1,417 allegations of
 torture were investigated between January 1 and September 30,
 1991. Officials in 183 cases were acquitted, 549 cases
 continue in judicial proceedings (some predating 1991), and 883
 cases have been dismissed by the courts. No government
 official was convicted of torture or inhuman and degrading
 treatment under Article 243 of the Turkish Penal Code during
 the January-September 1991 period; 17 were convicted for
 maltreatment under Article 245.
 Prosecution of alleged perpetrators of torture has been
 sporadic. The Government has reopened approximately 250 cases
 of alleged torture by authorities and is continuing court
 proceedings against another 550 security officials charged with
 mistreatment or torture of persons in custody. Credible
 sources continued to estimate that judicial authorities
 investigate only about half of the formal complaints involving
 torture and prosecuted only a small fraction of those. Justice
 
 
 1251
 TURKEY
 Ministry figures for January 1-September 30, 1991, show that of
 the 1,417 incidents of torture or maltreatment brought to the
 attention of judicial authorities, 463 resulted in lawsuits
 against government officials. Those found guilty have
 historically received light sentences. In one important case
 (cited in the 1989 and 1990 reports) an appeals court
 invalidated a light sentence given to a- Jandarma major
 convicted of beating southeastern Yesilyurt villagers and
 forcing' them to eat excrement and ordered a retrial. The
 retrial, however, resulted in another light sentence--a a-month
 suspension from duty and a $500 fine--which was ultimately
 suspended. The incident is currently being examined by the
 Human Rights Commission of the Council of Europe.
 Five policemen charged with torturing a correspondent of
 Mucadele (Struggle) magazine, Figen Baran, went on trial in
 Ankara on October 8-. The prosecutor asked that-each policeman
 be sentenced.to 5 years' imprisonment. .The court transferred
 the file to the Ankara Provincial Special Administrative Board,
 which handles disciplinary punishments for all civil servants.
 The Board had not announced any decision by year's 'end. The
 family of a university student who died after being tortured in
 1980 successfully brought a case this year against the
 responsible police officer, Sinan Yalcin, who was sentenced to
 4 years and 5 months of imprisonment on October 15.
 Article 15 of the Anti-Terror Law changed the way in which
 officials accused of torture or other mistreatment are
 treated. Formerly, a prosecutor could demand suspension of the
 suspected offender from his duties while the case was being
 investigated. Now the suspect may stay on the job until after
 being convicted. In addition, the legal fees of the suspects
 are paid by their agencies, with no limit placed on the amount''
 of such fees.
 Limited government reforms that could contribute to a reduction
 of abuse have not been effectively implemented. According-to
 government figures and estimates, the number of cases of
 torture prosecuted or in the hands of judicial authorities'for
 prosecution fell from 812 in 1990 to 463 in the first 9 months
 of 199 1. The percentage of convictions declined in the same
 period--from 3 to- zero convictions for torture; from 185 to 17
 convictions for maltreatment.
 The HRA's Human Rights Foundation operates torture
 rehabilitation centers in Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul. It is
 raising money to, establish another torture rehabilitation
 center in Diyarbakir. Foundation head Yavuz Ozen said the
 three existing. centers were treating more than 120 persons as
 of November 30.
 Prison conditions, although far from ideal, generally do not
 threaten the lives and hea'lth of prisoners-.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detentibn, or Exile
 Except-in limited circumstances, such as when a person is
 caught in the act of committing a crime, a prosecutor must
 issue a detention order. The detention period for those
 charged with common or individual crimes is generally 24 hours,
 but persons detained because of crimes falling under the �
 provisions of the Anti-Terror Law "are to be presented to a
 judge within 48 hours." Those charged with any crime of a
 collective or conspiratorial nature may still be detained up to
 15 days. In the 10 southeastern provinces under a state of
 
 
 1252
 TURKEY
 emergency, incommunicado detention for collective crimes may
 last up to 30 days. Access to counsel is not permitted during
 these periods of detention.
 Turkish law does not give detainees the right to have an
 attorney present during questioning, although a proposal to
 give detainees this right is pending in Parliament. Under
 existing law, a detainee's next of kin must normally be
 notified "in the shortest time" after arrest. Once formally
 charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is arraigned before a
 judge and allowed to retain a lawyer. Once arraigned, the
 judge may release the accused on presentation of an appropriate
 guarantee-, such as bail, or order him held in detention if the
 court determines that he is likely to flee or destroy evidence.
 Prime Ministry circulars issued in 1989 and 1990 on the issue
 of access to lawyers have not improved such access for most
 detainees, particularly those charged with collective or
 political crimes. According to the circulars, suspects
 detained for individual or collective crimes are to be allowed
 access to an attorney. Because the final decision is left to
 the independent prosecutors, however. such access is routinely
 denied, usually with an explanation that access would prejudice
 an ongoing investigation. In some cases, police are reported
 to make access impossible through time-consuming bureaucratic
 requirements. The Constitution specifies the right of
 detainees to request "speedy conclusion of arraignment and
 trial." Nevertheless, judges have ordered a significant number
 of persons detained while their cases progress, sometimes for
 years. While many cases involve persons accused of violent
 crimes, it is not uncommon for those accused of membership in
 illegal organizations or the dissemination of ideas proscribed
 by the Anti-Terror Law to be remanded in custody until the
 conclusion of their trials. Large-scale detentions in the
 southeast followed upon Vedat Aydin's funeral, when as many as
 500 persons reportedly were taken into custody in Diyarbakir.
 Most were released within 24 hours.
 Detentions sometimes appear arbitrary. For example, the
 16-year old student known as "N. A.," detained in October 1990
 for having hung a "No to War" placard on her classroom wall,
 was held in prison until the end of February 1991. In October
 1991, police detained an Istanbul youth for having asked
 President Ozal why "you always talk about the good things,
 (but) don't mention the bad things you have done?" He was
 charged and convicted of "insulting the President" and sent to
 prison. The length of the sentence was not reported; the
 maximum sentence for insulting the President is 6 years. The
 number of persons detained during the year for attempting to
 exercise free speech or other human rights cannot be
 established with any accuracy.
 There is no formal external exile. The Government has
 sometimes refused to renew the passports of Turks working
 abroad who refused to return home to face court charges or
 perform military service. These persons may apply to the
 Interior Ministry for permission to return to Turkey. Since
 the Anti-Terror law abolished elements of the old Penal Code,
 some persons who had refused to return to face charges have
 applied-successfully for permission to return. Turkey's
 internal exile law was lifted in 1987. In 199& the Government
 gave authority to the southeast regional governor to "remove
 from the region," for a period not to exceed the duration of
 the state of emergency, citizens under his administration whose
 activities (whether voluntary or forced) "give an impression
 
 
 1253
 TURKEY
 that they are prone to disturb general security and public
 order." There are no known instances of this authority having
 been used in 1991.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system and judicial procedures are modeled on Western
 European criminal and civil law codes. The judicial system is
 composed of general 'law courts, state security courts, and
 military courts.' Three martial law courts remain in Ankara,
 Istanbul, and Diyarbakir, clearing their dockets of cases
 involving offenses committed during the period following the
 1980 military takeover of the government and before 1985. The
 majority of cases are prosecuted in the general law courts,
 which include the civil courts. administrative courts, and
 criminal courts. Appeals are heard in either the High Court of
 Appeals or the Council of State. There is also a
 Constitutional Court and a Court of Cassation.
 The Constitution declares that judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties and provides for the security of
 their tenure." It also prohibits authorities from giving orders
 or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial power.
 In many instances, charges brought by prosecutors are dismissed
 by courts. The High Council of Judges and Prosecutors,,
 appointed by the President and including the Minister of'
 Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts
 and oversees those of the lower courts.
 Defendants normally have the right to an open trial, and the
 Constitution states that no one shall be found guilty until
 provei*'guilty in a court of law. The law requires the Bar
 Association to provide free counsel to indigent' who make such
 a request to the court. Costs are borne by the Association,
 but Parliament is considering a~proposal for the State to
 assume these legal fees. There is no jury system; all cases
 are decided by a-judge or a panel of judges.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independient
 prosecutor's files after arraignment and before the trial (a
 period of a few weeks). In political cases, access may be �
 denied to files dealing with national intelligence or security
 matters.
 Eight state security courts, composed of two civilian judges
 and one military judge, try defendants accused of crimes such
 as terrorism, drug smuggling, membership in illegal
 organizations, and espousing or disseminating ideas prohibited
 by law as "damaging the indivisible unity of the state with its
 territory and nation." Government sources indicate there are
 currently 1,192 cases involving 7,110 defendants being tried in
 the State Security Courts. State Security Courts may hold
 closed hearings and admit testimony secured during police
 interrogations or-under torture if it is corroborated by other
 sources. -Sentences imposed under the Anti-Terror Law may not
 be commuted to a fine or suspended.
 Military courts, with their own appeals system, hear cases
 relating to infractions of military law by members of the armed
 forces.                                                  1.
 The Constitutional Court is composed of 11 judges nominated by
 members of the judiciary and appointed by the President. It
 examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and procedural
 rules of the Parliament. However, no "decrees with the force
 
 
 1254
 TURKEY
 of law" issued during a state of emergency, martial law, or in
 time of war may be brought before the Constitutional Court.
 Available figures indicate that several dozen cases involving
 close to 1,000 defendents remained in the martial law courts as
 of the end of November, the majority of which have been
 referred to the military supreme court of appeals. Since the
 abolition of Articles 141, 142, and 163 in April 1991, a number
 of persons have been convicted under the new anti-terror laws
 but the number of those convicted for nonviolent crimes was
 probably small.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Government officials may enter a private residence and
 intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance
 of a judicial warrant.
 In the 10 provinces under a stete of emergency, however, the
 governor (or regional governor> may empower authorities to
 search residences or the premises of political parties,
 businesses, associations, and other organizations without a
 warrant. Authorities in these provinces may also search, hold,
 or seize without warrant persons, letters, telegrams, and
 documents. Roadblocks are commonplace in the southeast, and
 security officials, in search of'smugglers and terrorists,
 regularly search vehicles and travelers.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Since 1984 a continuing and increasingly violent insurgency by
 the separatist Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) has claimed over
 3,000 lives. The PKK's campaign of terrorism in southeast
 Turkey is directed both against security forces and against
 fellow Turks of Kurdish origin. In addition to casualties
 among security forces, there were some 105 noncombatant deaths
 as a result of these actions.
 The PKK fired rockets at night into the centers of Turkish
 towns, ostensibly aiming at security establishments or the
 homes of Turkish officials but in fact, causing death, injury
 or damage in surrounding neighborhoods. The PKK has also
 continued its attacks against the educational system, killing
 or threatening to kill ethnic Turkish teachers in many
 districts. As a result, schools did not reopen in most rural
 areas of southeast Turkey at the beginning of the 1991-92
 school year. The PKK stopped five minibuses one night in Siirt
 and killed 5 passengers, including one child. The PKK also
 killed the village teacher and her parents in Gorkce in Tuncele
 province. On two other occasions, the PKK attacked the homes
 of the head of a village guard force and of a Jandarma
 sergeant, wounding by gunfire the children of the first and
 killing the spouse of the latter.
 Government security forces have sometimes attacked villages
 suspected of harboring PKK terrorists, thereby causing an
 unknown'number of casualties and destruction. In July,
 citizens in Cizre and Idil villages accused government forces
 of indiscriminate firing after a PKK incident. It is
 impossible to determine the instigating party.
 
 
 1255
 TURKEY
 Vedat Aydin's funeral on July 11 (see Section l.a.) erupted in
 violence; several people were killed by police gunfire, dozens
 were wounded, and hundreds arrested. The facts are disputed;
 all parties agree only that no oner knows for sure who killed
 Aydin. Even the numbers of dead in the funeral riot are
 uncertain. Turkish government officials admitted to five, but
 another informed source mentioned twice that number of victims
 from a nearby town alone. The Government accused funeral
 participants of provoking the police, while human rights
 activists accuse the Government of using- the occasion to
 attack Kurdish rights leaders.
 Villagers complain that Jandarma and security team searches for
 PKK terrorists and for evidence of local support for them have
 resulted in expulsions, beatings, torture, and arbitrary
 killing of innocent civilians. Claiming official intimidation,
 Zubeyir Aydar, a lawyer, and his wife Evin, president of the
 Siirt HRA, allege they have received death threats for their
 activities since 1989, when Aydar publicized the existence of a
 so-called "butcher's river" near Siirt. Aydar was excluded
 from Siirt under the emergency situation legislation but was
 allowed to return in 1990. In December of that year, he was
 unable to attend Helsinki Watch ceremonies honoring his work as
 a human rights monitor because he was refused a passport. In
 May 1991,-after a'civilian was killed by the PKK, a Jandarma
 commander allegedly told the dead man's relatives to seek
 revenge by killing Aydar. Aydar also asserts that security
 teams in August offered village guards inducements to
 assassinate him.
 Government decrees, codified in December 1990 as decree 430 and
 most recently renewed in mid-November 1991, imposed stringent
 security measures in the southeast. The regional governor may
 censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile
 (see Section ld.). The decree also provides for the doubling
 of sentences for those convicted of cooperating with
 separatists. Informants and convicted persons who cooperate
 with the State are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences.
 Provisions in the-decree that specifically prohibited court
 challenges to administrative decisions-of the regional governor
 were later amended to provide limited judicial review.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press7
 With some significant exceptions, the freedoms of speech and
 press are widely and vigorously practiced in Turkey. The
 privately owned press, which reflects a broad range of opinion,
 does not hesitate to criticize the Government. Penal Code
 Articles 141, 142, and 163--designed to prevent what were
 historically considered threats to the democratic and secular
 nature of the State--Vere abolished in April.
 Prosecutions against authors, publications, and publishers
 continued, however, under the provisions of the Anti-Terror
 Law. It provides that "written and oral propaganda...aiming at
 damaging the indivisible unity of the state of the Turkish
 republic with its territory and nation(is) forbidden,
 regardless of the method, intention and ideas behind it."
 Those conducting such activity are to be punished by a sentence
 of between 2 and 5 years in prison and a fine equal to the
 equivalent at the current exchange rate of $10,000 to $20,000.
 If the offending "prQpaganda" is a periodical, the publishers
 are liable to an additional fine of no less than $20,000.
 
 
 1256
 Responsible editors may be fined half the amount of the
 publisher's fine and sentenced to between 6 months and 2 years
 in prison.
 Abolition of Article 141 (advocacy of a state based on class or
 race dominance, i.e., communism or fascism), led to
 decriminalization of the Communist Party and to acquittal in
 October of Turkish United Communist Party leaders Haydar Kutlu
 and Nihat Sargin, who had been on trial under Articles 140,
 141, and 142, on most charges against them. Kutlu and Sargin
 also benefited from an August decision by the International
 Court of Justice declaring they had been wrongly imprisoned.
 The Government has agreed to pay them compensation in an amount
 still to be determined. Abolition of Article 141 also led to
 the lifting of the ban on the leftist trade union confederation
 DISK (see Section 6.a.).
 Abolition of Article 142 (advocacy of a separate state based on
 ethnic origins, e.g., Kurdish separatism), along with the
 demise of Law 2932 prohibiting the use of the Kurdish language,
 prompted a rash of Kurdish-language cassette tapes and of
 publications on Kurdish subjects. Some of these initially ran
 afoul of the new law. Sociologist Ismail Besikci, a familiar
 figure in Turkish courtrooms, went on trial again (along with
 his publisher) in Ankara State Security Court on October 3,
 charged with producing antistate propaganda in his book "State
 Terror in the Middle East." Judges denied his attorneys'
 request that he be freed on bail until the case continued but
 did release him on October 31 pending further hearings. His
 freedom was short-lived, however, as Besikci was arrested again
 in November for another objectionable volume. The Turkish
 press wrote on December 17 that Besikci, now free on his own
 recognizance, is on trial in Ankara Criminal Court for
 "defaming Turkish citizenship and the Turkish republic" and
 faces a possible 1-to 6-year prison term. The HRA reported on
 October 3 that "Kurdish File," a book by journalist Rafet
 Balli, was ordered confiscated by the Istanbul State Security
 Court on the grounds that "it disseminated separatist
 propaganda and praised activities that are considered crime by
 the laws." The book interviewed leaders of several Kurdish
 organizations. The same court earlier ordered confiscation of
 the 49th issue of weekly Yeni Ulke (New Land) newspaper and the
 50th issue of biweekly magazine Emegin Bayragi (Flag of Labor)
 on grounds that they disseminate separatist propaganda. Yucel
 Halis was sentenced in Ankara State Security Court to 10 years'
 imprisonment for "disseminating PKK propaganda in Ankara."
 Minister of Culture Fikri Saglar announced on December 15 that
 he was immediately lifting the bans against all books
 prohibited since the 1980 military takeover in Turkey. Saglar
 said some 25,000 titles would be freed for publication and
 sale. Saglar also has stopped any government actions against
 Kurdish-language cassette tapes. A Turk resident in Sweden
 began publication of a weekly Kurdish-language newspaper in
 Turkey in December.
 Journalists sometimes face harassment and aggressive
 application of the law by public prosecutors. Publications
 must designate a "responsible editor" who is legally
 accountable for a publication's contents. Many have faced
 repeated criminal proceedings. According to information
 provided by the Justice Ministry, as of November 29, 1991, the
 single "editor, writer, or journalist" in confinement of any
 kind in Turkey is Gunes's Deniz Teztel" mentioned below. HRA
 president Nevzat Helvaci confirmed that fact on December 10.
 
 
 1257
 TURKEY
 The Justice Ministry adds that trials continue against 83
 editors, writers, or journalists without their being detained.
 Decree 430 superseded and modified some of the more severe
 provisions of its predecessors. For example, although it still
 requires self-censorship on all news reporting from or about
 the southeast andgives the Interior Ministry the authority to
 ban, upon the regional governor's proposal, the distribution of
 any news regarded as misreprdsenting events in the region, it
 does not permit indefinite closure of printing houses that
 violate the decree. Nevertheless, operations may be
 suspended--lO days for-a first offense and 30 days for
 subsequent offenses--if a government warning is not obeyed.
 Gunes journalist Deniz Teztel was imprisoned in Ankara in July
 for refusing to cooperate with authorities by providing
 information on sources who are allegedly members of Dev-Sol.
 She is currently imprisoned in Cankiri, awaiting trial for
 violating provisions of the Anti-Terror Law.
 Turkish radio and television (TRT) is a government monopoly.
 Opposition figures asserted that its broadcasts have a
 progovernment bias, despite coverage of opposition leadqrs and
 their parties. A government commission generally apportions
 party access to television and radio during, election and
 referendum campaigns based on the proportion of parliamentary
 seats that each party holds. However, TRT television aired a
 3-hour roundtable preelection debate with the leaders of six
 parties--including the Socialist Party and the Islamic
 fundamentalist Refah Party--participating on, equal terms. In
 1991 Turkish viewers with access to cable facilities or
 satellite dishes have also been able to watch foreign
 broadcasts, the Turkish-language "Star 1," and other private
 channels operating from abroad. Obscenity and censorship laws
 remain on the books and sometimes result in the confiscation
 and banning of pubIications and films.
 The lftwing weekly Toward The Year 2000, which had had its.
 publication suspended by the Interior Ministry during 1990,
 resumed publication in 1991. It is published regularly, but
 some issues have been confiscated. Other leftwing publications
 that had stopped publication or were published only
 sporadically during 1990 have benefited from the more liberal
 provisidns of Decree 430. -There remains limited independent
 reporting on southeastern Turkey.
 In three instances, foreign journalists were either detained or
 harassed by Turkish authorities: British journalist Robert
 Fisk was expelled from Turkey for "biased and insulting
 reporting" about Turkey; Elizabeth Schmidt,, a German journalist
 who covered Vedat Aydin's funeral in July, was beaten by police
 and detained for about 2 weeks; and a Turkish member of .the New
 York Times teim led by Chris Hedges was detained for having
 photographed Turkish soldiers firing into the air to break up a
 pro-PKK demonstration.
 While it is generally permissible to-criticize government
 leaders or policies, the Criminal Code provides penalties for
 those who "insult the President, the Parliament, and the army,"
 ranging from a 3-year minimum sentence for insulting the
 President to a 6-year maximum'for insulting the other branches
 of government. Judges have generally be~n rigorous in-
 examining evidence and have dismissed many charges brought
 under these laws. Police still detain people and prosecutors
 
 
 1258
 TURKEY
 still bring them to court under this section, resulting in long
 and expensive trials in many cases.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior notification to
 government authorities but may be restricted to designated
 sites. Permission may be denied if the authorities believe the
 assembly (for example, a May Day rally) is likely to disrupt
 public order.
 The law on associations reflects lingering concern over the
 widespread violence that preceded the military intervention of
 1980. ,It prohibits associations and labor unions from having
 ties to political parties or engaging in political activity.
 Police raided or closed branches of the Ozgur Dernegi (Freedom
 Association) in various cities in Turkey during 1991.
 Associations must submit their charters for government
 approval, which is a lengthy and cumbersome process. The
 Constitution and the law governing political parties proscribe
 student and faculty involvement in political activities.
 Political parties may not form youth branches. Students are
 not eligible to join political parties, and faculty members who
 are elected to Parliament must resign their university
 positions. Students and faculty members may participate in
 politics as individuals.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Turkey is a secular state. The Constitution provides for
 freedom of belief, freedom of worship (in specifically
 designated places of worship), and private dissemination of
 one's religious ideas. Turkey's population is 99 percent
 Muslim. Although Turkey is a secular state, Islamic religious
 instruction in state schools is compulsory for Muslims.
 Turkish law exempts non-Muslims from Muslim religious
 instruction upon written verification of their non-Muslim
 background, although students who wish to attend may do so with
 parental consent.
 Many prosecutors view proselytism and religious activism on the
 part of either Islamic fundamentalists or evangelical
 Christians with suspicion, especially when their activities are
 seen to have political overtones. Courts dismissed virtually
 all charges brought against Islamic fundamentalists and Turkish
 and foreign evangelical Christians in 1991. The police,
 nevertheless, continued their surveillance and detentions of
 evangelical Christians, refused to renew some residence
 permits, and expelled some from the country. The Foreign
 Ministry asserts that such expulsions are administrative
 measures taken against activities harmful and disturbing to
 public order. However, interviews with some detainees and
 deportees disclosed that they denied having broken Turkish laws
 and almost all assert they were never granted even an
 administrative hearing before actions were taken against them.
 One American obtained a written statement describing the
 grounds for his deportation and is pursuing the matter in
 Turkish courts.
 Among Turkey's non-Muslim religious groups, there are some
 60,000 Armenians, 25,000 Jews, 20,000 Syriac Christians, 18,000
 Arab Orthodox, 4,000 Greek Orthodox, and several thousand Roman
 Catholics and Chaldean Christians. Most religious minorities
 are concentrated in Istanbul. They operate churches,
 monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious
 
 
 1259
 TURKEY
 foundations such as hospitals and orphanages. The Jewish
 community reported no problems with the Government in 1991 (or
 in recent memory).
 Armenian and Greek churches and their affiliated operations are
 reportedly subject to careful official monitoring of their
 activities. The curriculum in their schools is tightly
 controlled by the Ministry of Education. Greek and Armenian
 theological seminaries in Turkey, ordered closed in 1971, have
 not reopened since then. Armenian and Greek churches also find
 their ability properly to manage or dispose of their
 considerable real estate holdings in Istanbul is affected by
 legal and bureaucratic regulations. Complicated and
 time-consuming bureaucratic procedures deter repairs to some
 religious facilities, which often require government approval
 because of their historical value. Under Turkish law,
 religious buildings that become "extinct" (i.e., due to
 prolonged absence of clergy or of lay persons to staff local
 religious councils) revert to the possession of the
 Government. Some non-Muslim minorities, particularly the Greek
 Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, Armenians and Jews, are faced
 with the danger of losing their houses of worship. Controversy
 also arose in April when an Armenian town hall under
 construction on Kinali island was razed allegedly because
 required building permits had not been obtained.
 The Turkish Government made no attempt to interfere in the
 election by the Greek Orthodox Holy Synod of Metropolitan
 Bartholomew as Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Turkish citizens enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey- and
 are generally free to travel abroad. The Constitution provides
 'that a citizen's freedom to leave may be restricted only on
 account of the national economic situation, civic obligations
 (i.e., military service), or criminal investigation or
 prosecution.
 Some human rights activists have experienced delays in
 acquiring passports. For example, Hatip Dicle, formerly
 president of the Diyarbakir chapter of the HRA and now an SHP
 parliamentarian, was unable to accept an official invitation to
 visit the United States in February 1991 because government
 authorities delayed his passport application for several
 months. Reportedly, he did obtain a passport later in 1991.
 When Kurds and other Iraqis fled from Saddam Hussein's forces
 in April, more than half a million found haven along Turkey's
 border with Iraq. The Turkish Government opened a staging
 center for hajj pilgrims to shelter some of the Iraqi refugees
 in Turkey. With the assistance and cooperation of coalition
 "Operation Provide Comfort" personnel, international
 organizations, and numerous private voluntary organizations and
 nongovernmental organizations, Turkey housed, fed, and provided
 medical care for the refugees. Turkey also cooperated with
 coalition efforts to establish a secure zone in northern Iraq
 to which the refugees could return.
 Turkey is still host to many refugees who did not feel they
 could return to Iraq. Official figures released in mid-October
 1991 showed that 5,538 Iraqis who fled Saddam's forces earlier
 in the year remain in camps in southeastern Turkey, which
 representatives of international organizations continue to
 
 
 1260
 visit grequently. An additional 5,933 Iraqi refugees were
 granted temporary residence permits by the Turkish Government
 and are living independently in Turkey. About 21,000 of the
 60,000 Iraqi Kurdish refugees who *arrived in 1988 remain in
 camps in the southeast. The Government does not recognize the
 Iraqi Kurds' claims to refugee status but has also stated these
 people will not be returned forcibly to Iraq. The Turks
 historically have followed this policy towards all persons
 seeking refugee status.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Turkish. citizens have the right and ability to change their
 government peacefully, within certain legal constraints. As
 noted in Section 2.b., the repeal of Article 141 of the Penal
 Code decriminalized the Turkish United Communist Party. Turkey
 has a multiparty parliamentary system, in which elections are
 held every 5 years on the basis of mandatory universal suffrage
 for all citizens 20 years of age and over.
 The Grand National Assembly (Parliament) elects the President
 as Head of State every 7 years. In the October parliamentary
 elections, the Correct Way Party (DYP) won a plurality of 27
 percent of the vote and 178 seats in the 450-member unicameral
 Parliament. Seats are allocated on a weighted proportional
 representation basis in which parties that poll less than 10
 percent of the total national vote are excluded. This
 provision is intended to prevent political fragmentation. Four
 other parties obtained seats in the Parliament, and the DYP
 formed a coalition with the Social Democratic Populist Party to
 achieve a parliamentary majority.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and
 women. Eight women, representing three parties, were elected
 to Parliament in 1991. Members of minorities, Muslim and
 non-Muslim, face no legal limitations on political
 participation. Although the People's Workers' Party (HEP)
 experienced difficulties with authorities during the year and
 some of-its members were arrested and charged with speaking in
 Kurdish before the language law was repealed, some 22
 HEP-affiliated candidates won seats in Parliament as SHP
 candidates. Several of these created a disturbance in
 Parliament when they took their oaths as written and appended
 Kurdish slogans to them. To date, no consequences have
 followed their action. HEP held an extraordinary convention
 that turned into a celebration of the PKK on December 15 in
 Ankara. The Government is proceeding with an investigation.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association (HRA), officially
 approved in 1987, has branches in 42 provincial capitals and
 organizes discussions, publications, rallies, petitions, and an
 annual Human Rights Day celebration. Its membership numbers
 about 12,000. The HRA established the Human Rights Foundation
 in 1990 which, as well as operating torture rehabilitation
 centers in Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul, serves as a
 clearinghouse for information on human rights.
 The Government closed the Batman branch of the HRA for several
 months in 1991 and has ordered other branches shut for greater
 and lesser periods. It contended that HRA statements opposing
 
 
 1261
 TURKEY
 the Persian Gulf war violated the law on associations which
 restricts political activities to political parties. Police
 have also reportedly raided HRA branches in Istanbul and
 elsewhere and confiscated materials. In September police
 detained 23 persons who attended an Ankara exhibit mounted by
 the HRA to commemorate the anniversary of the military coup on
 September 12, 1980. Four remain in custody. According to the
 president of the Istanbul chapter of HRA, his association was
 the subject of 17 separate police investigations and pending
 prosecutions as of the end of September. Many of these, and
 many arrests of human rights activists, stemmed from alleged
 violations of the Law on Associations or the holding of illegal
 demonstrations.
 The Social Democratic Populist Party has a human rights
 committee and has actively pursued human rights issues in
 Parliament for several years. All the political parties
 contesting the 1991 elections incorporated a human rights plank
 into their campaign platforms. Parliament passed the bill
 establishing its Human Rights Commission in December 1990. The
 Commission began operating early in'1991. It has authority to
 oversee Turkey's compliance with the human rights provisions of
 Turkish law and international agreements to which it is a
 signatory, investigate alleged abuses, and prepare an annual
 report. The Commission has visited and reported on conditions
 in Bursa Prison; has made a surprise inspectionof a police
 headquarters in Ankara; and has issued a report on the -number
 and types of cases brought to its attention. The Commission,
 whose new chairman is an ethnic Kurd, announced on December 18
 that it had established a subcommittee dedicated to
 investigating disappearances. The first case it will
 investigate is that of Huseyin Toraman, cited in-Section l.b.
 While representatives of diplomatic missions or foreign private
 organizations who wish to monitor the state of human rights in
 Turkey are free to speak with private citizens, official
 visitors to the southeast may be followed by security police.
 The Government contends that protection from possible terrorist
 assaults is necessary, but the presence of security officials
 may have an intimidating effect upon interviewees. The
 Government continues to be ambivalent toward nongovernmental
 organizations (NGO's) because of its belief that their reports
 do not reflect adequately the country's progress in human
 rights and tend to overlook human rights abuses practiced by
 terrorists. Access to government officials or facilities at
 times may be refused or restricted.
 Under the European and U.N. Conventions AgainstTorture
 ratified by Turkey, committees or rapporteurs may visit all
 places of detention at any time, following notification to the
 government. In September the Council of Europe's Committee for
 the Prevention of Torture visited Turkey and was given access
 to prisons and police facilities. European parliamentary
 representatives attending the human rights symposium sponsored
 by the Turkish Parliament in October publicly stated their hope
 that Turkey will authorize publication of the Committee's
 report on its findings. Turkey formally recognized the
 compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights
 in 1989, and a number of cases involving Turks have been
 referred to it.
 
 
 1262
 TURKEY
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state,
 regards all Turkish citizens as equal, and prohibits
 discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. The
 Treaty of Lausanne (1923) also guarantees the rights of
 Turkey's non-Muslim religious minorities. The Government
 officially recognizes only those minorities mentioned in the
 Treaty. Muslim ethnic or sectarian minorities face
 difficulties in maintaining distinct separate identities within
 Turkish society as a result of official attempts to assimi.late
 them.
 Millions of Turkish Kurds who have moved to industrialized
 cities in the western part of the country are by and large
 fully integrated into the political, economic, and social life
 of the nation. Most parliamentary representatives from
 southeastern Turkey are ethnic Kurds, but representatives of
 Kurdish ethnic origin have been elected from districts far
 removed from the southeast. A number of Cabinet MiAisters, as
 well as other government officials, claim an ethnic Kurdish
 background.
 The controversial 1983 law declaring Turkish "the mother tongue
 of Turkish citizens" and prohibiting publications and
 unfettered communication in "any language other than first
 official languages of states recognized by the Turkish
 republic" was repealed in April. That action legalized
 speaking in Kurdish, singing or recording Kurdish songs, and
 publishing books, newspapers, or other material in the Kurdish
 language. However, court proceedings continue to be conducted
 in Turkish, and the poor quality of court-provided translators
 may disadvantage some Kurdish-speaking defendants. Moreover,
 materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic
 identity continue to be subject to confiscation and prosecution
 under the "indivisibility of the State" provisions of the
 Anti-Terror Law. Foreign publications have been confiscated
 for criticizing government policy toward the Kurds. The
 question of Kurdish cultural identity within Turkey is more and
 more openly debated, however, both in government and among the
 general public.
 The Gypsy population in Turkey is extremely small. There was
 only one reported incident of public harassment directed
 against a Gypsy tribe.
 Although women are improving their situation in Turkish
 society, including the professions, business, and the civil
 service, they continue to face discrimination to varying
 degrees. Traditional values, shared by large numbers of both
 men and women, prevent many women from entering career fields.
 The first female Vali (governor> was appointed in 1991.
 Traditional family values in rural Turkey place a greater
 emphasis on advanced education for sons than for daughters.
 Primary education through the fifth grade is compulsory for all
 children, but thereafter female school attendance declines
 dramatically. According to 1985 census figures (the most
 recent available), the literacy rate was 90.26 percent for
 males under 50 and 76.19 percent for females under 50. Women
 comprise about 36 percent of the paid Turkish work force and
 generally receive equal pay for equal work. Although seldom
 enforced, some laws that discriminate against women remain on
 the books. The husband determines the legal domicile of the
 
 
 1263
 TURKEY
 family, and a married woman needs her husband's consent to be a
 legal partner in a company. In some parts of Turkey, laws
 requiring civil marriage are ignored, and polygamy is accepted,
 although technically illegal.
 Spousal abuse is still considered an extremely private matter,
 although government and public interest in the problem is
 growing. The police do not normally intervene in domestic
 disputes. Turks of either sex may file civil or criminal
 charges but rarely try to resolve family disputes in court.
 Turkish law makes no discrimination between the sexes in laws
 concerning violence or abuse, and courts make no distinction
 between men and women. In 1989 and 1990, Turkey's first three
 homes for battered women were opened by a private organization
 called the Purple Roof Foundation. In addition, in 1990 the
 Government began a program to open shelters in the major cities
 for abused women (and their children) who have left home. The
 first such government shelter in Ankara opened in the fall of
 1990 and was expanded in 1991. Istanbul's Bakirkoy
 municipality also operates a shelter, opened in September 1990,
 which has received over 4,000'applications to date and has a
 waiting list of more than 2,000.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Most workers have the right to associate freely and form
 representative unions. Exceptions are schoolteachers (both
 public and private), civil servants, the police, and military
 personnel. In November Prime Minister Demirel declared the
 Government's intention to grant trade union rights to both
 teachers and civil servants, and a draft bill was prepared for
 submission to Parliament in January 1992. The law prescribes
 that unions and confederations maybe founded without prior
 authorization on the basis of a petition to the governor of the
 province where the union's headquarters are'to be located.
 Although unions are independent of the Government and the
 ruling party, they must have government permission to hold
 meetings or rallies and must allow police to attend conventions
 and record the proceedings. Union officers may serve no more
 than eight consecutive 3-year terms in a given union position.
 The Constitution requires candidates for union office to have
 worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union.
 Both the 1983 law on trade unions and an amendment enacted in
 1988 recognize the right of unions'and their officers to
 express views on issues directly affecting members' economic
 and social interests, but it did not undo constitutional
 prohibitions on any union role in party politics. Unions may
 not establish organic or financial connections with any
 political party or other association. In practice, union
 leaders and the executive board of the Turkish Confederation of
 Labor (Turk-Is) have been able to convey clearly in election
 and referendum campaigns their support for, or opposition to,
 given political parties, including in the October Parliamentary
 elections.
 Prosecutors may request labor courts to order a trade union or
 confederation into liquidation based on alleged violation of
 specific legal norms. However, the Government may not
 summarily dissolve a union. The Turkish Confederation of
 Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK)-, which was Turkey's second
 largest trade union organization in the 1970's, had its
 
 
 1264
 TURKEY
 activities suspended, its assets seized, and some 1,500 of its
 members arrested following the 1980 military coup. After a
 highly publicized 6-year trial, the Military Court in December
 1986 convicted 264 DISK militants'on subversion charges. The
 Anti-Terror Law of April 1991 abolished the "thought crimes"
 provisions of the Penal Code (Articles 141 and 142) under which
 the DISK militants had been convicted. Thereupon, the DISK
 secured a ruling from the Military Court of Appeals in July
 that not only overturned the 1986 convictions but also lifted
 the 11-year suspension on DISK activity. On December 7, the
 DISK held an extraordinary national convention for the purpose
 of amending its bylaws so as to bring then into conformity with
 post-1980 labor legislation. Under the 1983 Trade Union Law,
 the DISK had until April 1992 to hold a second national
 convention for the purpose of electing officers. The DISK
 scheduled a regular national convention to elect new officers
 on January 18-19, 1992.
 The right to strike, while guaranteed in the Constitution, is
 subject to a number of restrictions. For example, workers in
 the petroleum industry, workers engaged in the protection of
 life and property, sanitation services, national defense, and
 education do not have the right to strike. Turkish law and the
 labor court system require collective bargaining before a
 strike. The law specifies the series of steps a union must
 take before it may legally strike and a similar series of steps
 before an employer may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding
 mediation is the last of those steps. In those sectors in
 which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through
 binding arbitration. A party that fails to comply with these
 steps forfeits the exercise of its rights. Once a strike is
 declared, unions are restricted in the actions pickets may take
 as well as in the number of pickets they may place at each
 entrance and exit of a strike site. The struck employer may
 respond with a lockout. The employer is, however, prohibited
 from hiring strikebreakers or using administrative personnel to
 perform jobs normally done by strikers. Unions are forbidden
 to engage in secondary (solidarity), wildcat, or general
 strikes.
 Under Article 33 of the 1983 Law on Strikes and Lockouts, the
 Government also has the power to suspend strikes for 60 days
 for national security reasons. Unions have the right to
 petition the Council of State to lift such a suspension, but if
 this appeal fails the strike is subject to compulsory
 arbitration at the end of the 60-day period. On January 25,
 during the Gulf War, the Government invoked Article 33 to
 suspend all labor strikes nationwide. This was the first such
 blanket suspension of strike activity under the 1983 labor'
 legislation. Turk-Is appealed the suspension. On February 27,
 the Council of State decided in its favor and lifted the strike
 suspension on the grounds that the Government's blanket
 suspension exceeded the norms of relevant legislation and would
 cause economic hardship if allowed to continue. Some 393
 strikes,-involving about 165,500 workers, took place in the
 first 10 months of the year. All strikes were peaceful, and
 most resulted in sizable wage and benefit settlements.
 Unions may and do form or join confederations and international
 labor bodies. The law requires governmental approval to do so
 and prohibits affiliations with organizations hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief.
 The Committee on Freedom of Association of the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) reviewed several complaints against
 
 
 1265
 TURKEY
 Turkey in November and 'sked the Government to return the
 assets of the DISK and to expand its efforts to develop
 constructive tripartite discussions on amendments to the labor
 law.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All industrial workers have the right to organize and bargain
 collectively, and most industrial activity and some public
 sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires
 that, in order to become a bargaining agent, a union must
 represent not only 50 percent plus one of the employees at a
 given work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This has the effect of favoring
 established unions. There is no agent election; the union
 submits its membership rolls to the Labor Ministry and requests
 certification as the collective bargaining agent. Once
 certified, the union receives checkoff privileges, as well as
 compensatory payment for nonunion members. The employer must
 enter good-faith negotiations with the certified union.
 Antiunion discrimination by employers'is prohibited by law. An
 effective means for resolving complaints of such discrimination
 exists within the system of labor courts.
 Union organizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the
 duty-free export processing zones at Antalya, Istanbul, and
 Mersin, but'workers in those zones will not be allowed to
 strike during the first 10 years of operation. Until then,
 settlements not otherwise reached will be determined by binding
 arbitration.
 At the annual ILO Conference in June, criticism of Turkey
 focused on ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize and
 collective bargaining and Convention  i1 on discrimination in
 employment. In its 1991 report, the ILO Committee of Experts
 (COE) again expressed concern about the numerical requirement
 for certification as a bargaining agent and the requirement for
 compulsory arbitration in sectors where strikes are forbidden.
 The COE also reiterated'that, in'barring unionization of civil"
 servants, the Government's definition of "cjvil servant" was
 too broad.
 With regard to Convention 111, the COE took note of the
 Government's report stating that nearly all of the public
 employees dismissed or transferred between 1980 and 1987 as a
 result of Martial Law Act 1402 have been reinstated. In regard
 - to the security investigation regulation of March 8, 1990,
 concerning background checks on public employees, the COE asked
 the Government to indicate the measures taken to ensure that
 rejection or transfer of persons pursuant to this regulation is
 not based on political or any other grounds that would
 constitute discrimination under Convention 111.
 The new Government which took office in November has pledged to
 revise many provisions of the Constitution and labor laws in
 order to bring them into compliance with ILO conventions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution and
 statutes, and it is not practiced.
 
 
 1266
 TURKEY
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Education is compulsory for the 5 years of primary school,
 ending at age 11. In practice, however, children in rural
 areas, especially in the east, sometimes leave school early.
 The Constitution and labor laws forbid employment of children
 younger than 15 years of age, with the exception that those
 aged 13 and 14 may engage in light, part-time work, if enrolled
 in school or vocational training. The Constitution also
 prohibits women and children from engaging in physically
 demanding jobs, such as underground mining, and from working at
 night. The laws are effectively enforced by the Ministry of
 Labor in the organized industrial sector but not elsewhere in
 the economy.
 In practice, many children work in Turkey. Families frequently
 need the supplementary income their children can earn. In
 family-owned businesses such as restaurants, boys visibly
 younger than 15 work long hours, for example, as busboys. In
 addition, there is an informal and essentially unsupervised
 apprentice system in which young boys work at low wages, e.g.,
 in auto repair shops, in the hope of learning a trade. Girls
 are rarely seen in public in work circumstances, but many are
 kept out of school to work on indoor handicrafts, especially in
 rural areas.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set minimum wages at
 least every 2 years through a Minimum Wage Board. In recent
 years it has done so annually. The Board is a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. On July 30, the minimum wage
 was increased by 93 percent over the minimum wage set in July
 1990. In comparison, inflation increased about 69 percent
 during the period July 1990-July 1991. The minimum wage is
 effectively enforced in the industrial sector.
 Without support from other sources, it would be difficult for a
 single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on the
 minimum wage. Most workers earn considerably more. In
 addition to wages, workers covered by the labor law also
 receive a hot meal daily (or a food allowance), transportation
 to and from work, a fuel allowance, and other fringe benefits
 which, according to the Turkish Employers Association, make
 basic wages alone only 34 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek. Most unions
 have bargained for fewer hours in the workweek, both to
 increase premium-pay overtime and to obtain more leisure time.
 Labor law limits the number of overtime hours a worker may work
 to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. Wage and hour
 provisions are effectively enforced by the Labor Inspectorate
 of the Ministry of Labor in the unionized industrial, service,
 and government sectors.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law,
 but the Government has not carried out an effective inspection
 and enforcement program. In practice, financial constraints,
 limited safety awareness, carelessness, and fatalistic
 attitudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and
 health by workers and employers alike.
 
 
 1267
