 TURKEY
 Turkey is a republic based on a multiparty parliamentary
 system.and a strong presidency. Governments are elected by
 universal suffrage. The Government of Prime Minister Ozal
 asserts that democratic civilian rule returned to Turkey with
 the 1983 parliamentary elections. Opposition critics
 challenge that claim, saying that the military arbitrarily
 barred some parties and politicians from participating. The
 Government responds that the Motherland Party won despite the
 publicly expressed opposition of the military and points out
 that it earned a clear plurality in the 1984 nationwide local
 elections in which!all legal parties participated freely. The
 merger of two of the.existing political parties, the formation
 of a new party, and the preparations for by-elections in the
 fall of 1986 are contributing to the restoration of normal
 political-activity and full democracy.
 The Turkish National Police are responsible for maintaining
 public order in most of.the country. In martial law areas (9
 out.of.67 .provinces compared to 34 out of 67 at the end of
 1984) military authorities oversee security through the
 Gendarmerie, which functions as the police in rural areas.-
 These nine provinces are in eastern Turkey where government
 forces are-under attack by Kurdish separatist insurgents.
 Turkey is moving from a closed economy dominated by the state
 sector to a free market, export-oriented economy. Although
 the rates.of inflation and unemployment are still high, the
 economy-under the Government's structural adjustment program
 has made substantial advances. Both the level of exports and
 the 4rass.national product increased significantly in 1984-85.
 '-Restrictions have been placed on the activities of
 associations and unions, and on organic links between trade
 unions -and political parties. There are no restrictions on
 the rights of Turkish citizens to own property. The
 Constitution, by implication, regards all citizens of Turkey
 as Turks; it does not permit the separate ethnic development
 of those minorities not given special status by international
 treaty. Although women generally enjoy the same legal rights
 as men and have risen to prominent positions in many fields,
 in some districts, especially rural ones, their level of
 education and social status is far inferior to that of men.
 Turkey is, by far, the poorest member country of the
 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and
 many of its citizens live in a relatively depressed economic
 state.
 The overall status of human rights in Turkey in 1985 showed
 continuing improvement, but there are important shortcomings.
 Chief among the latter is the persistence of credible reports
 of torture, usually at the hands of poorly educated police
 officials during initial periods of incommunicado detention.
 Politicians and the press have publicized allegations of
 torture. A parliamentary report released in November 1985
 recommended that the Government introduce legislation to put
 more teeth into its laws against torture, although several
 hundred security officials, according to official sources,
 have been prosecuted and punished for acts of torture. The
 press has publicized domestic and foreign criticism of human
 rights practices and has publicized the views of banned
 politicians with increasing frequency. With a few notable
 exceptions, most of the mass trials'of recent years have
 concluded with substantial numbers of both convictions and
 
 
 1107
 TUEKEY
 acquittals. In general, human rights trends in Turkey
 continue to move in a positive direction.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no accusations of government-instigated political
 killings in 1985.
 Some 125 armed clashes occurred between government security
 forces and separatist terrorists. In an October 16 statement
 to the Parliament, the Interior Minister noted that a total of
 59 soldiers and 108 insurgents had been killed to date. There
 have also been about 74 civilian deaths related to the
 conflict since August 1984. As of August 1985, the Government
 reported that 272 persons were under detention, 133 were being
 questioned, and 186 were on trial in connection with this
 conflict.
 The Turkish General Staff (TGS) describes the insurgents as
 "terrorists/separatists" whose aim is to establish a separate
 Kurdish state incorporating parts of Turkey, Iran, and Iraq.
 Drug smugglers, Armenian terrorists, and Kurdish guerrillas
 operating from bases in Iraq, Iran, and elsewhere are also
 involved in the incidents, according to the TGS.
 The Government has mounted a security operation aimed at
 ending the violence. According to press accounts, Turkish
 forces have established a "no-man's land" in some border areas
 to control infiltration from neighboring countries. The
 inhabitants of some small villages reportedly were
 compulsorily relocated as part of that effort, and the
 Government has undertaken to arm civilian villagers in the
 affected areas.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by either the
 Government or opposition groups in Turkey in 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution states that "no one shall be subjected to
 torture or ill-treatment incompatible with human dignity."
 However, the treatment of prisoners, especially during the
 initial pretrial detention period, remained an unresolved
 human rights issue for Turkey in 1985. Allegations that
 prisoners are subjected to torture and mistreatment in prisons
 and detention houses were made throughout the year by
 parliamentarians from within the ruling party, opposition
 political parties, the press, and outside groups which monitor
 human rights practices in Turkey.
 The subject of torture was much more widely and publicly
 discussed in Turkey in 1985 than in 1984. Two opposition
 parties formed a joint committee to study human rights
 transgressions, including the practice of torture, and
 parliamentary deputies from one of these parties demanded that
 the Government investigate a number of alleged instances of
 
 
 1108
 TURKEY
 torture by police officers, including 113 deaths of detainees
 under questionable circumstances over the past several years.
 Eleven of the persons on the list allegedly died in 1985.
 Newspapers and news magazines carried both lengthy studies of
 the torture issue as well as investigative accounts of
 specific incidents, including the results of medical reports
 and the comments of responsible officials. In addition, a
 parliamentary committee to investigate prison conditions,
 composed of representatives of all three parties in
 Parliament, submitted its report to Parliament in November.
 The report concluded that while some allegations of torture
 were clearly political in nature, torture did in fact continue
 to occur. The committee made a number of recommendations to
 the Parliament for acts of legislation to redress some of the
 problems it reported.
 During 1985 a number of defendants claimed that they had been
 tortured during pretrial interrogation. The press reported
 several of these, including the so-called Kapikule Trial
 (involving former customs officials), a trial involving
 alleged.members of a Communist organization, and a case
 against alleged members of an armed revolutionary group (Dev
 Sol), in which lawyers collectively petitioned the court to
 protest the treatment of the defendants. Turkish officials
 assert that such claims are generally proven groundless but
 are now made almost.routinely in trials involving terrorists
 or drug smugglers, because the defendants can thereby retract
 any statements made outside of court and perhaps gain
 international attention.
 In its May 1985 Report, Amnesty International charged that
 torture was "widespread and systematic" in Turkey. The
 Government responded that the organization had raised old, not
 current, incidents, and that, while occasional cases of
 mistreatment unfortunately still occurred, the perpetrators
 were punished.
 In September, the Ministry of Justice published statistics on
 the number of security.officials who have been prosecuted for
 mistreatment of prisoners since the 1980 military takeover.
 According to Ministry figures, investigations have been opened
 into accusations of torture involving 4;623 civilian security
 officers. Of, these, 2,052 defendants have been acquitted, 439
 have been found guilty, and charges against 410 have been
 dropped. The remainder are still under investigation. From
 among the 624 cases that involved martial law authorities,
 some 105 persons have been found guilty.
 The Ministers of Justice and Interior have made public
 statements condemning the mistreatment of prisoners. In
 January, the High Appeals Court issued a judgment that those
 convicted of torturing a prisoner face a maximum 3-year
 sentence. Those found guilty of murder receive longer
 sentences appropriate to murder convictions. Another appeals
 court also ruled in January that supervisory officials who
 observe the mistreatment of a prisoner and take no corrective
 action are also subject to prosecution.
 Many Turks link the mistreatment of prisoners to widespread
 public acceptance of the notion that the police should enforce
 public order by whatever means necessary. Other contributory
 factors include thegenerally low educational level of police
 personnel and the lack of adequate training. The Government
 has publicly recognized the latter problem by taking steps to
 
 
 1109
 upgrade the police force, requiring secondary-level education
 for new recruits, and organizing special courses to instruct
 policemen as to their responsibilities and the limits on their
 powers under the law.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires a warrant for any arrest, except in
 certain limited circumstances, e.g., when a person is caught
 redhanded. The Police Powers Act of June 1985 reduced from 48
 hours to 24 hours the time within which a person taken into
 custody must be charged or released. This provision was
 applied to 2 police officers in Giresun Province who were
 under indictment as of October 1985 for detaining 2 suspects
 for 37 hours without a warrant and for beating them. The Law
 did not change the period of detention without charge (15
 days) in cases of "offenses committed collectively."
 In the 9 provinces under martial law or'\the 16 under
 state-of-emergency rule, an individual may be detained without
 charge for 15 to 30 days. Martial law authorities do not need
 warrants to detain suspects. Martial law commanders, subject
 to prescribed judicial procedures, may impose "internal exile"
 for up to 5 years on individuals believed to be acting against
 the "general security and public order." No such cases were
 reported in 1985.
 Once taken formally into custody to face charges, a detainee
 appears first before a public prosecutor. The prosecutor
 informs the detainee of the suspicions or accusations which
 led to the warrant for his arrest. If the prosecutor decides
 to pursue the case, the detainee is arraigned before a judge
 and allowed to retain a lawyer. The judge decides whether to
 have the accused held in detention or to permit provisional
 release during the pretrial investigative period.
 In all cases the authorities may hold a detainee incommunicado
 within the prescribed time limits until he is charged or
 released. According to the Police Powers Act, a detainee's
 next-of-kin will be notified in "the shortest time," except in
 cases where secrecy is deemed necessary, such as when others
 are believed to be involved in a given crime. A detainee may
 not have access to a lawyer until he is brought before a
 judge. However, a bill has been submitted in the Parliament
 which would require that all arrested persons must be given
 immediate access to a lawyer.
 The system of justice includes a bail system under which the
 arraigning judge may release the accused on presentation of an
 appropriate guarantee, or order him held in preventive
 detention if the court determines that there is a risk that he
 may flee or destroy evidence. While Turkish law has no
 specific provision for habeas corpus, the Constitution
 includes the right of detainees to request speedy conclusion
 of arraignment and trial, or release "if the restriction
 placed upon them is not lawful." Especially in mass trials,
 the speed with which court proceedings are concluded or
 provisional release is granted is not so rapid as
 constitutional provisions would suggest. Indeed, due process
 provisions of Turkish jurisprudence often tend to prolong both
 civil and criminal cases.
 
 
 1110
 TURKEY
 The Constitution prohibits forced labor. Turkish judicial
 authorities, both civil and martial law, have the power to
 impose sentences of internal exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In most cases, defendants have the right to an open trial.
 Family members and lawyers may attend the trial. Members of
 the public and press are also usually free to attend. In some
 trials, particularly those held in military prisons or on
 military compounds, members of the public must seek permission
 to attend. The authorities usually grant such permission.
 The Constitution accords a defendant the right to retain the
 lawyer of his choice. In September 1985, however, the press
 reported that the President of the Turkish Union of Bar
 Associations had charged state security courts and military
 courts with depriving defendants of legal counsel by excluding
 defense lawyers from court hearings on various technical
 grounds.
 Although Turkey is overwhelmingly Muslim, its court system and
 judicial procedures are modeled on the Swiss and Italian
 systems. There are no Shari'a (Islamic law) courts.
 The Constitution declares that "judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties" and provides for their secure
 tenure. It also states that no authority may give orders or
 recommendations to judges concerning the exercise of judicial
 power. The Supreme Council of Judges and Public Prosecutors,
 appointed by the President and including the Minister of
 Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts
 and oversees those of the lower courts.
 People tried for the expression of views critical of the
 Constitution or of the integrity of the Turkish State are
 charged under Criminal Code articles specifically relating to
 the expression of such views. Their trials take place in one
 of eight state security courts which deal only with trials of
 this type.
 In provinces under martial law, all defendants accused of
 terrorism or other offenses against the security of the State
 are tried in military courts. Martial law judges normally
 have law degrees and observe the same professional standards
 as criminal judges. They may not be transferred at the
 discretion of military commanders. In provinces under a state
 of emergency, civilian courts try cases.
 Civilian and military courts generally conduct trials under
 the same rules of procedure, based on the Constitution or
 martial law regulations, respectively. A conviction in either
 system may be appealed to the appropriate civilian or military
 appeals court. If an appeals court overturns a lower court's
 guilty verdict, the case is sent back to the lower court for
 reconsideration. If the lower court insists on its original
 verdict, the case is returned to the Joint Council of the
 Appeals Court for a binding verdict. In some cases,
 particularly capital cases, appeals are automatic to the
 Supreme Court or to the High Court of Military Appeals. If a
 death sentence is confirmed by the appeals court, it must be
 approved by the Parliament, and, finally, by the President.
 
 
 1111
 TURKEY
 Certain trials, such as the trial of leaders of the
 Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions (DISK) and those
 in the first Peace Association case, have continued for up to
 4 years. The DISK defendants (except for five held on other
 charges) and one-third of the Peace Association defendants are
 free on bail, but it is not clear when either trial will end.
 It is not unusual for mass trials to last 4 years or more,
 with defendants being held in custody during most or all of
 the trial.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners held in
 Turkey's jails during 1985 vary greatly with the source and
 the source's definition of a "political prisoner." The Prime
 Minister was quoted in April 1985 as stating that there were
 no political prisoners--only anarchists--in Turkish prisons.
 Figures published in the press list over 3,600 convicted
 persons serving prison sentences for crimes against the
 security of the State, crimes against security forces, or for
 belonging to armed organizations. Many of these were
 convicted of crimes of violence. Of that total, 1,700
 belonged to the last category. Several thousand other people
 were incarcerated while under investigation or undergoing
 trial for similar alleged offenses.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Entry by government officials into a private residence and
 interception or monitoring of private correspondence are
 permitted only upon issuance of a judicial warrant.
 In the nine provinces still under martial law, the authorities
 have the legal power "without need for a warrant, application,
 or request.. to search residences, or buildings of all
 societies, associations, political parties, unions, clubs,
 business locations, or offices belonging to or occupied by
 juridical as well as private bodies." They also may search,
 hold, or seize without warrant persons, letters, telegrams,
 and documents. There is no evidence that this power is widely
 used or abused, nor are there allegations or evidence of
 widespread use of electronic surveillance.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There was much greater freedom of expression in every medium
 in Turkey in 1985 than had been the case in 1984.
 Discontinuation of martial law in November 1985 in Istanbul
 removed a major restraint on freedom of the press.
 The now-dissolved National Security Council promulgated a law
 in December 1983 which banned all criticism of the decrees,
 communiques, and actions of that body and its members. The
 same law also proscribed all statements praising or condemning
 leaders of banned (pre-1980) political parties. In practice,
 however, public disregard of that law has become increasingly
 commonplace. The President and members of the Presidential
 Council, who formerly comprised the National Security Council,
 have declared that they will not object to the publication of
 the minutes of their secret meetings during the period
 1980-83, if the Parliament agrees.
 
 
 1112
 
 TURKEY
 The press in Turkey is privately owned and reflects a wide
 range of political views.. Turkish Radio and Television (TRT),
 however, is a government monopoly, and the lion's share of its
 news coverage is traditionally devoted to the ruling
 government. Opposition political parties have harshly
 criticized TRT's programming and news coverage for ignoring
 their political parties.
 In 1985, the press enjoyed nearly complete freedom to discuss
 current political and economic issues. Some topics, however,
 which usually involved criticism of security policy and those
 responsible for it, were taboo. When two foreign playwrights
 discussed human rights in Turkey with the press in Istanbul,
 martial law authorities forbade publication of the story. In
 addition, the State prosecuted a number of journalists and
 writers for violations of laws limiting criticism of the
 previous (military) government, for violating Turkey's
 secularist principles or for writing pro-Communist
 propaganda. For example, Professor Yalcin Kucuk, who is not
 imprisoned, is now facing his fourth retrial on charges that
 his book, "For a New Republic", was Communist propaganda.
 Fifty-six prominent intellectuals, who in 1984 signed a
 petition to the Government concerning human rights, remain on
 trial in Ankara, though all are free. Also, on November 12
 the Military Supreme Court of Appeals struck down the
 acquittal earlier in the year by a lower court of 19 members
 of the Turkish Writers Union. They were charged with seeking
 to turn the union into a Communist organization. In late
 December, the lower court reaffirmed the verdict of
 acquittal. All defendants remain free at this time.
 Martial law authorities may, and occasionally do, ban the
 import or sale of any publications or films which are deemed
 to be hostile or harmful to Turkey. Such bans apply most
 often to pornography and to what is deemed to be Communist or
 religious (usually Islamic fundamentalist) propaganda.
 The right of indigenous minority groups to use their own
 languages is also limited. The Constitution states that the
 official language of the country is Turkish. Although one
 article bans discrimination on the basis of language, others
 prohibit the public use of "languages prohibited by law."
 However, legislation has never been enacted prohibiting
 specific languages. The Government has stated that the intent
 of these articles is to foster Turkish as the language of all
 citizens for all uses, as part of its effort to inculcate in
 all Turkish citizens a sense of identity with the Turkish
 state and nation as opposed to identification with any
 particular groups within the nation. There are four main
 ethnic groups in Turkey whose native language and/or culture
 is not Turkish: Kurds, Arabs, Armenians, and Greeks. The
 Treaty of Lausanne guarantees the use of Greek and Armenian in
 schools and religious education. The Government honors that
 guarantee. In practice, the severity of restrictions on the
 use of a minority language appears to depend on the perceived
 threat the group in question presents to the integrity of the
 Turkish State. For example, the use of Kurdish, which the
 Government believes fosters separatist tendencies, is severely
 restricted. Use of Arabic, about which there are no such
 concerns, is not similarly restricted.
 The State operates all Turkish institutions of higher
 education. Partly as a result of political violence emanating
 
 
 1113
 TURKEY
 from university campuses in the late 1970's, the Government
 has moved since 1980 to bring universities under tight,
 centralized control through a Higher Education Council. The
 Constitution and the Political Parties Law prohibit faculty
 members and students from becoming members of political
 parties or involved in political activities. Thus, faculty or
 student political associations of any type are banned, and
 political parties are also forbidden to form youth branches.
 Some faculty members who were fired when martial law was in
 effect throughout the country have unsuccessfully petitioned
 the Higher Education Council for reinstatement. There is a
 court case pending to determine the constitutionality of the
 earlier dismissals.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior permission from
 the appropriate authorities. In the provinces still under
 martial law, this permission must be obtained from martial law
 authorities. In 1985, before the lifting of martial law in
 Istanbul, permission was given for a large rally to protest
 Bulgaria's oppression of its Turkish minority. In addition,
 the left-of-center Social Democracy Party held a mass meeting
 in Istanbul to protest government policies, and the Turkish
 Trade Union Confederation (TURK-IS) held several indoor
 rallies.
 Updated regulations on rallies and demonstrations were
 published in the official gazette on August 9, 1985.
 According to the regulations, marching routes, rally areas,
 crowd dispersion routes, and poster-hanging locations are to
 be fixed for each city in January of each year.
 The laws on associations and trade unions prohibit all
 associations and trade unions from having any ties to
 political parties. The trade union law and the Constitution
 also prohibit any political activity by trade unions,
 including the endorsement of parties or candidates and
 contributions to their campaigns. However, trade union
 activity in the defense of workers' social and economic
 interests is not considered political activity. The unions
 have taken advantage of this exception to mount strenuous
 public campaigns against various government policies and to
 lobby government and opposition parliamentarians in support of
 labor positions. Those unions and confederations which are
 organized in accordance with the 1983 Labor Law have been
 allowed to organize workplaces freely.
 DISK, which was suspended under martial law in 1981 and whose
 leaders have been on trial since December 24, 1981, has not
 been allowed to reorganize pending the outcome of the trial.
 The DISK leaders are charged with "trying to change the form
 of government" and with "interfering with the work of the
 Parliament." Some defendants are charged with culpability in
 acts of violence. All defendants are free on bail, but the
 organization and its funds remain under the control of
 court-appointed trustees.
 Although only a small percentage of Turkey's total work force
 of some 16 million is organized, over 60 percent of
 industrialized workers are union members covered by collective
 bargaining agreements. As a result, unions have a significant
 impact on the economy, especially on its work rules and wage
 
 
 1114
 
 structure. While the 1983 Labor Law strictly regulates the
 bargaining process and makes general strikes, political
 strikes, and solidarity (secondary) strikes illegal, unions
 are nevertheless able to represent their workers, engage in
 collective bargaining, and are beholden to their members'
 interests, not the Government's. (Strikes against companies
 established in the newly created free trade zones are also
 forbidden for 10 years, during which period both employers and
 unions must accept binding arbitration.) Turkish unions and
 confederations maintain ties with the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTU), and other bodies.
 Both the ILO and the ICFTU have closely monitored the
 situation of organized labor in Turkey since the military
 intervention of September 12, 1980. ILO reports have noted
 the increase in government cooperation as well as some
 improvements on the outstanding issues; however, the
 continuing DISK trial remains a major concern, as do some
 restrictions on trade unions (for example, on political
 activities). The ICFTU has followed the DISK trial closely,
 although DISK is not an ICFTU affiliate, and has urged the
 Government to amend its labor laws and Constitution along the
 lines urged by Turkey's largest union confederation, the
 ICFTU-affiliated TURK-IS.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The majority of Turks are Sunni Muslim. There is also an
 eclectic minority "Alevi" group made up of adherents to
 different varieties of Shi'ism.
 The Constitution proclaims secularism to be a basic
 characteristic of the state. The political and military
 elites regard the principle of secular government as an
 essential attribute of a modern, Western-style, democratic
 system. Stringent constitutional and legal restrictions on
 religious activism in politics hinder the efforts of a small
 minority of Islamic fundamentalists who advocate a greater
 role for Islam in Turkish political life, if not the
 establishment of a state based on the Shari'a.
 The Constitution stipulates that "everyone has the right to
 freedom of conscience, religious belief, and conviction."
 Constitutional and legal restrictions which are intended to
 protect the principle of secularism and separation of church
 and state limit that right significantly. For example, during
 the early years of the republic, the State suppressed certain
 Sufi brotherhoods, including the Dervish orders. In 1985 the
 Government charged some members of one such order with
 antisecularist activities. The trial stimulated lively debate
 on religious orthodoxy and its proper place in contemporary
 Turkey.
 The Criminal Code proscribes advocacy of a theocratic state or
 proselytizing by any person or group. Twenty-three Turkish
 Jehovah's Witnesses were convicted in 1984 for proselytizing
 and for allegedly advocating institution of a theocratic state
 and were sentenced to prison terms of up to 6 years and 8
 months. Although their convictions were overturned by an
 appellate court in July 1985, they were reaffirmed by the
 court of first instance and are now awaiting final
 adjudication. All of the defendants are free pending result
 of the final appeal.
 
 
 1115
 TURKEY
 The Political Parties Law prohibits the establishment of any
 political party advocating theocracy or the foundation of law
 and government, even partially, on religious principles.
 Several former administrators of the now-dissolved National
 Salvation Party, convicted in 1983 of "turning a legally
 established party into a front working for the establishment
 of a regime based on theocratic principles," were acquitted by
 an appellate court in September 1985.
 Under the Constitution, Islamic religious instruction,
 following a state-prepared curriculum, is compulsory for all
 students except those who declare themselves non-Muslim. The
 courses of about 2 hours per week are taught by lay teachers.
 Extracurricular Koran courses using government-approved texts
 are permitted.
 Armenian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Greek Catholic, Jewish,
 Syrian Christian, Roman Catholic, and Protestant religious
 minorities are found throughout Turkey but are primarily
 concentrated in Istanbul. These groups operate churches,
 monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious
 foundations, such as hospitals and orphanages. Guarantees of
 minority rights, beyond those contained in the Constitution,
 are included in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), which provides
 that non-Muslim minority communities may maintain separate
 schools for their children.
 Non-Muslim minority groups have repeatedly complained about
 government policies and procedures concerning the operation of
 community schools, the formation of parish councils, and the
 registration and repair of church property. Government claims
 on property endowed by religious charitable organizations have
 also been cited as a major concern. There were complaints in
 1985 about a government ruling that a 1984 law, which permits
 religious foundations to increase property rents, applies only
 to Muslims. Of continuing concern to some non-Muslim
 religious communities is the dearth of new clergy. The lack
 of clerics for these communities stems partly from the closure
 of some seminaries and partly from the inability of the
 communities to generate enough candidates for the religious
 life from their indigenous populations.
 The Greek Orthodox community is concerned about its inability
 to obtain permission to rebuild a part of the Patriarchate
 administration building, although some progress was made on
 this issue in 1985. Relations between the Church and the
 Government were improved when Archbishop Iakovos, the Primate
 of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America,
 was permitted to visit Turkey in 1985. lakovos had not been
 allowed to enter Turkey since 1961.
 A dispute between the Greek community and the Government arose
 in May 1985 over alterations to a Greek Orthodox church in an
 Istanbul suburb which the Greek community claimed was
 protected by the Treaty of Lausanne. The Government asserted
 that the alterations were necessitated by a compelling public
 need for road-widening and did not prevent continued use of
 the church for religious services. Further, the Government
 pointed out that several mosques were razed in a similar
 project. The alterations have now been completed.
 The daily use of languages other than Turkish by non-Muslim
 religious minorities, such as Greek, Armenian, Hebrew, and
 Arabic, in religious services is allowed but is declining.
 
 
 1116
 
 TURKEY
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is general freedom of movement within Turkey, except in
 the nine provinces under martial law where authorities have
 the seldom-used power to restrict movement. Martial law
 authorities may expel "persons whose presence in the martial
 law area is determined as prejudicial," or restrict and
 prohibit their residence in, or entry into, certain areas
 under martial law. Some border areas are off-limits to
 foreigners who have not been given specific permission to
 visit them.
 Turks are free to travel abroad, and increasing numbers have
 done so since currency controls were relaxed.
 Turkish law guarantees citizens protection against
 deportation, extradition, or denial of reentry. The
 Constitution guarantees the rights of Turks and their families
 living abroad to return home. However, under the provisions
 of Turkish citizenship law, the Government may deprive of
 their citizenship Turks who have refused to return to Turkey
 to face criminal charges there or who have been determined to
 have expatriated themselves.
 Turkey has permanently resettled about 4,500 Afghan refugees
 in recent years and provides a temporary haven for Eastern
 European refugees in two temporary settlement facilities. The
 Government does not grant refugee status to Iranians.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Turkey has a multiparty presidential parliamentary system.
 The president is elected by Parliament for a single 7-year
 term. He has broad executive powers. The current President,
 whose election was automatic with the approval of Turkey's new
 Constitution in the 1982 referendum, is retired General Kenan
 Evren, former head of the Turkish General Staff and the
 National Security Council which ruled Turkey during the period
 of military rule.
 The unicameral Parliament has 400 seats elected on a
 proportional basis. The Election Law provides that a party
 must obtain at least 10 percent of the vote in order to win
 seats in the Parliament. The 10 percent threshold is intended
 to prevent political fragmentation and recurrence of the
 parliamentary paralysis of the late 1970's.
 Prime Minister Turgut Ozal's Motherland Party retained its
 parliamentary majority throughout 1985. Two opposition
 parties and some independents made up the balance.
 Several changes occurred in 1985 as Turkey moved toward full
 political democracy. These included the formation of a new
 political party, the merger of two opposition parties, one of
 which was not represented in the Parliament, the acquittal of
 20 former officials of the banned rightwing National Salvation
 Party, and increased press coverage of the views of
 politicians constitutionally banned from political activity.
 Besides the continuing political ban on leadership figures of
 the pre-September 1980 political system, restrictions on
 political activity include the barring of certain groups from
 
 
 1117
 TURKEY
 operating independently in the political arena, for example,
 the ban on political parties which advocate a theocratic
 state. Furthermore, no party may advocate the superiority or
 dictatorship of a particular social class or group, or
 "exclusive" or "elitist" political philosophies, and no party
 may be formed around a particular ethnic or cultural group.,
 Prohibited political groupings also include a Communist or
 other Marxist party based on class or a Fascist "elitist"
 party. Any of these is regarded as inimical to a
 Western-style democratic society and threatening to Turkey's
 fundamental integrity. People considered Communists or
 Fascists by the authorities are banned from membership in any
 party. Other groups permanently banned from joining or
 actively participating in political parties include actyive
 members of the armed forces and certain categories of civil
 servants--a prohibition based on the pre-1980 politicization
 of government and security structures.
 The Constitution guarantees equal political rights for men and
 women. Turkey was one of the first countries to grant women
 full, equal political rights. There are 12 women members of
 Parliament, and several women hold important positions in
 party hierarchies, although the present 22-member Cabinet has
 no women members.
 Members of minorities, Muslim and non-Muslim, face no legal
 limitations on political participation as long as they'accept
 a Turkish national identity. The small numbers of most
 minorities, however, limit their ability to play a major role
 in politics. Kurds do play a large role in Turkish political
 life, again on the condition of their acceptance of Turkish
 nationality. Dozens of members of the Turkish Parliament are
 of Kurdish ethnic background.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government permitted visits by foreigners to discuss human
 rights in Turkey during 1985 and in most cases facilitated
 attendance at trials and contacts with officials. Visitors to
 Turkey in 1985 included rapporteurs from the Council of Europe
 (COE) and the European Parliament (EP), a delegation from the
 European Human Rights Commission, and representatives of the
 international writers' organization, PEN. In December,
 representatives of the U.S. Helsinki Watch Committee visited
 Turkey and had extensive meetings with Turkish officials,
 including Prime Minister Ozal. Although the ILO did not visit
 Turkey in 1985, in reviewing the report of its 1984 contact
 mission (the third such mission in as many years), it noted
 the cooperation it had received from the Government.
 Amnesty International met with officials of the Turkish
 Government outside of Turkey but sent no official request for
 a visit to Turkey in 1985. There is no Amnesty International
 branch or any other domestic human rights organizations known
 to be operating in Turkey.
 The Council of Europe in 1985 continued to pay special
 attention to the human rights situation in Turkey. In
 resolutions passed in April 1985, the Council cited the
 progress that Turkey had made but expressed concern over the
 continuation of martial law and the existence of the death
 sentence.
 
 
 11118
 The European Parliament also concerned itself with Turkish
 human rights questions in 1985. In October, on the basis of a
 report prepared by a British Labor Party member serving on the
 Political Committee, the European Parliament voted not to
 renew its official ties to the Turkish Parliament. It cited
 the use of the death penalty, the continuation of the DISK
 trial, and the existence of torture as reasons for its
 decision. Some parliamentarians who opposed the decision
 charged that it was taken more for political than for human
 rights reasons. In an official response, the Turkish Foreign
 Ministry took issue with the veracity of the report upon which
 the vote was taken, charging that the author was "prejudiced"
 and the report was "distorted" and "full of groundless
 accusations."
 In 1982, five nations--France, The Netherlands, Denmark,
 Sweden, and Norway--brought a formal complaint against Turkey
 before the European Human Rights Commission for breaches of
 the European Convention on Human Rights. The complaint cited
 violations of articles concerning treatment of prisoners and
 civil rights for the period September 1980 through July 1982.
 On December 9, the parties reached a "friendly settlement"
 which included among its provisions a commitment by Turkey to
 issue instructions to all public officials to observe human
 rights principles and to make periodic reports on the measures
 adopted to ensure effective protection of human rights.
 In its 1905 Report (covering the year 1984), Amnesty
 International continued to be concerned about the imprisonment
 of a considerable number of prisoners of conscience and about
 widespread and systematic torture and ill-treatment of
 political prisoners. It was also concerned about the effects
 of inadequate access to lawyers and the use of confessions
 allegedly induced by torture on the fairness of trials before
 military courts. Freedom House rated Turkey "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Unofficial, preliminary reports of the just-completed national
 census show the population of Turkey in 1985 at about 51.4
 million, with an canual growth rate of 2.8 percent. This
 compares with World Bank estimates of a population of
 50,661,000 and an annual growth rate of 2.3 percent. In 1983,
 per capita gross national product (GNP) was approximately
 S1,230.
 The Turkish economy has made substantial advances under the
 economic structural adjustment program begun in January 1980
 in consultation with the International Monetary Fund, the
 World Bank, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
 Development. Through a combination of monetary and fiscal
 policies, export incentives, and realistic exchange rates, the
 stabilization program has promoted a more efficient,
 export-oriented economy, less dependent on a highly protected
 domestic market. The Ozal Government has continued the basic
 policies of the structural adjustment program and has
 introduced new measures, such as import liberalization,
 designed to make Turkish industry more competitive in the
 world market. The economy has generally responded positively
 to these policies. In 1984, real GNP is estimated to have
 increased by 6 percent, and exports were up by 24 percent in
 dollar terms. Inflation and unemployment, however, continued
 to be problemp. The wholesale price index rose by 50.3
 percent in 1984 and is expected to increase by about 35
 
 
 1119
 TURKEY
 percent in 1985. Estimates of unemployment range from 16 to
 over 20 percent.
 Turkey has substantial agricultural resources which fulfill
 most of its food requirements and permit some exports. In
 1977, caloric supply as a percentage of the total minimum
 requirement was 118.6 percent. Safe water was available to 95
 percent of the urban population and 62 percent of the rural
 population, according to estimates made in 1980.
 Basic medical care is available to most of the population
 (with the possible exception of a few provinces in the
 southeast), regardless of income. Life expectancy was 64
 years, and infant mortality in 1985 was estimated to be 90 per
 1,000 live births. Primary schooling is compulsory, although
 not universally available. University tuition is heavily
 subsidized. In 1980, the literacy rate for the general adult
 population was estimated to be 68.8 percent--83.2 percent for
 adult males and 53.4 percent for females.
 The Constitution guarantees the right to reasonable conditions
 of labor suited to the worker's age, sex, and capacity, and
 grants the right to rest and leisure and a "fair wage." The
 labor law forbids the employment of children under 13, and
 restricts children under 15 to "light work which will not harm
 their health and physical development, prevent their
 attendance at occupational training and orientation programs,
 or their ability to benefit from education." Children between
 15 and 18 years of age may not be employed in underground or
 underwater work, nor may they be employed at night. Girls and
 women may not be employed in underground or underwater work,
 but, if over the age of 18, may work night shifts under
 conditions specified jointly by the Ministry of Health and
 Social Welfare and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. A
 board composed of government, private sector, and labor
 representatives establishes national minimum wages for the
 agricultural and nonagricultural sectors. The labor law
 provides for a 7.5-hour day and a 45-hour workweek.
 Acceptable conditions of work are both guaranteed by the
 Constitution and sought after by the workers, though there
 remains a considerable gap, especially in the area of
 occupational safety and health, between society's goals and
 laws, on the one hand, and actual practice on the other. The
 trade unions have repeatedly complained that existing
 regulations governing health, safety, and working conditions
 are not adequately enforced.
 Turkey has long been in the forefront of Muslim nations in the
 promotion and protection of women's rights. Although some
 conservative elements in Parliament and in society at large
 have resisted advances in women's rights, President Evren has
 been a consistent champion of equality for women. Women have
 full suffrage, occasionally attain high public office, and are
 represented--albeit not always in significant numbers--in all
 Turkish professions and institutions. Women have served or
 are currently employed at the rank of university rector and
 dean, ambassador, political party vice president, and army
 colonel. Turkish businesswomen play significant roles in many
 industries, and a few sit on the boards of some of Turkey's
 largest private firms. Female lawyers and judges are no
 rarity, and female doctors are dominant in some specialties.
 Despite government policies to promote and protect women's
 rights, the role of women in smaller communities and rural
 
 
 1120
 
 TURKEY
 areas, especially in the southeast, is still defined by
 centuries of traditional practice. Many women and girls in
 the southeast are still partially or fully veiled. Prevailing
 cultural values make it difficult for some women to receive
 primary or secondary education or to pursue careers outside of
 the home.
 It is a longstanding cultural policy of the Turkish State,
 supported by most Turks, that all the citizens of Turkey are
 "Turks" and use the Turkish language. This policy derives in
 large part from attempts to partition Turkey after World War I
 with the aim of establishing independent ethnic states on the
 territory of what is now the Turkish Republic. The wariness
 of Turkish governments toward groups which emphasize ethnic
 identity has since been reinforced by the activities of
 separatist movements inspired from outside and within Turkey--
 movements that frequently promoted terrorism and anarchy. As
 a consequence, the Turkish Government aims at the assimilation
 of individuals of non-Turkish ethnic backgrounds into the
 mainstream of Turkish society and culture. In order to
 further this objective, the Government has forcefully
 discouraged manifestations of ethnic differences, in some
 cases by law; for example, the use of languages other than
 Turkish for certain purposes is prohibited.
 The separatist terrorist activities in Kurdish areas have
 posed the most serious challenge to the nationalities policy
 of successive Turkish governments. Complicating the issue is
 the fact that ethnic Kurds constitute a significant proportion
 of the population within the provinces in which they are
 concentrated. These provinces also include Turkey's poorest
 and least developed areas. Successive governments have
 recognized this situation and launched major programs for
 rural electrification, power plants, and irrigation to
 generate employment and income for the region. In 1985, both
 the President and Prime Minister traveled to the southeast to
 underscore the Government's commitment to the development of
 that region.
 
 
 1121
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..       286.0    139.5    175.9
 LOANS ..............  .... 85.0     63.5     85.0
 GRANTS ................. 201.0      76.0     90.9
 AA......................  285.0    138.5    175.0
 LOANS ..............  .... 85.0     63.5     85.0
 GRANTS ................. 200.0      75.0     90.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASS ST,)...      285.0    138.5   175.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................  .00       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.0      1.0      0.9
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.0      1.0      0.9
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        1.0      1.0      0.9
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 1IJ., ASSIST.-TOTAL...*      402.8    718.3   703.6
 * LOANS .............   .... 290.0   585.0    485.0
 GRANTS ................. 112.8     133.3    218.6
 A.MAP  GRANTS ...........    110.0    130.0   215.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....      290.0    585.0   485.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        2.8      3.3      3.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 111o.OTAL ECON. & MIL...       688.8    857.8    879.5
 LOANS ................... 375.0    648.5    570.0
 GRANTS ................. 313.3     209.3    309.5
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     70.5      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ............... 0.0          70.5      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   676.8    945.2    705.6   7214.0
 IBRD             669.4    794.3    698.5   5928.6
 IFC                5.3    150.0      7.1    402.9
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    178.1
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               2.1      0.9      0.0     67.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     11.7
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0    625.0
 
 
 1122
