 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliament, the Grand Na-
 tional Assembly, which elects the President. Suleyman Demirel was elected Presi-
 dent in 1993. December 1995 elections led to an unstable coalition government that
 fell in the spring, and in July Necmettin Erbakan, leader of the Refah party, became
 the first Islamist Prime Minister in the Republic s history. He heads a coalition gov-
 ernment with the secular center-right True Path Part(DYP), whose leader, Tansu
 Ciller, is Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. The Government respects
 the constitutional provisions for an independent judiciary.
 For over a decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist
 Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), whose goal is a separate state of Kurdistan in
 southeastern Turkey. A state of emergency, declared in 1984, continues in 9 south-
 eastern provinces where the Government faces substantial terrorist violence from
 the PKK (The state of emergency was lifted in Mardin province in November.) A
 regional governor for the state of emergency has authority over the ordinary gov-
 ernors in the 9 provinces, as well as 2 adjacent ones, for security matters. The state
 of emergency allows him to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including re-
 strictions on the press and removal from the area of persons whose activities are
 deemed hostile to public order. The state of emergency decree was most recently re-
 newed for 4 months in November.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) have primary responsibility for security in
 urban areas, while the Jandarma (gendarmene) carry out this function in the coun-
 tryside. The armed forces continued to combat the PKK in the state of emergency
 region, thereby taking on an internal security function. Although civilian and mili-
 tary authorities remain publicly committed to the establishment of a state of law
 and respect for human rights, some members of the security forces, particularly po-
 lice "special teams," Jandarma, and TNP personnel, committed serious human
 rights abuses.
 Turkey has a primarily market-based economy driven by an increasingly active
 private sector. The agricultural sector employs nearly one-half of the country's labor
 force but contributes only 15 percent of the gross national product (GNP) and total
 exports. The leading industrial sectors-textiles, iron, and steel-provide the leading
 exports. Impressive economic growth over the past 15 years has translated into an
 improved standard of living and the creation of a growing middle class. Per capita
 GNP is approximately $3,000. Such positive developments, however, have been ac-
 companied by substantial macroeconomic imbalances. The Government had little
 success in implementing needed reforms to reduce the budget deficit and inflation.
 The introduction of populist economic measures pushed the budget deficit to nearly
 10 percent of GNP while inflation exceeded 80 percent. Persistently high inflation
 over the past decade has worsened income distribution. The conflict in the southeast
 and maintenance of a large national defense establishment continue to be a signifi-
 
 
 1154
 cant drain on the economy. As expected, implementation of the customs union with
 the European Union in January appears to have aggravated the trade deficit in the
 short term. Corruption has taken an economic toll and has sapped popular faith in
 the Government.
 Serious human rights problems continued. The Government was unable to sustain
 improvements made in 1995 and, as a result, its record was uneven in 1996 and
 deteriorated in some respects. Human rights emerged as a priority public issue dur-
 ing the year. There was growing recognition in the Government, arliament, the
 media, academia, big business, and the public at large that the countiy's human
 rights performance is inadequate and needs to be brought in line, not only with its
 international obligations and commitments, but also with popular aspirations and
 demands.
 The situation in the southeast was of particular concern. The Government has
 long denied its Kurdish population, located largely in the southeast, basic cultural
 and linguistic rights. As part of its fight against the PKK, the Government forcibly
 displaced large numbers of noncombatants, tortured civilians, and abridged freedom
 of expression. The PKK has committed widespread abuses and regularly employed
 terrorism against the Government and civilians, mostly Kurds. In January a mini-
 bus ariYi_" g 11 people, including some supporters of a Kurdsh political party, was
 ambushed mn Sirnak provine, and all were killed. The Government blamed the
 PICK, but an independent "Working Group for Peace" concluded that security forces
 were responsible.
 Estimates of the total number of villagers forcibly evacuated from their homes
 since the conflict began vary widely: between 330,000 and 2 million. A credible esti-
 mate given by a former Member of Parliament from the region is around 560 000.
 Although the Government began a new resettlement program this year, its efforts
 to deaT with and compensate the many internally displaced remained inadequate.
 As of October, 2,019 households with 15,314 people were resettled, according to gov-
 ernment figures.
 Human rights abuses were not limited to the southeast. Extrajudicial killings, in-
 cluding deaths in detention, from the excessive use of force, in safe house raids, and
 "mystery killings continued to ocuur with disturbing frequency. Disappearances
 also continued. Ti~orture remained widespreadi Polie and security forces often
 abused detainees and employed torture dring periods of incommunicado detention
 and interrogation. Prolonged pretrial detention and lengthy trials continued to be
 problemsrt Metin Goktepe died from wounds he sustained while in po-
 ie custody. Fort-ight polie memers were charged in his death; 14 of whom
 were dismised from the orce pending trial. In western Turkey, 10 police officers
 from the city of Manisa, including 2 superintendents, are being tried for torturing
 14 people, mostly teenagers accused of ties to a leftist terrorist organization. In Is-
 tanbul, five police officers have been indicted for torturing Gulderen Baran and four
 others whom they suspected of being members of a terrorist organization. PriSon
 conditions remained poor. At least 12 prisoners died during nationwide hunger
 strikes between March and July. At Diyarbakir prison, 10 prisoners were beaten to
 death by security forces called in to quell a disturbance in September, a parliamen-
 tary commission investigated and recommended that 68 police and security person-
 nel be tried for their role in the violence. They were charged with manslaughter.
 Limits on freedm of expression remained another serious problem. For example,
 at various times 135 journalists were detained, 11 of whom were formally arrested.
 Seven were reportedly attacked and one kidnaped. Academics, students, Members
 of Parliament, and intellectuals also had their freedom of expression limited. The
 Government continued to use the 1991 Anti-Terrr Law, with its broad and ambigu-
 ous definition of terrorism, to detain both alleged terrorists and others on the charge
 that their acts words, or ideas constituted dissemination of separatist propaganda.
 A book titled 'Ihe Euphrates Flows Sadly," published by a Kurdish former Member
 of Parliament (M.P.) from Erzurum, Abdulmelik First, was confiscated as separatist
 propaganda on orders of the Istanbul State Security Court prosecutor. Prosecutors
 also used Article 312 of the Criminal Code (incitement to racial or ethnic enmity)
 with increasing frequency. The translator and publisher of a Human Rights Watch
 report on the conflict in the southeast are being charged under Article 159 of the
 Code (defaming the military). Kurdish-language broadcasts remained illegal, despite
 the fact that urdish music broadcasts are growing. Despite these developments,
 private channel television program and print media expanded the limits of debate
 on human rights and other issues of freedom of speech and the press. The number
 of licensed media rose substantially, the number of banned publications declined
 considerably, and the number of persons charged or convicted under the Anti-Terror
 Law fell significantly.
 
 
 1155
 
 Four pro-Kurdish former M.P.'s who were convicted in 1994 on charges of separat-
 ism, and whose sentences were overturned on appeal in 1995, were retried and
 found guilty in A ril on similar charges. In September their sentences were upheld
 on appeal. Like the other M.P.'s from the Democracy Party (DEP) who were earlier
 convicted of separatism, they plan to appeal to the European Commission of Human
 Rights. The Ankara State Security Court pressed charges against three other former
 DEP Parliamentarians this year, also for promoting separatism.
 In September and October, the Government prosecuted 43 members of the Pro-
 Kurdish People's Democracy Party (HADEP), including party chairman Murat
 BozIak, based on an incident at the party's June 23 convention in Ankara, during
 which the Turkish flag was torn down and replaced by a PKK banner. The accused
 face minimum sentences ranging between 12 and 221Y years, and the party itself
 may be declared illegal (as were two of its predecessors). Of the 43 defendants, 16
 remain in custody, by year's end, the trial had not yet concluded.
 Officials of various government agencies continued to harass, intimidate, indict,
 and imprison human rights monitors journalists, and lawyers for ideas that they
 expressed in public forums. In May Mustafa Cinkilic, a representative of the Adana
 branch of the Human Rights Foundation (HRF), and Dr. Tufan Kose, who operated
 a center for the treatment of victims of torture were charged with operating an un-
 lawful health center. Human rights monitors alleged that the prosecution of Cinkilic
 and Kose was a government attempt to harass the HRF. There were several hear-
 ings during the year, and the case is set to resume in February 1997. In May
 Seyfettin KiziIkan president of the Diyarbakir Medical Chamber, was arrested on
 the grounds that he had PKK ties. He was sentenced in June to a 3-year prison
 term by the Diyarbakir State Security Court but remains free pending the outcome
 of his appeal.
 Prosecutions of police or security officers for killings and torture increased some-
 what. However the climate of impunity reflected in the relatively small number of
 convictions probably remains the single largest obstacle to reducing these troubling
 human rights abuses. The lack of early access to an attorney by those detained is
 also a major factor in the use of torture by police and security forces.
 The Government expanded human rights training for the police and military. The
 military improved the training of its officers and noncommissioned officers, which
 human righ ts nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) reported led to a reduction in
 human rights violations. Human rights education in primary schools is mandatory;
 it is an elective in high schools. The Refab/DYP coalition Government initially abol-
 ished the position of State Minister for Human Rights, but recreated it in Novem-
 ber, appointing Lutfu Esngun to the position and providing him with more person-
 nel and resources than his predecessors. Some discrimination against women per-
 sists. Spousal abuse and child labor remain serious problems.
 PKCK terrorists murdered noncombatants, targeting village officials, teachers, and
 other perceived representatives of the State and committed random murders in their
 effort to intimidate the ppulace. The PKK brutally murdered seven primary school
 teachers in predominantly Kurdish areas and often targeted civilians in an effort
 to prevent them from collaborating with security forces or to coerce them into assist-
 ing the insurgents. The PKK was also responsible for at least 23 disappearances.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-While accurate figures on the num-
 ber of political and extrajudicial killings were unavailable, credible reports of such
 violations by government authorities continued. The Human Rights Foundation of
 Turkey, a respected nongovernmental organization, reported in its documentation
 center announcements a number of deaths under suspicious circumstances while in
 official custody, some as an apparent result of torture.
 In January Metin Goktepe, a correspondent for Evrensel newspaper, died from
 wounds inflicted while in detention in Istanbul. Goktepe was detained by the police
 as he covered the funeral of a prisoner who died during a disturbance at Istanbul's
 Umraniye prison. Police initially denied that he had been detained, then later said
 that he died from a fall. Followinglarge public demonstrations and a parliamentary
 outcry over the circumstances of his death, an investigation led to the arrest of 48
 police officers, including 3 senior officers and a deputy commissioner. Some of these
 officers alleged that they were themselves tortured during interrogation. Fourteen
 of the accused were dismissed from the police force in October, and the case against
 all of the accused continued at year's end. The remaining police were suspended.
 (Some officers returned to work briefiy, but due to public reaction they were again
 suspended.) In January a policeman sot and killed Cetin Karaoun while the 14-
 
 
 1156
 year-old was in custody in Magazalar. Authorities are obliged by law to investigate
 all deaths in custody. However, the number of serious prosecutions of security force
 members, while increasing, remained low.
 The Human Ri.qhts Asspciation (HRA) and other human rights (NGO's) recorded
 several mystery kllings  in which the assailant's identity was unknown, many with
 the alleged complicity oi security forces. Most of the reports pertain to the southeast
 where some of the victins were leaders or prominent members of the Kurdish com-
 munity, local politicians, or members of the HADEP. The 1995 recommendations of
 a Parliamentary Commnittee, designed to purge "ilegal formations" within the State
 which the Committee said committed some mysterykiling were not implemented.
 In November a fatal car crash occurred involving: Abdallah Catli, a rightwing mil-
 itant wanted by Interpol on charges of murdering seven Labor Party members in
 1980; Huseyin Kocadag, former Istanbul deputy police chief- Gonca Uz a former
 beauty queen; and Sedat Bucak (the only survivor), an ethnic kurdish Mif. and clan
 leader with an important stake in the Government's village guard program. The in-
 cident resurrected serious concerns about corruption and the abuse of power in the
 security forces. It also led to the resignation of the Interior Minister, Mhmet Agar,
 who had been linked to the victims of the accident. A parliamentary committee was
 formed to investigate reputed links among politicians, police officials, and organized
 crime bosses.
 There was an increase in the number of reports of deaths attributable to govern-
 ment authorities due to excessive use of force. According to Amnesty International,
 four prisoners died from beatings received in January in Umraniye prison. The Par-
 liamentary Human Rights Commission concluded after an investigation that secu-
 rity forces killed 10 prisoners with truncheon blows to the back of the head while
 quelling a disturbance in Diyarbakir on September 24. A total of 37 people, includ-
 ing prison offiers, were wounded (see Section 1.c.). The Commission recommended
 that 68 police ani security personnel be tried for their role in the violence, and in
 January 1997 they were charged with manslaughter. Several NGO's have credibly
 reported that government forces used excessive force during some raids on alleged
 terrorist safe houses. Police killed three protesters during violent May Day dem-
 onstrations in Istanbul (see Section 2.b.).
 Following en investigation, six of eight police officers originally accused have been
 charged in the case of Sinan Demirtas who died in 1995 while in police custody.
 The 1995 death of journaist Safyettin T~epe in custody was ruled a suicide. In April
 the Bitis prosecutor transferred the case to the provincial administrative bard to
 detrin if any further investigation into the conduct of police officer who had de-
 tained Tep was warranted. The 1994 death in detention of Can Demirag was also
 ruled a suicide. Turkish authorities have in the past frequently claimed that deaths
 in custody were suicides. The case of police officer Abdullah Bozkurt, charged with
 the 1994 murder of Vedat Han Gulsenglu, continues; Bozkurt has been reassigned
 from Istabui to Van while his case is being prosecuted. The 1994 investigation into
 the murder of Diyarbakir tradesman Serif Avsar revealed that he was killed by six
 village guards, some  of whom were his relatives. One defendant confessed that
 Avsar was killed as the result of a family vendetta. The case in absentia continues
 concerning the death in detention in 1993 of Vakkas Dost; policeman Nurttin
 Ozturk, the accused murderer, is still at large. The trial of the 11 police officers in
 the 1992 e ssalak case continues.
 The following cases remain unresolved: the 1992 ase of Yucel Ozen, the 1994
 murder of HEFparty official Faik Candan, and the 1993 murder of journalist Ugur
 Mumcu.
 A law under which terrorists who surrendered were eligible for lighter sentences
 was not renewed, but the Government continues to encourage their surrender. The
 courts also are more lenient with such terrorists. The Government asserts that it
 treats surrendered PK members well and that only PaK coercion and propa-
 ganda-claiming that the Government kills all surrendered terrorists-has pre-
 vented an increase in the number surrendering.
 The PKK continued to commit political and extrajudicial killings, primarily in
 rural southeast Anatolia. Political killings perpetrated by the PCK have in the past
 included those of state officials (Jandarma, local mayors, imams, and school-
 teachers), state-paid paramilitary village guards and their family members, young
 villagers who refused to be recruited, and PKK guerrillas-turned-informants. Ac-
 cording to government figures, for the first 10 menths of 1996 the PICK killed 447
 people in several operations, including at least 109 unarmed civilians, and wounded
 900 other people. This total included 7 schoolteachers, bringing the total number of
 teachers killed by the PCK over the last 12 years to 153. The PIK also destroyed
 70 pa r  and middle schools. This year the PCK began a new campaign of suicide
 bmbinges by women, who had usually been drugged or coerced in other ways.
 
 
 1157
 Turkish Hizbullah, an Islamist Turkish terrorist group (not related to Lebanese
 Hizbullah) also targeted civilians in the southeast committing at least eight grue-
 some murders and injuring several other people in iyarbikar. Four trials continued
 against 89 Hizbullah meibers charged With a total of 113 murders. The Foreign
 Ministry states that a case has been opened against Hizbullah for the 1993 murder
 of DEP prliamentarian Mehmet Sincar, human rights groups consider the case a
 h. Xisa'ppear ee.-A#urat statistics on disappearances of those previously
 under dteention are hard to confirm; nonetheless, HRA figures indicate that such
 disappearances appear to have declined from a total of 221 in 1995 to 194 in 1996.
 Some persons disapp    d after witnesses reported that security forces or law en-
 forement officials took them into custody. On September 16, at least five bodies
 were found on the outskirts of the village of Baharli, near Diyarbakir. Some of the
 victims had reportedly been in police custody earlier in Sptember. The disappear-
 ances and dea s are under investigation; as yet no one has been formally charged.
 For nearly a year, mothers who aim that their children have disappeared have
 gathered weekly in a square in Istanbul to ask for their return. In July police broke
 up one of these demonstrations, temporarily detaining at least 25 people and hitting
 others with truncheons, according to eyewitnesses. During the remainder of the
 year, the demonstrations took place unimpeded.
 This year the Ministry of Interior created a missing persons bureau, which oper-
 ates 24 hours a day. It has investigated disappearances reported by the HRA for
 1995 and the first 5 months of 1996 and found, that of 187 repor dapparances,
 39 persons had since been found, 3 were fugitives from justice, 2 were killed by ille-
 gal groups, 82 who were allegedly in police custody had never been detained and
 were not being sought, 58 had been jailed for crimes, and 3 were active in terrorist
 groups.
 The Government, human rights organizations, and the media report that the PKK
 routinelykidnaps young men or threatens their families as part of its recruiting ef-
 fort. PKK terrorists continued their abductions of local villagers, teachers, journal-
 ists, and officials in the southeast. According to the Government, the PKK abducted
 23 people through October, and killed at least 4 of them.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, the Government's cooperation with un-
 scheduled foreign inspection teams, and public pledges by successive governments
 to end torture, it continued to be widespread. The HRF's torture rehabilitation cen-
 ters in Ankara, Izmir, Istanbul, and Adana reported that they accepted a total of
 354 credible applications for treatment in the first 6 months of 1996. A total of 713
 applications were received in 1995. Human rights attorneys and physicians who
 treat victims of torture say that most persons detained for or suspected of political
 crimes usually suffer some torture during periods of incommunicado detention in po-
 lice stations and Jandarma headquarters before they are brought before a court.
 Government officials admit that torture occurs. Although they deny that torture is
 systematic, they explain its occurrence by stating that it is closely tied to the State's
 fight against terrorism. The Government's drat legislation before Parliament in-
 cludes provisions for reducing lengthy prearraignment/pretrial detention periods
 cited by human rights monitors as providing occasions for torture; by year's end this
 legislation had not been passed into law.
 Many cases of torture, however, occur in western Turkey, outside the zone of con-
 flict. For example, 10 police officers, including 2 superintendents from Manisa (west-
 ern Turkey) are being tried for allegedly torturing a group of 14 teenagers whom
 they suspeted of belonng to a leftist terrorist organization. The December 1995
 incident came to light thrugh the intervention of a Manisa M. Widespread press
 coverage led to public outrage. The plie officials' trial is set to resume in February
 1997. Meanwie the separate tria  of the 15 alleged victims ended in January
 1997. Five of the students were sentenved to 12  years' imprisonment, one student
 was sentenced to 3 years,9 months, and four students to 4  years. The other five
 were acquitted. Lawyers have announced that they will appeal the convictions. The
 timing of the police and teenagers' trials precluded consideration that the teenagers'
 confessions may have been based on torture. Amnesty International published a re-
 port in November citing the Manisa case, and other alleged incidents of torture of
 children. In Istanbul, five police officers from the antiterror department were in-
 dicted in criminal court. The police are accused of torturing Gulderen Baran and
 four other detainees during an interrogation about their alleged membership in a
 terrorist organization.
 Private attorneys reported neither better treatment of those charged under the
 Anti-Terror Law nor an overall decrease in the incidence of torture in 1996. In 1996
 women again charged that sexual abuses occurred while under detention by security
 
 
 1158
 officials. In the 1995 case of Leman Celikaslan, who alleged that she was sexually
 abused by antiterror police, no evidence of rape was found, and the investigation
 was dropped, according to the HRF. In February she was found guilty of being a
 member of the PKK and sentenced to prison.
 The 1992 Criminal Trials Procedure Law (CMUK) facilitates faster attorney ac-
 cess to those arrested for common crimes- however, the CMUK's provisions for im-
 mediate attorney access do not applytotose detained under the Anti-Terror Law
 or for other "security" crimes. The CIUs allowable maximum prearraignment de-
 tention periods exceed Council of Europe maximums.
 Human rights observers report that because the arresting officer is also respon-
 sible for interrogating the suspect, some officers may resort to torture to obtain a
 confession that would justify the arrest. Commonly employed methods of torture al-
 leged by the HRF's torture treatment centers include: high-pressure cold water
 hoses, electric shocks, beating on the soles of the feet, beating of the genitalia, han-
 ing by the arms, blindfolding, sleep deprivation, deprivation of clothing, systematic
 beatings, and vaginal and anal rape with truncheons and, in some instances, gun
 barrels. Other forms of torture were sexual abuse, submersion in cold water, use of
 truncheons, hanging sandbags on detainees' necks, forcing detainees to stand on one
 foot releasing drops of water on their heads, and withholding food.
 The Government maintains that medical examinations occur once during deten-
 tion and a second time before either arraignment or release. However, former de-
 tainees assert that some medical examinations took place too long after the event
 to reveal any definitive findings of torture. According to a 1996 report by the Physi-
 cians for Human Rights (PHR) based on interviews with 39 torture survivors, a sur-
 vey of 60 physicians who officially examine detainees, and a review of more than
 150 official medical reports on detainees, law enforcement officers frequently coerce
 physicians through the use of violence and intimidation, not to report evidence of
 torture. Members of security and police forces often stay in the examination room
 when physicians are examiing detainees, resulting in intimidation of both the de-
 tainee and the physician. Physicians responded to the coercion by refraining from
 examining detainees performing cursory examinations and not reporting fin,
 or reporting physical findings but not drawing reasonable medica inferences that
 torture occurred. Sixty percent of the physicians surveyed believed that 'nearly ev-
 eryone who is detained is tortured." The report also found that doctors and other
 health care professionals in the state of emergency region have been killed, tortured,
 imprisoned, internally exiled, and legally sanctioned in the course of their profes-
 sional duties.
 The Government attempted to deal with the problem doctors face in reporting evi-
 dene of torture by makingimprovements in medical examination procedures during
 the year. The Ministry of ealth added some reporting requirements designed to in-
 crease accountability. A Ministry of Health circular from July requires "health sta-
 tion doctors" to examine detainees every 48 hours in areas where forensic doctors
 are not available. This requirement was adopted to promote independent and objec-
 tive exams. While there is no information about the implementation and impact of
 this regulation, the Turkish Medical Doctors' Union noted that practices in 1996
 were "more positive" than in the past. Ministry of Health efforts to disseminate in-
 formation on forensic medicine were generally successful; however, according to the
 Medical Doctors' Union, not all the new monitoring practices were in place, espe-
 cially in the southeast.
 Credible sources in the human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate very few of the formal complaints involving torture and pros-
 ecute only a fraction of those. Security personnel accused of violating human rights
 are held to a different standard than other citizens. The Anti-Terror Law provides
 that officials accused of torture or other mistreatment may continue to work while
 under investigation and, if convicted, may only be suspended. Special provincial ad-
 ministrative boards rather than regular courts decide whether to prosecute such
 cases. Suspects' legal fees are paid by their employing agencies. Under the state of
 emergency, any lawsuit directed at government authorities must be approved by the
 state of emergency governor. Approval is rare. These constraints contribute to the
 paucity of convictions for torture.
 Under the Administrative Adudication Law, an administrative investigation into
 an alleged torture case is conducted to determine if there is enough evidence to
 bring a law enforcement officer to trial. Under the CMUK, prosecutors are empow-
 ered to initiate investigations of police or Jandarma officers suspected of torturing
 or mistreating suspects. In cases where township security directors or Jandarma
 commanders are accused of torture, the prosecutor must obtain permission to initi-
 ate an investigation from the Ministry of Justice, because these officials are deemed
 to have a status equal to that of judges.
 
 
 1159
 
 In the first 9 months of 1996, seven complaints of torture or mistreatment were
 filed with the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission. This was a decrease from
 1995 when 23 cases were filed during the same period. In each of the seven cases,
 the Commission wrote to the offices of the public prosecutor where the alleged inci-
 dents occurred. As prosecutors were not required to complete their investigations
 within strict deadlines, by year's end no further developments had occurred. There
 were no additional developments in the case of Baki Erdogan.
 The Government accepted numerous unannounced visits by the Council of Eu-
 rope's Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) and is in regular dialog with
 the CPT. In December the CPT issued a very tough report about torture. The report
 acknowledged that progress had been made since 1992, but said that "although
 much of the legal framework necessary to combat torture is in place * ** in prac-
 tice these measures are being ignored." The Government agreed that CIT reports
 on Turkey may be made public.
 In December the European Court of Human Rights ruled against Turkey in the
 case of Zeki Aksoy. Specifically, the Court ruled that Aksoy had been tortured, de-
 tained for too long a time without being brought before a judge, and that he had
 not been provided with an effective remedy for his complaint of torture. The Court
 ordered Turkey to pay compensation, legal costs, and expenses. Aksoy did not live
 to hear the verdict, since he was murdered by unknown assailants in April 1994,
 reportedly after being threatened with death if he did not withdraw his petition be-
 fore the Court.
 The Turkish Medical Doctors Union states that women are no longer routinely
 subjected to virginity testing when they file complaints alleging sexual crimes.
 Prison conditions remain poor. Prisons are overcrowded, and families often must
 supplement the poor quality food. Prisons are run on the ward system. Prisoners,
 often those of the same ideological bent, are incarcerated together and indoctrinate
 and punish their own. One of several examples of this practice was the death in
 August in Diyarbakir's central prison of PKK prisoner Emine Yavuz, who reportedly
 was strangled by other PKK militants for collaborating with the police. Torture in
 prisons decreased in the last few years, but security personnel continued to use ex-
 cessive force in quieting disturbances. Four prisoners died of head injuries received
 in a January confrontation with security personnel, who also caused injury to 33
 others. Ten prisoners were beaten to death in Diyarbikar in September by security
 forces called in to quell an uprising.
 Hunger strikes in protest of prison conditions and poor treatment by guards oc-
 curred at many institutions throughout the year. In March prisoners at Diyarbakir
 prison, many convicted of terrorist-related crimes, began hunger strikes in protest
 of a government plan to transfer some prisoners to a new Western-style maximum
 security facility in Eskisehir, which would have broken up the ward system. Accord-
 ing to Ministry of Health figures, by July an estimated 2,174 prisoners had gone
 on hunger strikes in 43 prisons in 38 cities. There were reports that some prisoners
 were forced by others to participate in the hunger strikes. Twelve prisoners who
 joined the hunger strikes eventually died. The strikes ended in August when an
 ag   =met rescinding the transfers was reached with the Justice Minister. As part
 of the accord, the Government agreed to the establishment of an independent "Pris-
 on Watch Committee," composed of prominent individuals such as novelist Yasar
 Kemal, to monitor negotiations and prison conditions.
 Several monitoring groups, both domestic and international, carried out prison
 visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-To take a person into custody, a prosecu-
 tor must issue a detention order, except in limited circumstances such as when a
 person is caught committing a crime. The maximum detention period for those
 charged with common individual crimes is 24 hours. Those detained for common col-
 lective crimes may be held for 24 hours. The detention period may be extended for
 an additional 24 hours. Under the CMUK, detainees are entitled to immediate ac-
 cess to an attorney and may meet and confer with the attorney at any time. In prac-
 tice, this access continued.
 Persons detained for individual crimes that fall under the Anti-Terror Law must
 be brought before a judge within 48 hours, while those charged with crimes of a
 collective, political, or conspiratorial nature may be detained for up to 15 days in
 most of the country and up to 30 days in the 9 southeastern provinces under the
 state of emergency. Those detained and tried for the expression of views, generally
 for disseminating separatist propaganda, are charged promptly.
 There is no guarantee of immediate access to an attorney under the law for per-
 sons whose cases fall under the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts; these in-
 clude those charged with smuggling and with crimes under the Anti-Terror law.
 This lack of early access to an attorney is a major factor in the use of torture by
 
 
 1160
 police and security forces. The Government presented to Parliament draft legislation
 which, when passed, would grant more immediate access to an attorney and return
 to the jurisdiction of the regular criminal courts some offenses now within the pur-
 view of the SSC system. By year's end, this legislation had not been passed into
 law.
 The decision concerning access to counsel in such cases is left to the independent
 prosecutor, who often denies access on the grounds that it would prejudice an ongo-
 ing investigation. The Justice and Interior Ministries generally have not intervened
 in prosecutors' decisions or police actions denying access to counsel Although the
 Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request speedy arraignment and
 trial, judges have ordered a sgnificant number detained indefintely, sometimes for
 years. Many cases involve persons accused of violent crimes, but it is not uncommon
 or those accused of nonviolent political crimes to be kept in custody until the con-
 clusion of thefr trials.
 By law, a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after ar-
 rest, a requirement observed in practice. Once formally charged by the prosecutor,
 a detainee is arraigned by a judge and allowed to retain a lawyer. After arraign-
 ment, thged     may releas e    accused upon recipt of an appropriate guarantee,
 such as bail, or order him detained if the court determines that he is likely to flee
 thejurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 Thre is no external exile. Turkey's internal exile law was repealed in 1987, but
 in 1990 the Government granted the southeast regional governor the authority to
 "remove from the region,  for a period not to exceed the duration of the state of
 emergency (now in its twelfth year), citizens under his administration whose activi-
 ties  ve an impression that they are prone to disturb general security and public
 order. There were no known instances of the use of this broad authority during the
 year. Human rights monitors and residents of towns in the southeast report that
 officials continued to rely on "administrative transfers" to remove government em-
 ployes thought liable to "create trouble."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and in practice the courts generally act independently of the executive. The
 Constitution requires that judges be independent of the executive in the discharge
 of their duties and provides for the security of tenure. The High Council of Judges
 and Prosecutors, which is appointed by the President and includes the Minister of
 Justice  selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and is responsible for
 oversight of those in the lower courts. The Constitution also prohibits state authori-
 ties from issuing orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial
 power.
 The judicial system is composed of general law courts, State Security Courts, and
 military courts. There is also a Constitutional Court. Most cases are prosecuted in
 the general law courts, which include the civil, administrative, and criminal courts.
 Appeals are heard either by the High Court of Appeals or the Council of State. Pro-
 vincial administrative boards established under the Anti-Terror Law decide whether
 cases in which state officials are accused of misconduct should be heard in criminal
 court. Military courts, with their own appeals system, hear cases regarding infrac-
 tions of military law by members of the armed forces, and cases in which civilians
 are alleged to have impugned the honor of the armed forces or undermined compli-
 ance with the draft.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and par-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decrees with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war.
 State Security Courts (550) sit in eight cities. They are composed of panels of five
 members-two civilian judges, one military judge, and two prosecutors-and try de-
 fendants accused of crimes such as terrorism, drug smuggling, membership in illegal
 organizations, and espousin  or disseminng ideas prohibited by law such as
 "damaging the indivisiole umty of the state." There are 18 such SC's. (In Novem-
 ber changes in the relevant law abolished the    's in Erzincan, Konya, and
 Kayseri and established new ones in Ezurum, Van, and Adana. Cases have feen re-
 distributed among the new courts. The changes are meant to expedite existing cases
 by moving the courts closer to the cases.) SSC verdicts may be appealed only to a
 specialized department of the High Court of Appeals dealing with crimes against
 state security.
 In 1996 5S0's predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror Law and Sec-
 tion 3.12 of the Criial Code, which prohibits "incitement to racial enmity." The
 State claims that these courts were established to try efficienty those suspected of
 certain crimes. The heav caseload often means that cases drag on for years. These
 courts may hold closed herng   and may admit testimony obtained during police
 interrogation in the absence of counsel. The trial of Diyarba  ers charged with
 
 
 1161
 acting as couriers for the PKK continues at the Diyarbakir SSC, but the number
 of defendants has increased from 12 to over 20. There was no information available
 on the trial of nine Erzurum lawyers charged with similar crimes. None of the attor-
 ne  is being detained.
 1efendants normally have the right to a public trial and, under the Constitution,
 can be proven guilty only in a court of law. By law the bar association must provide
 free counsel to indigents who make such a request to the court. Costs are borne by
 the association. There is no jury system; all cases are decided by a judge or a panel
 of judges. Trials may last for months or years, with one or two hearings scheduled
 each month.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independent prosecutor's files after
 arraignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving viola-
 tions of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the President or
 defami~ng_ Turkish citizenship,N defense attrneys may be demed access to files
 which the State asserts deal with national intelligence or security matters.
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against minorities.
 However, as legal proceedings are conducted solely in Turkish, and the quality of
 interpreters varies, some defendants whose mother tongue is not Turkish may be
 seriously disadvantaged. There are still some laws in effect that discriminate
 against women.
 Turkey recognizes the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights and
 the Euro pean Commission on Human Rights. Citizens may file applications alleging
 violations of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fun-
 damental Freedoms with the Commission. In September the European Court ruled
 agint the Government in the case of Huseyin Adivar and six other Kurds, who
 claimed that the security forces had destroyed their homes in the village of Kelekci
 (see Section 1.f.). According to the Foreign Ministry, a total of 424 individual appli-
 cations were made to the Commission as of August. Fifty cases were concluded, and
 374 cases are still under review. The Commission has found 73 cases admissible to
 date. As of August, 6 new applications were made in 1996, compared to 71 new
 cases in all of 1995 and 96 in 1994. Bakir Caglar, a constitutional lawyer respon-
 sible for defending the Government's psition before the European Court, resigned
 in the fall to protest the lack of progress on human rights.
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political prisoners. The Government
 claims that most alleged political prisoners are in fact security detainees, convicted
 of being members of, or assisting, the PKK or other terrorist organizations. The
 number of people charged, suspected, or convicted of offenses under the Anti-Terror
 Law was down significantly, probably because the late 1995 addition of an "intent"
 clause to the statute, as intended, made it more difficult to prosecute terrorist sus-
 pects. According to government statistics, during the first 10 months of 1996, 1,024
 persons were in custody and an additional 1,943 were suspects not in custody relat-
 ed to offenses under the Anti-Terror Law. Eighty were convicted through October.
 Under the same law, 5,893 persons were arrested and charged with offenses in
 1995, and 2,861 were convicted.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. Government officials may enter a private resi-
 dence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance of a judicial
 warrant. These provisions are generally respected in practice outside the state of
 emergency region.
 A judge must decide whether to issue a search warrant for a residence. If delay
 may cause harm to the case, prosecutors and municipal officers authorized to carry
 out prosecutors' instructions may conduct a search. Searches of private premises
 may not be carried out at night, unless the delay will be damaging to the case or
 the search is expected to result in the capture of a prisoner at large. Other excep-
 tions include persons under special observation by the Security Directorate General,
 places anyone can enter at night, places where criminals gather, places where mate-
 rials obtained through the commission of crimes are kept, gambling establishments,
 and brothels.
 In the 9 provinces under emergency rule, the regional state of emergency governor
 empowers security authorities to search without a warrant residences or the prem-
 ises of political parties, businesses, associations, or other organizations. The Bar As-
 sociation claims it is not constitutional for security authorities in these provinces
 to search hold, or seize without warrant persons or documents. Roadblocks are com-
 mon in the southeast; security officials regularly search vehicles and travelers. In
 August Parliament passed a law amending several laws affecting the security situa-
 tion in the southeast. Key changes, which have been criticized by human rights ac-
 tivists, include authorizing security forces to shoot to kill when challenging a sus-
 
 
 1162
 pect, and grantin all governors the power to declare a "state of emergency" and
 to call in security forces.
 Security forces have forcibly evacuated villages in the southeast to prevent villa-
 er from giving aid and comfort to the PKK (see Section 1..). The Government ad-
 mits to village evacuations but claims that they occur as the consequence of pres-
 sures by and fear of the PKK and because security operations against the PKCK in
 the region make continued occupancy unsafe. On September 16, the European Court
 of Human Rights ruled against the Government in the case of several Kurds who
 claimed that their human rights were violated when security forces destroyed their
 village. The Court ordered the Government to compensate the villagers (see Section
 L.e.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flict.--Since 1984 the separatist PKCK has waged a violent terrorist insurgency in
 southeast Turkey, directed ag t both security faces and civilians, almost all of
 them Kurds, wham the PKK accuses of cooperating with the State. The TNP,
 Jandarma, and armed famces, in turn, have waged an intense campaign to suppress
 terrorism, target'_mg active PKK units as well as persons they believe support or
 sympathize wth the PKK. In the process, bth government famces and PKK terror-
 ists 7have committed human rights abuses against each other and noncombatants.
 In August Hurriyet newspaper reported that since 1984, 12,984 PK, 4,133 security
 force members, and 4,922 civilians lost their lives in the fighting. The 'Repentance
 Law," pursuant to which members of terrorist organizations who tarn state's evi-
 dence could have their sentences decreased or annulled, was not renewed by Par-
 liament beyond July 1995, but authorities claim that it is still being applied in some
 cases. According to press reports, 364 PKCK terrorists were captred *ve, and 271
 turned themselves in during 1996. The Government assrts that it treats PKK
 members who surrender well-and that it is only PCK propaganda-alleging that the
 surrendered members are killed-that has kept the n-u r     *vidals who sur-
 render from rising.
 Government security forces forcibly evacuated and destroyed some villages. Ac-
 ording to the Foreign Ministry, as of October 1996, approximately 2,400 villages
 and hamlets (setlements of 3 or 4 houses) had been evacuated by the Government.
 The Government's stated purpose was to protect civilians or prevent PKK guerrillas
 from obtaining logistical support from the inhabitants. Some villagers alleged that
 security forces had evacuated them for refusing to participate in the paramilitary
 village guard system. The Government denied these allegations. The emergency re-
 gion governor stated that villages were depopulated "for various reasons," including
 or security reasons; residents leaving of their own accord for security or economic
 reasons; and departures because of PKK pressure. The PKK burned some villages
 to seek revenge on paramilitary village guards.
 The exact number of peMns foriby displaced from villages in the southeast
 since 1984 is unknown. Most estimates agree that 2,600 to 3,000 villages and ham-
 lets have been depopulated. A few nongovernmental organizations have put the
 number of people forcibly displaced as high as 2 million. Official census figures for
 1990-before large-scale forced evacuations began-indicate that the total popu-
 lation for the 10 southeastern provinces then under emergency rule was between 4
 to 4.5 million peple, half of them in rural areas. Since alrrn  areas in the south-
 east have not een depopulated, the estimate of 2 million evacuees is probably too
 high. On the low end, the then Interior Minister stated in July that the total num-
 ber of evacuees was 330,000. Rapidly growing demands for social services in the
 cities indicate that migration from the countryside has been higher than this figure.
 Although the urbanization is also accounted for in part by voluntary migration for
 economic or educational reasons also related to the conflict, the figure given by a
 former M.P. from the region--560,000-appears to be the most credible estimate of
 those forcibly evacuated.
 Whatever the actual number, government programs to deal with and compensate
 the forcibly evacuated villagers have been inadequate. The Foreign Ministry indi-
 cated that, as of October, 15,314 people or 2,019 households had returned to their
 villages in the southeast. The Ministry also noted that some of the displaced chose
 to resettle in urban areas and are receiving assistance there. The Government
 began a new "emergency support prgram" durng the year to expedite resettlement
 in the southeast. The progr am is funded from the pubic budget and in September
 was allocated $2 million. The funds are used for rebuilding homes and roads, as well
 as for animal husbandr and beekeeping programs. Human rights activists dispute
 these figures, and officials overseeing these programs express dismay at the inad-
 equacy of their funding
 There are credible a egations that serious security force abuses during the course
 of operations against thePK continue. The Government organizes, arms, and pays
 
 
 1163
 for a civil defense force in the region known as the village guards. Participation in
 thi paramilitary militia by local villagers is theoretically voluntary, but villagers
 are sometimes caught between the two sides. If the villagers agree to serve, the
 PKK may target them and their village. If the villagers refuse to participateov-
 ernent security forces may retaliate against them and their village.  e viuage
 guards have a reputation for beig te least trained and disciplined of the Govern-
 ment's security forces and have lieen accused repeatedly ofcorruption, common
 crimes, and human rights abuses. In addition to the village guards the Jandarma
 and police "special teams" are viewed as those most responsible for abuses.
 A minibus con       . 11 people, including 4 village guards, was ambushed on
 Sirnak's Guclukonak H   .way on January 15. Its occupants were all killed and
 burned in the vehicle. Miry officials claimed that it was a PKK attack, as many
 of those killed were supporters of the HADEP party. HADEP Vice Chairman Osman
 Ocelik sought a parliamentary investigation of the incident claiming that the vic-
 tims had earlier been in the custody of security forces. The Diyarbakir HRA branch
 also said that the victims had previously been under police detention. An independ-
 ent investigation concluded that the official explanation was inconsistent and laid
 the blame for the incident on security forces.
 According to the Physicians for Human Rights 1996 report on torture, Law 169
 of the Penal Code and Article 7 of the Anti-Terror Law, which prohibit assistance
 to illegal organizations or armed groups, have been used extensively to prosecute
 health professionals for providing care to individuals suspected of being members
 of terrorist organizations. Dr. Iken Diken, convicted and imprisoned for failing to
 report that he had treated terrorists in 1994 and 1995, was released in 1996.
 Government state of emergency decree 430, codified in 1990 and most recently re-
 newed for 4 months in November, imposes stringent security measures in nine prov-
 inces in the southeast. The state of emergency was lifted in the province of Mardin
 on November 28. The regional governor for the state of emergency may censor news,
 ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile (see Section 1.d.). 'f6 decree also
 provides for doubling the sentences of those convicted of cooperating with separat-
 ists. Informants and convicted persons who cooperate with the state are eligible for
 rewards and reduced sentences. Only limited judicial review of the state of emer-
 gency governor's administrative decisions is permitted.
 As a result of an initiative by a coalitionparty M.P., seven soldiers being held
 by the PKK were released in November and December to a delegation that included
 their relatives and human rights activists. A prosecutor dropped charges that the
 members of the delegation were collaborating with the PKK during an earlier, un-
 successful effort to obtain the soldiers' release.
 Although schools have remained open in most urban centers, in the southeast,
 rapid igration has led to severe overcrowding of schools and chronic teacher short-
 ages. The PK policy of murderig teachers exacerbated the situation (see Section
 l.a.). Government ofcil clam    a a sgnificant effort is being made both to re-
 schools and to build new schools in regions faced with acute overcrowding. For
 tnes5-96 school year, according t theForeign Ministry, of 6,244 primary schools
 th souteas, ,4   a open, and ,820 secondary SChOOlS are open.
 In 1996 urkish groun   rcs wmt air support conducted several preemptive op-
 eratins io nortern Ilraq. These incursions, carried out b, units of 1,000 to 2,000
 men, were designed t destroy PCK infrstructure and to disrupt PICK supply lines.
 The )meat recent operation commenced D~ecember 31 and lasted 6 days (see iraq re-
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech andPress.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 andthe press; however, the Government continued to limit these freedoms. The
 Criminal Code provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the Par-
 liament, and the army Numerous other proviions in various laws restrict freedom
 of expresion toone degree or another, those most frequently employed include Arti-
 cle 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and Article 312 of the Criminal Code that forbids "in-
 citement to racial or ethnic emnity." Judges generally examine evidence rigorously
 and dismiss many charges brought under these laws.
  In 1995.the o Anti-Terror Law was amended by adding a retroactive intent clause
 t te article that prohibits disse min__ation of separatist propaganda. According to
 me oreign Ministry, tat change led to the judicial review of thousands of cases,
 resutoin m the release of 143 prisoners in 1995 and an additional 126 prisoners
 by inovember. Sentences were reduced over this period for another 1,408 pris-
   eeDomestic and foreign periodicals providing a broad spectrum of views and opin-
 ions are widely available. Government censorship of foreign periodicals is very rare.
 
 
 1164
 While the overall readership of the local press is not large for a country of 60 mil-
 lion, the newspaper business is intensely competitive and the product often sensa-
 tionalist.
 The electronic media reach nearly every adult, and their influence is correspond-
 ingly great. Radio and television have experienced explosive growth in the 5 years
 since privately owned broadcasting has been allowed: as of October, over 229 local,
 15 regional, and 1 national television stations were regred, and 1,058 local, 108
 regional, and 36 national radio stations were registered. Another 260 television sta-
 tions and 1,202 radio stations have applied forbroadcast licenses. Other television
 and radio stations broadcast without an official license. In 1994 Parliament passed
 reguhatory legislation making it illegal for broadcasters to threaten the countrys
 umy          W or national securiy and miig te prvate broacast Of tele vision prgrams
 in languages other than Turkish. The increasing availability of satellite dishes and
 cable television allows access to foreign broadcasts, including several Turkish-lan-
 guage private channels. Internet use is growing and faces no government restric-
 ilons.
 Despite the restrictions noted, the media frequently criticizes government leaders
 and policies. Turkish media coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be
 unreliable, underreprting it in some instances and sensationalizing it in others.
 Government Decree 430 requires self-censorship of all news reporting from or about
 the southeast and, upon the request of the regional overor, gives the Interior Min-
 istry the authority to ban distribution of any news viewed as misrepresenting events
 in the region. In the event that such a government warning is not obeyed, the De-
 cre provides for a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days
 for subsequent offenses.
 The Press Law permits prosecutors to seek a court order for the confiscation of
 a newspaper or magazine and requires that each publication's "responsible editors"
 bear legaIres ponsibilty for the publication's content. Many editors have faced re-
 pea ted criminal proceedings. Ismail Besikci served 10 years in prison between 1971
 and 1987 for his publications on the Kurdish situation in Turkey. He now has been
 in prison since November 1993 on a variety of new charges based upon his ongoing
 articles on Kurdish issues. In August he was remanded to Isan ulasMetris prison
 to serve out his latest sentence. SSC prosecutors ordered the confiscation of numer-
 ous issues of leftist, Kurdish nationalist, and pro-PKK periodicals, although most
 continue to publish. The pro-PKK newspaper Ozgur Ulke and its successor Yeni
 Politika were both closd by court order in 1995. A successor, Demakrasi, which
 began publishing in December 1995, is available.
 According to the Turkish Journalists' Association, during the year 109 issues of
 newspapers and magazines and 8 books' press runs were confiscated on court order.
 These numbers are down significantly from 1995 when 1,443 publications (56 books,
 784 journals, 602 newspapers, and 1 bulletin) were similarly confiscated. Forty
 newspapers and magazines were shut down for some period during the year, includ-
 ing the leftist daily Evrensel, which was ordered closed four times early in the year
 for publishing issues that the Government claimed "incited hatred" or "promotd
 racism."
 Individual journalists are subject to harassment and police violence. At various
 times 135 journalists were detained. The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)
 has documented 14 arbitrary detentions. Eleven journalists were formally arrested.
 The CPJ reports 19 instances where journalists were physically assaulted by police
 while practicing their profession. One journalist was reportedy kidnaped during the
 year.
 Sanar Yurdatapan, a well-known musician and spokesman for freedom of expres-
 sion, was arrested on October 17 and charged with "aiding members of an armed
 orgnation(the PKK) when he participated in a discussion on the PKK-associated
 MED-V ad sgned a statement condemning a reported assassination attem~pt
 against the PKK leader, despite the fact that Yurdatspan has also publicly de-
 nounced the aims and methods of the PKK. He was released on November 11 when
 the Ankara SSC claimed that it did not have jurisdiction to prosecute him. His case
 is now pending review in Istanbul.
 In 1995 the Istanbul SSC charged prominent Turkish novelist Yasar Kemal in
 connection with the article, 'Black Sky Over Turkey," which he published in a Ger-
 man news magazine, and later reprinted in Turkey in a book entitled "Freedom of
 Expression." In it, Kemal accused the Turkish Government of waging a "campaign
 of lies" in its comprehensive censorship of reporting on the Kurdish question. Kemal
 was charged beth under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and under Article 312 of
 the Criminal Code for "inciting to racial or ethnic enmity." The court acquitted
 Kemal in December 1995, finding that he had no intent to promote separatism or
 racial enmity, but he was tried again and convicted in March on virtually the same
 
 
 1165
 charge. He was fined and given a 20-month suspended sentence, which he appealed;
 his appeal was denied in October. The 99 writers originally being tried for their in-
 volvement with the same book have been joined by many others. Currently, 1,000
 individuals are involved. The case against them continued at year's end as testi-
 mony is being collected.
 In May author Turgut Inai was acquitted of charges under Article 159/3 of the
 Criminal Code for "insulting the laws of the Turkish Republic" in his article "We
 Protect Human Rights with an Imperfect Constitution and Laws." The entire board
 of directors of the HRF which published na's article in a book entitled "A Present
 to Emil Galip Sandalci,' also was acquitted (see Section 4).
 In Augst a Kurdish former M. from Erzurum, Abdulmelik Firat, was brought
 to trial or calling the Turkish Parliament the "most useless and characterless insti-
 tution (in Turkey)" during an interview. On September 29, First was acquitted of
 the charges. A book that Firat wrote, however, was confiscated as separatist propa-
 ganda in September on orders of the Istanbul SSC prosecutor. BRA deputy sec-
 retary general Erol Anar, who wrote a book entitled "History of Human Rights," was
 charged in August by SSC prosecutors with disseminating separatist propaganda.
 At the request of the defense, the trial was moved from Ankara to Istanbul and was
 set to resume in Febrary 1997.
 In October Erturu Yurkcu and Ayse Nur Zarakolu, respectively the translator
 and publisher of a November 1995 report by the Human Rights Watch arms project
 "Weapons Transfers and Violations of the Laws of War in Turkey," were chargei
 under Article 159 of the Turkish Penal Code for "defaming the state's security and
 military forces." In December the prosecution decided to focus its case on only one
 section of the translated report, an unconfirmed comment attributed by HRW to an
 unnamed US. official describing police special counterinsurgency forces as "thugs.'
 The trial is set to resume in February 1997.
 Seven pro-Kurdish former DEP M.P.'s and one independent M.., convicted in
 1994 on charges ranging from disseminating separatist propaganda to supporting or
 being a member of an armed band or gang, appealed their sentences in 1995. The
 15-year sentences of four of the defendants for being members of a terrorist group
 were upheld; they are appealing their case to the European Commission on Human
 Rights. The court overturned the sentences of the other four in 1995, but they were
 retried and found guilty in April on the reformed Article 8 charges. In September
 the Court upheld these sentences on appeal. These four defendants also plan to ap-
 eato the European Commission of Human Rights; the Government pledged to
 abide by its decision.
 In  December the Ankara SSC prosecutor charged Mehmet Sever, Mahmut
 Uyanik, and Muzaffer Demir, former DEP M.P.'s, with assisting the PKCK. The
 charges stem from a 1991 incident during which the accused publicly termed the
 parliamentary swearing-in oath as "racist, chauvinistic, antidemocratic, and a viola-
 tion of human right.." Additionally, during the swearing-in ceremony the three de-
 fendants wore handkerchiefs in colors associated with the PKK. This new trial is
 apparently unrelated to the earlier DEP trials. The three defendants left the DEP
 party prior to its being banned in 1994 and remained in Parliament as independents
 until their terms expired in 1995. Until that time, they had parliamentary immu-
 nity and could not be tried for alleged offenses. The delay of a year between the
 edof the defendants' terms in Parliament and the bringing of charges is not con-
 sidered unusually long, given the sensitive nature of the case. If convicted, they
 could face prison terms ranging from 4 to 7 ' years.
 The Government prosecuted 41 members of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy
 Party (ADEP), including part chairman. Murat Bozla , based on an incident at
 the partys June 23 convention in Ankara, in which thne Turksh flag was torn down
 and-replcd by a PKCK banner. The accused face minimum sentences ranging be-
 tween 12 and 22 ' years, and the party itself may be declared illegal (as were two
 of its predecessors). Of the 43 defendants, 16 remain in custody. Hearings were held
 in September, October, November, and December, and the trial is set to resume on
 an undetermined date. The chief judge has denied a defense motion for acquittal
 and refused requests for the release of the defendants. Following the party's conven-
 tion, three party members were murdered by unknown assailants, and party offices
 were bombed.
 Th 1995 independent MJ'. Hasan Mezarci was charged with insulting modern
 Turkey's founder, Kemal Ataturk, but the criminal court dropped the charges. Fol-
 lowing this decision, Mezarci again was brought to court in January on similar
 charges, had his parliamentary immunity lifted, and was sentenced to 18 months
 in prison. Th August the new verdict was upheld by the appeals court. Mezarci left
 the country and a warrant was issued for his arrest. He returned on December 26
 
 
 1166
 and was arrested. Press reports indicate that he is being held at Istanburs Metris
 prison.
 Although the 5-month sentences of well-known journalist Mehmet Ali Birand and
 two other journalists for "harming the image of the military" were overturned in
 1995 by the military court of appeals, they were retried in early 1996 on the same
 charges. The mlitar-y ourt of appeals again overturned the sentences in June. Ac-
 cording to current law, Birand may be retried one more time on the same charges.
 Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects continued to be
 widely available, although suppression continued. The Kurdish-language weekly,
 Welate Me, continued to be available. Some potential customers are afraid to pur-
 chase Kurdish-language materials because possession of such items may be inter-
 retedas evidence of PKK sympathies. Kuh-        g broadcasts are still illegal.
 an-TV, a private station based in the southeast broadcasts Kurdish-language
 music from a list of songs approved by security ofi is. In August police raided
 Can-TV offices during a live Turkish-language broadcast of a panel discussion on
 "Peace and the Kurdish Issue." The detainees were released within 2 days of the
 raid, and no charges were filed. Pro-PKK Med TV, based in Belgium and England,
 broadcasts via Intelsat and can be received by satellite dish in the southeast.
 In February there was a large conference in Istanbul entitled "The Kurdish Prob-
 lem and a Democratic Solution," which was attended by academics, human rights
 monitors, politicians, and labor leaders. The conference highlighted the growing visi-
 bility of these issues and the increasing discussion of the Kurdish issue in a demo-
 cratic context. University professor Dogu Ergil continued throughout the year to
 publish articles and papers on the Kurdish issue without government interference.
 Until 1995 the Constitution and the law governing political parties proscribed stu-
 dent and faculty associations and labor union involvement in political activities.
 Constitutional amendments passed by Parliament in 1995 provided for participation
 in political activities by students age 18 years or older and professors. No imple-
 menting legislation has been passed. Nonetheless, some students have been politi-
 cally active.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but authorities may deny permission if they believe the gath-
 ering is likely to disrupt public order. Prior notification of gatherings is required,
 and the authorities may restrict meetings to designated sites.
 Police committed serious abuses during crowd control situations. A May Day dem-
 onstration in Istanbul, attended by as many as 10,000 people, including hundreds
 of members of illegal leftist and Kurdish organizations, turned violent and resulted
 in some looting, destruction of stores, and armed clashes with the police. Police han-
 dled the demonstration very poorly and shot three demonstrators to death, in reac-
 tion to the serious beating of a police officer by rioting demonstrators. At the end
 of the rioting, 89 people were wounded (including 52 police officers) and 354 were
 arrested. Although complaints of excessive use of force were made against the po-
 lice, none was prosecuted.
 On November 6, university students took to the streets to protest the Higher Edu-
 cation Council's control over student life and academic currcula. Protests in Istan-
 bul, Ankara, and Balikesir turned violent, and according to eyewitnesses and the
 media, police used excessive force to disperse the crowds. In Istanbul 545 students
 reportedly were detained, and 7 students and 3 police were wounded. In Ankara ap-
 proximately 100 students were detained and 7 wounded. Nearly all students were
 released within 48 hours.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but associations and founda-
 tions must submit their charters for government approval, a lengthy and cum-
 bersome process.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and private dissemination
 of religious ideas. The Government generally observed these provisions in practice.
 About 99 percent of the population is Muslim. Under the law, religious services may
 take place only in designatedplaces of worship.
 Although Turkey is a secular state, religious instruction in state schools is com-
 pulsory for Muslims. Upon written verification of their non-Muslim background,
 Lausanne Treaty minorities (Greek, Armenian, and Jewish) are exempted by law
 from Muslim religious instruction, although students who wish to attend may do so
 with parental consent. Syriac Christians are not officially exempt because they are
 not an official Lausanne Treaty minority. However, according to a church official,
 because the community is mentioned in the Treaty, its members have not been
 forced to follow any specific curriculum.
 
 
 1167
 Turkey's Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shiite Islam) is estimated to
 number at least 12 million. There are, however, no government-salaried Alawi reli-
 gious leaders, in contrast to Sunni religious leaders, and no Religious Affairs Direc-
 torate funds go to the Alawi community. Some Alawis allege discrimination in the
 form of failure to include any Alawi doctrines or beliefs in religious instruction
 classes. Alawis are disgruntled by what they regard as the Sunnibias in the Reli-
 gious Affairs Directorate and the Directorate's tendency to view the Alawis as a cul-
 tural group rather than religious group.
 Many prosecutors regard proseeeyizing and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamic extremists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they
 deem such activities to have political overtones. Since there is no law explicitly pro-
 ibigting proselytizing police sometimes arrest Islamic extremists and evan  lical
 Christians for distur-ing the peace. Courts usually dismiss such charges. If the
 prosyletizers are foreigners, they may be deported, but generally they are able to
 reenter the country easily.
 Twice this year the armed forces dismissed groups of soldiers for prohibited reli-
 gious and political activities. Some of these soldiers have indicated that they will
 bring their cases to the European Court of Human Rights.
 Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. The number of Christians
 in the south has been declining as the younger Syriac generation leaves for Europe
 and North America. Minority religions not recognized under the Lausanne Treaty
 may not acquire additional property for churches. The Catholic Church in Ankara,
 for exam pie, is confined to diplomatic property. The State must approve the oper-
 ation of churches, monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious founda-
 tions, such as hospitals and orphanages.
 The Government formed in July has sought a more cooperative relationship with
 religious minorities, particularly in Istanbul, according to prominent members of
 these communities. The state ministry responsible for the religious minority commu-
 nities gave the Armenian Patriarchate permission to rebuild a church in Anatolia
 and informed the Patriarchate that requests to restore some other properties would
 be approved immediately. These requests have all been approved without delay.
 The authorities monitor the activities of Eastern Orthodox churches and their af-
 filiated operations. The Ecumenical Patrimchate in Istanbul has consistently ex-
 pressed interest in reopening the seminary on the island of Halki in the Sea of
 Marmara. The seminary has-ben closed since the 1970's when the state national-
 ized most private institutions of higher learning.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Under the law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (because
 of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff local religious councils or for
 lack of adherents) revert to government possession. Some non-Muslim minorities,
 particularly the Greek Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, the shrinking Armenian Or-
 thodox and Jewish communities, are faced with the danger of losing some of their
 houses of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement domestically and the
 freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted only in the case of a national emergency, civic obligations (mili-
 tary service, for example), or criminal investigation or prosecution. The overseas
 travel $100 departure tax was repealed in March, spurring a boom in foreign travel.
 Travel in the southeast often is restricted for security reasons. Roadblocks, set up
 by both security forces and the PKK, can seriously impede travel in the region. The
 PKK, in an effort to draw attention to its cause, kidnaped foreign tourists and other
 travelers in the region for short periods.
 When Turkey ratified the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status
 of Refugees, it exercised the option of accepting the convention's obligations only
 with respect to refugees from Europe. It has not subsequently lifted the geograuhic
 limitation of its treaty obligation. As a result, the Government does not recognize
 non-European asylum seekers as refugees and requires that they register with the
 authorities within 5 days of entering the country. The Government screens these ap-
 plicants, determines those that it considers bona fide, and then refers them to the
 U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It provides only very limited first
 asylum opportunities designed to allow non-European applicants time to process for
 onward resettlement. A negative decision usually leads to immediate expulsion. The
 UNHCR representative and foreign diplomats in Ankara continued to protest the
 turnikg back of Iranian and Iraqi asylum seekers, many of whom claimed religious
 persecution in their home countries. Since Turkey implemented new asylum regula-
 tions in 1994, more than 150 Iranians and Iraqi UNHCR-recognized asylum seekers
 were forcibly returned to their countries.
 
 
 1168
 The Government declined numerous offers from the UNHCR to assist in establish-
 in reception centers for undocumented asylum seekers in key border areas. The
 ofer included funding and training for officer. conducting interviews.
 At the end of the year, Turkey facilitated the humanitarian evacuation from
 northern Iraq and immediate transit to the United States of some 6,700 employees
 and Iraqi political oppoitionists who faced potential prseution.
 Due to the cessation of fighting in the former Yugoslavia, the number of Bosnian
 refugees in Turkey decreased sgnifcantly. At year's end, it was estimated that
 fewer than 5,000 refugees remained, down from a peak of 15,000 to 20,000 in the
 early 1990's. As "guests" there is no restriction on the period that they are allowed
 to remain. They are not allowed to work or attend school; however, many do.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Righta" The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice. Turkey has a multiparty par-
 iamentary system, in which national elections are held at least eveiy 5 years on
 the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for all citizens 18 years of age and over.
 As of October, there were at least 30 political parties, 7 of which were represented
 in Parliament. The Grand National Assembly (Parliament) elects the President as
 head of state every 7 years or when the incumbent becomes incapacitated or dies.
 The Government neither coerces nor forbids membership in any political organiza-
 tion, although the Constitutional Court may close down political parties for uncon-
 stitutional activities. In March the Court closed down the tiny pr-Kurdish Democ-
 rac.y and Transformation Party (DDP) on these grounds.
 There are no restrictions in law ainst women or minorities voting or participat-
 inag in poitics. The Constitution cals for equal political rihts for men and women.
 There were 13 women in the 550-seat Parliament. In addition to Deputy Prime Min-
 ister Ciller, there were three other female ministers. Some political parties now re-
 cruit female delegates for their p arty conferences and electoral lists. Women's coi-
 mittoes are active within political party organizations.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The non    o vernmental Human Rights Association has branches in 50 provincial
 capitals. The HRA claims a membership of about 17,000. HRA branches in the
 southeast, closed at different times in 1994 and 1995 by the authorities, were re-
 opened; nonetheless, periodic harassment continued. In March Adana's then acting
 provincial governor shut down the local HRA for a period of 15 days on the grounds
 that it possessed willegal publications. As of October, HRA branches in the south-
 east were operating in Diyarbakir, Adiyaman, Malatya, Mardin, and Sanliurfa. HRA
 branches in Batman and Hakkari remain closed by the authorities.
 In 1990 HRA established the Human Rights Foundation which operates torture
 rehabilitation centers in Ankara, lamir, Istanbul, and Adana and serves as a clear-
 inghouse for human rights information. Other domestic nongovernmental organiza-
 tions include the Istanbul-based Helsinki Citizens Assembly, the Ankara-based
 Turkish Democracy Foundation, human rights centers at a number of universities,
 and the Islamist-oriented Mazlum Der, the Association of Human Rights and Soli-
 darity for Oppressed Peoples.
 Government agents have harassed human rights monitors as well as lawyers and
 doctors involved in documenting human rights violations. According to a 1996 report
 by the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights, "there is a close connection between
 the Turkish Government's hostility toward those who expose human rights viola-
 tions, and its attacks on the integrity of the legal profession, and the persistence
 of severe human rights prblems. Some human rights monitors have ben aggae-
 sively prosecuted. Turgut Inal and members of the board of directors of the cRF
 were acquitted of criminal charges brought against them in 1995 for the publication
 of a book entitled "A Gift to Emil Galip Sandalci" (see Section 2.a.).
 In May Mustafa Cinkilic, the Adana HRF representative, and Dr. Tufan Kose,
 who operated one of the HRF centers for the treatment of victims of torture, were
 charged with operating an unlawful health center. The case is scheduled to resume
 in February 1997. Similar charges had been leveled against the operators of the
 other HRF torture treatment centers. Charges in Izmir and Ankara were droppe-
 in Istanbul, the criminal court found that insufficient evidence had been presented
 to warrant the charges, and the defendant was acquitted.
 In May Dr. Seyfettin Kizilkan, director of Diyarbakir's state insurance hospital
 and president of the southeast region's chamber of doctors was arrested after police
 allegely found bomb materials and PKK documents in his home. In June the
 
 
 1169
 
 Diyarbakir SSC sentenced him to a 3-year 9-month prison term. His family and
 local activists allege that the police planted the evidence. Kizilkan is free pending
 an appeal. In May the Diyabakir SSC a cquitted the HRA representative in
 Hak       Abdulkerm Demirer, who was on tril for being a member of a terrorist
 organization.
 In December the Ankara SSC acquitted HRA head Akin Birdal, Mardin HRA
 branch head Cemil Aydagn, and Thsan Asian, Vice President of the Islamist human
 _rights group Mazum Der, of charges that they had collaborated with the terrorist
 PKK. The three men, together with Refah party MI. Fethullah Erbas, had sought
 the release of seven Turish soldiers beinag be d captive by the PKK. (Erbas had
 parliamentary immunity and so was not charged.) The soldiers were eventually re-
 Since 1991 Parliament has convened a Human Rights Commission. The Commis-
 sion is authorized to oversee compliance with the human rights provisions of domes-
 tic law and international agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, investigate al-
 leged abuses, and prepare reports. Previously underfunded and laIcing the power
 to subpoena witnesses or documents, the Commission this year has asserted itself.
 It was instrumental in pressing for criminal charges against 68 security personnel
 for excessive use of force in the  nof 10 prison inmates in Diyarbakir.
 Representatives of diplomatic missions who wish to monitor human rights are free
 to speak with private citizens. However, security police usually place such visitors
 in the southeast and the east under visible surveillance, intimidating those they
 meet.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all citizens as
 equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. Discrimi-
 nation nevertheless remains a problem in several areas. The Government officially
 recognizes only those religious minorities mentioned in the Treaty of Lausanne
 (1923), which guarantees the rights of Eastern Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, and
 Jewish adherents.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is serious and widespread. However it is still considered
 an extremely private matter, involving societal notions of family honor. Few women
 go to the police, who in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic disputes and
 frequently advise women to return to their husbands. Turks of either sex may file
 civil or criminal charges but rarely do so. Laws and ingraied societal notions make
 it difficult to prosecute sexual assault or rape cases. enalties may legally be re-
 duced if a woman was not a virgin prior to a rape, or if a judge deems the woman
 to have acted provocatively.
 During the year, a series of high-profile "honor murders"-the killing of women
 who are suspected of being unchaste-in rural areas or among recent immigrants
 to cities, has focused attention on some of the inequalities in the legal code as it
 applies to women. In one case, 16-year-old Sevda Gok was murdered by her family
 because she allegedly had dishonored them by behaving too independently and con-
 sorting with boys. Often family members refuse to press charges and task minor
 family members with the actual killings. In this case, Gok's 14-year-old cousin did
 so and was sentenced to only 2 years in jail for the crime. The two men who held
 Sevda Gok down were never identified.
 According to the Prime Ministry's Family Research Institute, beating is one of the
 most frequent forms of violence against women in the home. New figures were not
 available for 1996, but in the past the Institute has noted complaints of beatings,
 threats, economic pressure, and sexual violence.
 There are several shelters for battered women, and at least two consultation cen-
 ters-Istanbul's Purple Roof Foundation and Ankara's Altindag center city shelter.
 New NGO's have been formed to address women's issues, including honor murders.
 The Civil Code, which prohibits granting gender-based privileges or rights, retains
 some discriminatory provisions concerning marital rights and obligations. Because
 the husband is the legal head of household, the wife automatically acquires the hus-
 band's surname with marriage; the husband is authorized to choose the domicile
 and represents the conjugal unit. As parents, husband and wife exercise joint child
 rearing rights, but when they disagree, the husband's view often prevails. Women's
 group have lobbied to change this provision. A s0ingle woman who gives birth to
 a child out-of-wedlock is not considered automatically to be the legal guardian of her
 child. A court decision may be required. Divorce law requires that the divorcing
 spouses divide their property according to property rgistered in each spouse's
 name. Because in most cases property is registered in the husband's name, this can
 create difficulties for women who wish to divorce. Under inheritance laws, a widow
 
 
 1170
 generally receives one-fourth of the estate, her children the rest. There are reliable
 reports that under the current Government, female judges have been shifted from
 courtroom to administrative jobs.
 The itea   rate for women has been revised upward to a pproximately 79 per-
 cent. Particularly in urban areas, women continue to improve their position, includ
 Ing in the professions,.business, and the civil service, although they continue to face
 discriination to varying degrees. Numerous women have become lawyers, doctors,
 ana engineers since the 1960's. Women make up between 43 and 50 percent of the
 work force. They generally receive equal pay for equal work in the professions, busi-
 ness, and civil service jobs, although a large prentage of women employed in agri-
 culture and in the trade, restaurant, and hotel sectors work as unpaid family help.
 Women may take the examination required to become a subgvernor. Several have
 been appointed subgvernors; one governor is a woman.
 Independent women's roups and women's* rigts associations exist and are grow-
 but the conept of    n for womens rhtisstilinits infancy.
 hdren.-The Governmnf is ommitted to furthering children a welfare and
 works to expand opportunities in education and health, including further reduction
 of the infant mortality rate. The State Minister for Women's and Family Issues
 oversees impleme ntation of the Government's programs for children. Education for
 children is mandatory and government-provided through fifth grade, or the age of
 10. Traditional family values in rural areas place a greater emphasis on advanced
 education for sons than for daughters. Far fewer girls than boys continue their edu-
 cation after primary school.
 Children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in the southeast. The mi-
 gration-forced or voluntary--of many families, terrorism against teachers, and
 school closings in the southeast have uprooted children to cities that are hard
 pressed to find the resources to extend basic, mandatory services such as schooling.
 Many cities in the southeast are operating schools on double shifts, with as many
 as 100 students per classroom (see Section 1.g.). The Government is establishing re-
 gional boarding schools to help combat this problem, but these are insufficient. In
 practice, in rural Anatolia and the southeast, the literacy rate for girls is very low,
 and many do not complete primary school. The literacy rate for boys most of whom
 complete primary school, is-higher. Some continue on to middle and high school, for
 which they generally must travel or live away from home.
 Instances of child beating and abuse are more frequently reported than in pre-
 vious years, according to women's groups. The increase may be attributable to great-
 er public awareness of the problem.
 People With Disabilities.-Legislation dealing with the disabled is piecemeal, and
 there is little legislation regarding accessibility for the disabled. Certain categories
 of employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent of their employee
 pool, although there is no penalty for failure to comply.
 Religious Minorites.-Extremist groups target minority communities from time to
 time. According to press reports during an anti-Israel demonstration in October,
 Refah party officials in Ankara declared-Jews to be the enemies of Muslims. Refah
 party .ournals also frequently publish an-tiSemitic diatribes.
 During the last few years, tere have been instances of graffiti stones tossed over
 the walls, and press attacks on the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Patriarch. On
 September 30, a hand grenade was thrown over the wall of the Ecumenical Patri-
 archate compound in Istanbul causing minor damage. On December 17, a small pipe
 bomb exploded at St. Anthony's Catholic Church in Istanbul. The police responded
 promptly in both cases and are investigating the incidents. The Armenian Patri-
 archate also reported incidents of harassment against Armenian churches in Istan-
 bul, and church officials complain of growing encroachment by certain Muslim ex-
 tremist groups on lands belonging to the Armenian community, especially on the
 Princes' Islands in the Sea of Marnara. The police have responded with intensified
 security measures.
 All religious minority groups fear the possibility of rising Islamic extremism.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution does not recognize the
 Kurds as a national, racial, or ethnic minority. There are no legal barriers to ethnic
 Kurds' participation in political and economic affairs, but Kurds who publicly or po-
 litically assert their Kurdish ethnic identity risk harassment or prosecution. Some
 M.P.'s and senior officials and many professionals are ethnic Ku. Kurds who are
 long-ternm residents in industrialized cities in western Turkey have been for the
 most part assimilated into the political, economic, and social life of the nation, and
 there has been much intermarriage over many generations. Kurds who are currently
 migrating westward (incluin those displaed by the conflict in the southeast)
 bring with them their culture and village identity, but often little education and few
 skills; many simply are not well prepared for urban life.
 
 
 1171
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communications in Kurdish
 leg    d private spoken and printed communications in Kurdish. Under the law on
 ltical parties, however, all discussion that takes place at political meetn  must
 in Tukish. Kurdish may be used only in "nonpolitical communication!'  aterials
 dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic identity continue to be subject to
 confiscation and prosecution under the "indivisible unity of the state" provisions of
 the Anti-Terror Law (see Section 2.a.).
 The Ministry of Education tightly controls the curriculum in foreign-language
 schools. Many Greek-origin students report difficulty in continuing their education
 in Turkey and go to Greece, often never to return.
 The Romani population is extremely small, and there were no reported incidents
 of public or government harassment directed against them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to associate freely and form
 representative unions, except police and military personnel. Constitutional amend-
 ments in 1995 gave civil servants, including schoolteachers, the right to form legally
 recognized unions; however, implementing legislation has not yet been enacted.
 (Even prior to passage, civil servants' unions existed and worked for legal recogm-
 tion, collective bargaining, and the right to strike through demonstrations and 1-
 day work stoppages.) Parliament added language to Article 53 of the Constitution
 stipulating that civil servants' unions could bring cases to court on behalf of mem-
 bers, carry out collective talks with the Government to secure their objectives, and
 sign an understanding with the Government if agreement is reached. The amend-
 ment language did not mention strikes.
 The Constitution stipulates that no one shall be compelled to become or remain
 a member of, or withdraw from, a labor union. The law states that unions and con-
 federations may be founded without prior authorization based on a petition to the
 governor of the province of the prospective union's headquarters. Although unions
 are independent of the Government and political parties, they must have govern-
 ment permission to hold meetings or rallies and must allow police to attend conven-
 tions and record the proceedings. The Constitution requires candidates for union of-
 fice to have worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union. Slightly over
 12 percent of the total civilian labor force (15 years old and above) is unionized.
 There are three confederations of labor unions: the Turkish Confederation of Work-
 ers Unions (Turk-Is), the Confederation of Turkish Real Trade Unions (Hak-Is), and
 the Confederation of Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK). Unions and their offi-
 cers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly affecting members'
 economic and social interests.
 Prosecutors may ask labor courts to order a trade union or confederation to sus-
 pend its activities or to go into liquidation for serious infractions, based on alleged
 violation of specific legal norms. The Government, however, may not summarily dis-
 solve a union.
 The right to strike, while provided for in the Constitution, is partially restricted.
 For example, workers engaged in the protection of life and property and those in
 the mining and petroleum industries, sanitation services, national defense, and edu-
 cation do not have the right to strike.
 Collective bargaining is required before a strike. The law specifies the steps a
 union must take before it may strike or before an employer may engage in a lockout.
 Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. A party that fails to comply with
 these steps forfeits its rights. The employer may respond to a strike with a lockout
 but is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using administrative personnel to
 perform jobs normally done by strikers. Article 42 of Law 2822, governing collective
 bargaining, stries, and lockouts, prohibits the employer from terminating workers
 who encourage or participate in a legal strike. Unions are forbidden to engage in
 secondary (solidarity), political or general strikes, or in slowdwns. In sectors in
 which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through binding arbitration.
 The Government has the statutory power under Law 2822 to suspend strikes for
 60 days for reasons of national security or public health and safety. Unions ma pe-
 tition the Council of State to lift such a suspension. If this appeal fails, and the par-
 ties and mediators still fail to resolve the dispute, it is subject to compulsory arbi-
 tration at the end of the 60-day period. The International Labor Organization's
 (ILO) Committee of Experts and the Committee on the Application of Standards re-
 gr the Government's application of the law as too broad and have called on the
 Govenment to limit the application of the law and recourse to compulsory arbitra-
 tion to essential services in the strict sense of the term. The Government asserts
 that the law does not contradict the committees' principles.
 
 
 1172
 During the first 7 months of 1996, there were 31 strikes involving 1,160 workers
 which resulted in approximately 114,010 lost work days. During the same period
 there were 2 lockouts involving 660 workers resulting in 69,564 lost work days. No
 strikes or strike decisions were suspended by the first or second coalition govern-
 ments since their formation following the December 24 1995, general elections.
 In some instances labor union members have been tie subject of government lim-
 its on freedom of speech and assembly (see sections 2.a. and 2.b.). Implement'ing leg-
 islation for certain provisions of constitutional amendments, to permit the legal
 unionization of the civil service has not yet been enacted. However, some civil serv-
 ice organizations continued to demonstrate for the right to strike and for higher sal-
 ary. In response to these protests, the Ankara public prosecutor's office initiated two
 separate court cases against Turk-Is in 1995, charging that August 8 and September
 20 demonstrations herd by Turk-Is in Ankara to protest the deadlock in collective
 bargaining negotiations were illegal In the first case, the public prosecutor de-
 manded prison terms for the Turk-Is officials of a minimum of 6 months in accord-
 ance with Article 72 of Law 2822. In the second case, the prosecutor's office accused
 Turk-Is management of violating the associations law when it announced its sup-
 prt for opposition parties before the 1995 general elections. The trials began in the
 Ankara court of first instance on June 21. The Turk-Is president stated m his de-
 fense that he and other officials actually calmed down the workers during the dem-
 onstrations. Judicial officials postponed the trials to a later date to hear the testi-
 mony of other Turk-Is officials who were not present at the first trial.
 With government a proval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bodes, as long as these organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) approved DISK as an affiliate in 1992. Hak-Is applied for ICFTU
 affiliation in 1993; however, its application has been held up by the international
 labor federation due to opposition expressed by Turk-Is, a longstanding member of
 the ICFTU. The application is still pending.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at a iven work site, but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10 percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 unions, particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that represents
 nearly 80 percent of organized labor.
 The ILO has called on Turkey to rescind this 10 percent rile. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however. The Gov-
 ernment informed the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards that the Min-
 istry of Labor and Social Security proposed to remove the 10 percent numerical re-
 striction and that it had communicated its proposal to the social partners. The ILO
 took note of the Government's statement that it continued to study removal of this
 requirement despite objections from employer and worker organizations.
 The law on trade unions stipulates that an employer may not dismiss a labor
 union representative without rightful cause. The union member may appeal such a
 dismissal to the courts, and if the ruling is in the union member's favor, the em-
 ployer must reinstate him and pay all back benefits and salary. These laws are gen-
 erally applied in practice.
 In November thousands of teachers staged a protest march in Ankara to demand
 better treatment and salaries, better working conditions, and "cessation of exile to
 remote areas of the country of teachers who engage in union activities." Minister
 of Education Mehmet Saglam said that the Ministry of Labor had begun reviewing
 the government prohibition of teachers' gaining union rights and pledged to examine
 the cases of teachers who had been punished for union activity.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and statutes pro-
 hibit compulsory labor. The laws are enforced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution and labor laws
 forbid employment of chilrien younger than age 15, with the exception that those
 13 and 14 years of age may engage in light part-time work if enrolled in school or
 vocational training. The Constitution also  hibits children from engaging in ph ys-
 ically demanding jobs such as underground mining and from working at night. The
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces these laws only in the organized industrial
 sector.
 In practice many children work because families need the supplementary income.
 An informal system provides work for young boys at low wages, for example, in auto
 repair shops. Girls are rarely seen working in public, but many are kept out of
 school to work in handicrafts, especially in rural areas. The bulk of childlabor oc-
 
 
 1173
 
 curs in rural areas and is often associated with traditional family economic activity
 such as farming or animal husbandry. It is common for entire families to work to-
 gether to bring in the crop during the harvest.
 The Government has recognized the problem of child labor and has been working
 with the ILO to derme its dimensions and to determine solutions. The Ministry of
 Labor, the Ankara municipality, the Turk-Is labor confederation, and the Turkish
 Employers Association are among the institutions participting in the ILO's Inter-
 national Program on the Elimination of Child Labor E),a project to solve the
 problems of working children. The Ministry of Labor and the ILO have jointly pro-
 duced a study showing that almost one-half (44 percent) of the children working in
 Turkey are below the age of 15, are paid less than the minimum wage, and have
 no insurance.
 According to a study conducted by the Turk-Is child workers bureau released in
 September, for every 100 workers, 32 were between the ages of 6 and 19. Children
 employed at work sites and homes constitute 5 percent of the total working ppu-
 lation and were mostly employed in the metal, shoe, woodworking, and agriultural
 sectors. The young workers employed on a monthly or daily wage payment basis
 worked over 40 hours a week, and those employed at home and not receiving a wage
 payment worked less than 40 hours per week. The study said that 56 percent of
 these workers were uninsured. It added that the total number of working young
 people between the ages of 12 and 19 was 3.5 million, and 45 percent of them were
 under the age of 16.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage bard, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. In recent years, it has done so annually. In August
 the nominal minimum wage was increased by approximately 101 percent over the
 year before. The monthly gross minimum wage rates, which became effective on
 September 1, are approximately *200 (tI 17,010,000) for workers older than 16 years
 of age and about $170 (tI 14,400,000) for workers under the age of 16.
 It would be difficult for a single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on
 the minimum wage without support from other sources. Most workers earn consid-
 erably more. Workers covered by the labor law, who constitute about one-third of
 the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or a daily food allowance and other
 fringe benefits which, according to the Turkish Employers' Association, make basic
 wages alone account tor only about 37 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law sets a 45-hour workweek, although most unions have bargained for
 fewer hours. The law prescribes a weekly rest day and limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 a day for up to 90 days in a year. The Labor Inspectorate of the
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces wage and hour prvision in the unionized in-
 dustrial, service and government sectors, which cover about 12 percent of workers.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. Law
 1475 sts out procedures under which workers may remove themselves from hazard-
 ous conditions without risking loss of employment. The law also allows for the shut-
 down of an operation if a five-man committee, which includes safety inspectors, em-
 ployee, and employer representatives, determines that the operation endangers
 workers' lives. In practice, financial constraints, limited safety awareness, careless-
 ness, and fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and
 health by workers and employers alike.
