 TURKEY
 Turkey is a republic with a multiparty parliamentary system
 and a strong presidency. In 1987 Turkey completed a return to
 a full functioning democracy. A referendum, passed on
 September 6, restored all political rights to those former
 politicians who had been banned from politics by a provisional
 article of the 1982 Constitution. All charges against the
 formerly banned politicians for activities prior to the
 referendum were dropped. Prime Minister Turgut Ozal called
 for early national elections which took place on November 29.
 These were the first. national elections since 1980 to include
 all prominent political leaders. Prime Minister Ozal's
 Motherland Party won the elections from a field of seven legal
 political parties.
 The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma in
 the countryside are responsible for maintaining public order.
 On July 19, the Government lifted martial law in the last five
 provinces where it had been in effect. At present nine
 provinces (Istanbul, plus eight provinces in the southeast
 where the Government faces armed Kurdish guerrillas) remain
 under a state of emergency, which empowers their civilian
 governors to exercise some of the powers of martial law
 commanders. In addition, a specially empowered "supergovernor"
 oversees and coordinates the actions of 12 governors in
 southeastern Turkey (including the 8 southeastern provinces
 under the state of emergency).
 Since 1980 Turkey has been moving from a closed economy,
 dominated by the state sector, to a free market, export-
 oriented economy. Although the rates of inflation and
 unemployment are still high, the economy under the
 Government's structural adjustment program has made
 substantial advances. In April Turkey applied for full
 membership in the European Economic Community.
 Progress in the observance of human rights continued in 1987.
 The end of martial'law in July 1987, the lifting of political
 bans in the September referendum, and recent court rulings
 removed many restraints on freedom of the press. In January
 the Government recognized, in principle, the right of Turkish
 citizens to appeal to the European Human Rights Commission,
 although it has yet to approve appeals to the European Human
 Rights Court, whose decisions are binding. In January 1988,
 Turkey signed the Council of Europe (COE) Convention for the
 Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and
 announced its intention to sign a similar U.N. agreement. By
 signing, the Government of Turkey, for the first time, accepted
 official outside monitoring of places of detention, a step
 human rights organizations had long been advocating.
 Application for membership in the European Community has
 provided an additional impetus for bringing human rights
 practices into conformity with general Western European norms.
 The Government prosecuted many persons accused of torturing
 detaineeS. Increased penalties for torture have been
 incorporated into the proposed revision of the penal code.
 The Government is also improving prison conditions by building
 new facilities and responding to prisoner demands. However,
 despite the Government's efforts to date, serious and repeated
 incidences of torture continue to be reported.
 Some minority problems persist. The Constitution regards all
 citizens as Turks but, except for the special status granted
 to non-Muslim minorities by the Treaty of Lausanne (1923),
 
 
 1033
 TURKEY
 Turkey does not legally recognize the existence of ethnic
 minorities.
 Trade unions and associations are prohibited by the 1982
 Constitution and the Law on Associations from engaging in
 political activities or having organic links or ties with
 political parties.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no accusations of politically motivated killings by
 government forces in 1987. A terrorist bombing in Istanbul
 during October killed one person. Also, an attack on a police
 station in Istanbul in August resulted in the death of one
 policeman.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by government forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In January 1988, Turkey signed the Council of Europe (COE)
 Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
 Degrading Treatment and announced its intention to sign a
 similar U.N. agreement. Accession to the COE Convention
 allows an international committee of COE member states to
 visit all places of detention (police stations, civilian and
 military prisons, and mental hospitals) at any time, following
 notification of the visit to the Government of Turkey. In
 announcing its intention to sign the COE Convention, the
 Government stressed the seriousness of Turkey's desire to
 eradicate torture.
 Although the Constitution states that "no one shall be
 subjected to torture or ill-treatment incompatible with human
 dignity," Turkish politicians, the Turkish press, and outside
 monitoring groups have repeatedly asserted that prisoners are
 subject to mistreatment and torture during initial
 interrogation or imprisonment. In its September 1987 File on
 Torture, Amnesty'International charged that torture was
 "widespread" and "systematic," claiming that "almost 4 years
 after a civilian government came to power in November 1983, no
 effective measures have been taken to prevent torture." The
 Amnesty file included accounts of torture methods, centers of
 torture, sexuaf abuse, and death in custody. Helsinki Watch
 in its latest rep'ort concluded that "torture is still
 practiced in Turkey on a large scale." It also stated,
 however, that abuse or torture in prisons, apart from the
 intitial detention period, has substantially decreased.
 Some assertions of torture concern treatment that could be
 defined as police brutality, such as rough handling by police
 officials aimed at intimidating a suspect or prisoner or
 resulting from personal animosity. In other cases the
 mistreatment appears to involve systematic torture. Nearly
 all of the numerous assertions have derived from treatment
 during initial periods of incommunicado detention, before
 charges were filed and before the accused was able to contact
 
 
 1034
 TURKEY
 an attorney. Many cases were documented by medical evidence.
 Greater freedom of the press has yielded extensive coverage in
 Turkey of such instances of torture, including photos of
 victims, descriptions of methods-, and, sketches of premises
 where torture is said to have taken place.
 Even before signing the COE Convention, the Government had
 condemned torture and expressed its determination to eradicate
 it by prompt and severe punishment of offenders. Following
 the November elections, the newly appointed Director General
 of Security, who serves as head of the Turkish National Police,
 flatly condemned the practice of torture and pledged to
 eradicate it. The Government has made efforts to investigate
 assertions of torture and to prosecute the offenders.
 Although accurate figures for the number of investigations and
 prosecutions are not available, the press continues to report
 sentences of those convicted of torture. For example, in
 October, following a judicial medical board's determination
 that a prisoner in Bingol died as the result of torture, the
 Government opened a case against a number of military
 personnel, including one officer. This same officer was later
 convicted of torture in a separate case. Nonetheless,
 international human rights organizations continue to maintain
 that many assertions of torture are not fully investigated and
 that some convicted offenders continue to carry out their
 official duties even while their cases are being appealed.
 Human rights advocates both in and outside of Turkey, including
 the Turkish Bar Association, have suggested that the most
 effective way to prevent torture or assertions of torture is
 to allow lawyers access to prisoners during the initial perio
 of detention. Such access is being considered among proposed
 revisions to the criminal code. The revised criminal code, if
 adopted, would also increase the punishment for torture. The
 current criminal code categorizes murder by torture as
 manslaughter and punishes it with an 8-year sentence.
 Penalties for torture which does not result in death range
 from 3 to 5 years. In 1986 the Parliament defeated a bill
 which would have increased this penalty to a range of 5 to 10
 years. The new criminal code would increase the penalty. for
 murder by torture to up to 16 years.
 In August, following widespread hunger strikes by prisoners
 and parallel demonstrations by their friends and relatives
 outside the prisons, Turkish reporters were permitted for the
 first time to visit prisons and to report extensively on prison
 conditions. As a result of this press attention, conditions
 in many prisons appear to have improved. The Government has
 responded to many prisoner demands and has been building new
 prisons to improve living conditions. The Minister of Justice
 claimed in September that prison conditions had improved
 dramatically in the last 3 years with the establishment of 93
 new places of detention. However, because of its relative
 underdevelopment, most public facilities in Turkey, including
 prisons, are still substandard when judged against those of
 many developed countries.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Except in limited circumstances, such as when a person is
 caught in the act of committing a crime, a judge must issue a
 detention warrant to the prosecutor if a prisoner is to be
 incarcerated. The police or public prosecutor, however, can
 hold persons taken into custody incommunicado and without
 charge 'for up to 24 hours. By court order, the period of
 
 
 1035
 TURKEY
 incommunicado detention may be extended to 15 days. In cases
 of "offenses committed collectively" by three or more persons,
 detention without charge for up to 15 days is permitted without
 court order.
 In the nine provinces under a state of emergency, the governor
 (or supergovernor) may authorize detention of a person for up
 to 30 days without charge. Under emergency rule, authorities
 do not need warrants to detain suspects. Once in formal
 custody, a detainee is taken before a public prosecutor to be
 informed of pending charges. If the prosecutor decides to
 pursue the case, the detainee is arraigned before a judge and
 subsequently allowed to retain a lawyer.
 Parliament in 1986 defeated a bill requiring immediate access
 to a lawyer. A proposed revision of the criminal code under
 which a person, upon being detained, would have the right to
 obtain a lawyer is still under discussion. A detainee does
 not have a right of bail; the arraigning judge, however, may
 release the accused on provisional liberty on presentation of
 an appropriate guarantee, or order him held in preventive
 detention if the court determines that he may flee or destroy
 evidence. The Constitution specifies the right of detainees
 to request speedy conclusion of arraignment and trial. In all
 cases, the authorities may hold a detainee incommunicado
 within the prescribed time limits until he is charged or
 released. According to the Police Powers Act of 1975, a
 detainee's next of kin must normally be notified "in the
 shortest time."
 On April 15, the Parliament passed a law rescinding a
 provision of the Execution of Sentences Act of 1986 that
 permitted Turkish judicial authorities to impose sentences of
 "security observation," known commonly as internal exile.
 The Constitution prohibits forced labor, and there is none in
 practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Defendants normally have the right to an open trial. In some
 trials, such as those held in military prisons or on military
 compounds, members of the public must seek permission to
 attend, but such permission is routinely granted. Although
 Turkey is predominantly Muslim, its court system and judicial
 procedures are modeled on the Italian (criminal) and Swiss
 (civil) law codes. As in many other civil law countries,
 trials in which layman juries render verdicts do not form part
 of the Turkish judicial system.
 The Constitution declares that judges shall he independent in
 the discharge of their duties and provides for their secure
 tenure. It also prohibits authorities from giving orders or
 recommendations to judges concerning the exercise of judicial
 power. The independence of the judiciary was demonstrated
 when the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional two
 provisions of the 1985 Police Powers Act which were widely
 considered to be oppressive. Courts have also acquitted many
 defendants in cases involving freedom of expression.
 Public prosecutors are also independent; to pursue a case is
 their decision alone. It is they who determine whether to
 pursue investigations of assertions of torture. The Supreme
 Council of Judges and Public Prosecutors, appointed by the
 President and including the Minister of Justice, selects
 
 
 1036
 TURKEY
 judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and oversees
 those of the lower courts.
 All defendants accused of terror-ism or other offenses against
 the security of the State, including drug smuggling, are tried
 in one of eight State Security Courts. The judges in these
 courts observe the same standards of evidence as judges
 presiding over regular civilian courts. Three judges preside
 over State Security courts: a civilian judge as chairman, one
 additional civilian judge, and one military judge. Civilian
 and security courts generally conduct trials under the same
 rules of procedure, based on the Constitution and emergency
 law regulations.
 A conviction or acquittal in either.system may be appealed.
 If an appeals court overturns a lower court's guilty verdict,
 the case is sent back to the lower court for reconsideration.
 If the lower court insists on its original verdict, the case
 is returned to the appeals court for a binding opinion. In
 some cases, particularly capital cases, appeals to the Supreme
 Court or to the High Court of Military Appeals are mandatory
 and automatic. If a death sentence is confirmed-by an appeals
 court, it must be approved by the Council of Ministers, then
 by Parliament, and finally by the President.
 Available evidence suggests that Kurdish-speaking defendants
 standing trial in the southeast often suffer from having only
 a partial, or in some cases-total, lack of familiarity with
 Turkish, the official and only language permitted in
 communication with attorneys or judicial officials. Although
 translators are permitted, the quality of the-translations
 from Kurdish into Turkish is reportedly poor.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners held in Turkish
 jails vary greatly, depending on the source and the source's
 definition of political prisoner. The Government denies that
 it holds any political prisoners but points out that many
 persons have been imprisoned for terrorist acts or for other
 crimes committed in the course of pursuing ostensibly political
 goals during the 1970's. Human rights organizations believe
 that many people have been imprisoned under statutes
 proscribing "membership in illegal organizations," prohibiting
 propaganda aimed at promoting the hegemony of one class or
 ethnic group, and advocating the establishment of an Islamic
 state. They estimate-that persons currently imprisoned for
 nonviolent activity under these statutes number several
 hundred.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Entry by government officials into a private residence and
 interception or monitoring of private correspondence are
 permitted only upon issuance of a judicial warrant.
 In the nine provinces still under state-of-emergency law,
 however, the governor (or supergovernor) may empower
 authorities to search residences or the premises of political
 parties, businesses, associations, and other organizations
 without obtaining a warrant. They may also search, hold, or
 seize without warrant persons, letters, telegrams, and
 documents.
 
 
 1037
 TURKEY
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 Since August 1984, the Government has faced in southeastern
 Turkey an increasingly bloody campaign of violence carried out
 by Kurdish guerrilla groups resident both in Turkey and several
 nearby countries, whose professed aim is to establish an
 independent Kurdish state--incorporating parts of present-day
 Turkey, Iraq, and Iran--by destabilizing the central Turkish
 Government. Armed Kurdish rebels in Turkey receive substantial
 outside support and materiel.
 Guerrilla attacks appear to have increased in both number and
 geographic extent in 1987. Recent changes in guerrilla tactics
 include the formation of larger bands for armed attacks,
 strikes at the economic and transportation infrastructure of
 the region, and brutal, terrorist-style massacres of villagers,
 many of the victims being women and children.
 The attacks by supporters of the Marxist-oriented Kurdish
 Workers' Party (PKK), the main insurgent group, on government
 and civilian targets has resulted in at least 500 civilian and
 military deaths. A Turkish paper in July reported the 3-year
 death toll at 715, of which 289 were civilians, mostly women
 and children, 159 military personnel, and 267 guerrillas.
 There have been additional killings, particularly of civilians,
 since then.   Despite major military operations against the
 PKK, guerrilla activities continue in many remote and
 relatively inaccessible parts of the southeast.
 Turkish members of Parliament, international human rights
 groups, and the Turkish press have raised questions concerning
 activities by security forces in southeastern Turkey.
 Reportedly, family members of suspected terrorists have been
 abused or tortured to obtain information about the terrorists'
 whereabouts. In some cases, the populations of entire
 villages have been questioned or even detained. In other
 cases, villagers suspected of providing food to terrorists
 have been charged with aiding the separatists.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Political developments and court rulings have removed most
 restraints on freedom of the press. The criminal code,
 however, prohibits speech or writings considered threatening
 to state security and the democratic system of government.
 The proscription applies to advocacy of class or racial
 domination (e.g., communism or fascism), the establishment of
 a theocratic state (e.g., Islamic fundamentalism), or the
 creation of a separate state on ethnic lines (e.g., Kurdish
 separatism). These provisions are longstanding, dating from
 the early days of the Turkish Republic.
 The Turkish press is robust and vigorous. It is privately
 owned and reflects a wide range of political views. There is
 no "government" paper; to a greater or lesser extent, all
 newspapers present opposition views. Furthermore, the recent
 trend in judicial rulings affecting freedom of the press has
 been consistently in favor of more freedom despite still
 existing statutory restrictions. Nevertheless, the
 possibility of prosecution probably induces some caution by
 the press in its selection of subject matter for reporting.
 
 
 1038
 TURKEY
 Turkish radio and television (TRT) is a government monopoly.
 Opposition leaders complain that it is biased toward the
 Government in its coverage, although all parties were
 permitted to present their views during the November election
 campaign. Works of certain leftist and Kurdish performers and
 writers are reliably reported to be banned from broadcast on
 TRT for political or cultural reasons.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior permission from
 the authorities. Such requests are generally granted.
 According to current regulations, marching routes, rally
 areas, crowd dispersion routes, and poster hanging locations
 are fo be fixed for each city every January. The Government
 allowed political rallies during the referendum campaign and
 did not interfere with the political campaigning for the
 November parliamentary elections.
 The Law on Associations, which reflected government concern
 over the involvement of some associations in the political
 violence preceding the military intervention of 1980,
 prohibits associations from having ties to political parties
 or engaging in political activity. Association activity is
 closely monitored by the Government. Associations must submit
 their charters for the approval of government authorities
 before they are allowed to form. Turkey's Human Rights
 Association, formed in July 1986, did not receive permission
 to operate as a legal association until 1 year later, although
 it was able to hold meetings and seminars in the interim.
 As a reaction to the universities' involvement in pre-'1980
 violence, the Constitution and the Political Parties Law
 proscribe student and faculty involvement in political
 activities. Political parties are forbidden to form youth
 branches. Students must obtain their university rector's
 permission before joining an association. After student
 protests, the Government withdrew in April a proposed amendment
 to the Higher Education Act which would have limited student
 associations to one per university campus. Nevertheless, 143
 students who protested the draft law went on trial for unlawful
 assembly. This trial is still going on. Of approximately 100
 faculty members dismissed under martial law regulations--as
 many as 1,000 resigned of their own will either out of
 disagreement with the military intervention or far other,
 mainly economic, reasons--a number have petitioned for
 reinstatement, and at least one professor has been reinstated
 following a court decision in his favor.
 Membership in, or activities related to, an organization
 advocating the establishment of a system of government based
 on class (e.g., Communist organization) are illegal under
 Turkish law. Authorities detained four persons in October and
 arraigned them on charges of being active members of the
 Revolutionary People's Union, which is claimed to be such an
 organization.
 Trade unions and confederations which continued to operate
 under the provisions of the 1983 labor law have been allowed
 to organize workplaces freely and to engage in collective
 bargaining. Although only a small percentage of Turkey's
 total work force of some 16 million is organized, over 60
 percent of industrialized workers are union members covered by
 collective bargaining agreements. As a result, unions have a
 significant impact on the economy, especially on its work
 
 
 1039
 TURKEY
 rules and wage structure. The 1983 Collective Bargaining,
 Strike, and Lock-out Law strictly regulates the bargaining
 process and makes strikes outside the collective bargaining
 process (general strikes, political strikes, and solidarity
 strikes) illegal. Unions are able to represent their members,
 engage in collective bargaining, and respond to their members'
 interests.
 Under martial law, the activities of trade unions and
 confederations were severely restricted. Notwithstanding the
 lifting of martial law, political activity by trade unions is
 banned by the Constitution, the Law on Associations, and the
 Trade Union Law. Unions can theoretically neither endorse
 candidates and parties nor make contributions to their
 campaigns. Nevertheless, the Turkish Confederation of Labor,
 Turk-Is, openly campaigned against the ruling Motherland Party
 both in the 1986 byelections and the 1987 parliamentary
 elections. Trade union activity in defense of workers' social
 and economic interests is not regarded as political activity.
 The unions have taken advantage of that distinction to mount
 strenuous public campaigns against various government policies
 and to lobby government and opposition parliamentarians in
 support of labor positions.
 These campaigns included continuing efforts to persuade the
 Parliament to bring the laws restricting union activity into
 harmony with relevant International Labor Organization (ILO)
 conventions. A March 24 "March On Parliament" was prevented
 by the police, who charged that Turk-Is had not applied for a
 parade permit.
 A December 1986 court decision ordered the permanent closing
 of DISK (Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions), whose
 activities were suspended under martial law following the 1980
 military takeover. The trial is in the appeals stage. The
 organization and its funds remain under the control of court-
 appointed trustees. Three former leaders of DISK were elected
 to Parliament in November. The Peace Association trials are
 also at the appeals stage, and all defendants are free on bail.
 Turkish government, union, and employer representatives
 participate fully in the activities of the ILO. The largest
 confederation, Turk-Is, is an affiliate of the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU); most Turk-Is
 member unions are affiliated with their respective
 international trade secretariats. The Government of Turkey
 was elected a deputy member of the ILO governing body in 1987.
 The American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
 Organizations (AFL-CIO) has alleged that the Turkish workers'
 constitutional right to organize is hampered by the labor code
 and by government and employer policies and practices, that
 the right to strike is heavily encumbered, and that observance
 of minimal safety and health standards is lax. The Minister
 of Labor has announced that the Government is preparing
 legislation which will address some of the worker rights
 issues raised by the AFL-CIO and others. The new legislation
 reportedly will modify or eliminate some restrictions placed
 on trade unions, excessive government oversight of unions, and
 regulations affecting their free choice of officers. New
 legislation would also address the right of civil servants and
 teachers to organize, as well as the strict requirements a
 union currently must satisfy in order to become a bargaining
 agent.
 
 
 1040
 TURKEY
 C. Freedom of Religion
 The overwhelming majority-of Turks are Sunni Muslims.
 "Alevis," adherents-of different heterodox varieties of
 Shi'ism, constitute from 10 to 15 percent of the population.
 There are also various small Christian religious groups, and a
 small Jewish community.
 Turkish governments since the founding of the Republic have
 regarded secularism as an essential attribute of a modern,
 Western-style.democratic-system, and the Constitution
 proclaims it to be a basic characteristic of the State.
 Accordingly it distinguishes.carefully between a person's
 private right to "freedom of conscience, religious belief, and,
 convilction" and public proselytizing of any kind- Since
 Ottoman times, pexsona identity in Turkish society has
 correlated.with religion. The 1923 Treaty of-Lausanne defines
 minorities according to religion, and personal identity is
 still largely synonymous with religious identity even in the
 modern secular Turkish state. Proselytization is therefore
 politically sensitive.
 Under the Constitution, "instruction in religious culture and
 moral education" in accordance with a state-prepared
 curriculum is compulsory for all students. The Education
 Ministry confirmed in 1986 that non-Muslims would have to
 attend classes in general religious instruction but would be
 excused from the "practical" sections, which include
 memorization of Koranic verses and instructions in prayer.
 The courses--2 hours per week--are taught by lay teachers.
 Extracurricular Koran courses using government-approved texts
 are permitted. The Government has closed Koran courses run by
 fundamentalist sects teaching a more radical brand of Islam.
 Among other religious groups, small numbers of Armenian
 Orthodox and Armenian Catholic, Greek Orthodox and Greek
 Catholic, Bulgarian Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Syrian and
 Assyrian Christian, Chaldean Uniates, Protestants, and Jewish
 believers are found in Turkey, primarily in Istanbul. In
 addition to the Turkish Constitution, the Treaty of Lausanne
 guarantees the rights of the non-Muslim minorities. These
 groups operate churches, monasteries, synagogues, schools
 (where students may be taught in their own language), and
 charitable religious foundations such as hospitals and
 orphanages.
 Non-Muslim minority groups have repeatedly complained about
 government policies and procedures concerning the operation of
 community schools, the formation of parish councils, and the
 registration and repair of church property. Government
 restrictions on the transfer of property to religious
 charitable organizations is also a matter of contention.
 The Government has recently taken steps to resolve several
 issues of concern to non-Muslim groups. It granted permission
 to the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in April 1987 to rebuild
 its administration building, destroyed by fire in 1941. It
 increased the value of repairs which can be made without prior
 authorization to historical buildings, thereby removing
 another issue of contention. It permitted the free
 circulation of Bibles. However, it has not yet granted
 permission to build churches to such communities as the
 Chaldean Uniates who have emigrated to Istanbul from the
 southeast, or to the Armenian community of Ankara.
 
 
 1041
 TURKEY
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is general freedom of movement within Turkey. Turks
 generally are free to travel abroad, and increasing numbers
 have done so since the relaxation of currency controls.
 According to the Constitution, a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted on account of the national economic
 situation, civic obligations (generally military service), or
 criminal investigation or prosecution. Some Turks involved in
 lengthy mass trials dating from the early 1980's have been
 denied passports, although others have been granted passports,
 and there is evidence that some citizens not under indictment
 were denied passports for political reasons. Turkish law
 provides-that those denied passports while under indictment
 may nevertheless be permitted to travel if the Justice
 Ministry and Office of the Prime Minister approve.
 Restrictions have been eased as a matter of practice, and the
 Government is currently considering legislative changes in
 order to bring Turkish passport policies more into conformity
 with European norms.
 Turkish law grants citizens protection against deportation,
 extradition, or denial of reentry. The Constitution provides
 for the right of Turks living abroad to return home. Under
 provisions of the Turkish citizenship law, however, the
 Government may strip citizenship from those who have refused
 to return home to face criminal charges, or who have committed
 acts expatriating themselves, including failing to return to
 perform military service. According to a Turkish press report
 in April, 13,788 Turks living abroad have been stripped of
 their citizenship since 1980.
 Turkey has permanently resettled approximately 4,500 Afghan
 refugees of Turkic ethnicity in recent years and provides a
 temporary haven for East European refugees in two temporary
 settlement facilities. Since Turkey limits the definition of
 refugees to East Europeans, the Government does not grant
 refugee status to Iranians. Nevertheless, as a country of
 first asylum, Turkey serves as a safe haven for many Iranian
 refugees being processed for resettlement by the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It does not
 generally deport to Iran those who entered Turkey illegally or
 who overstayed their permitted time as "tourists." In
 consequence, large numbers of Iranians are now living in
 Turkey, many of them in Istanbul and other large cities.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The right to change the government exists both in theory and
 in practice. Turkey has a multiparty, presidential
 parliamentary system. The President is elected by Parliament
 for a single 7-year term. The current President, whose
 election was automatic with the approval of Turkey's new
 Constitution in the 1982 referendum, is retired General Kenan
 Evren, former Chief of the Turkish General Staff and head of
 the National Security Council which governed Turkey during the
 period of military rule (1980-83).
 Elections for public office are on the basis of universal
 suffrage. The unicameral Parliament has 450 seats elected on
 a proportional basis. The Election Law requires that a party
 win at least 10 percent of the total national vote in order to
 obtain seats in Parliament. The 10 percent threshold is
 
 
 1042
 TURKEY
 intended to prevent political fragmentation and recurrence of
 the parliamentary paralysis of the late 1970's. Of the seven
 legal parties which fielded slates of candidates for the
 November national elections, three received more than 10
 percent of the total vote.
 Parties advocating a theocratic state, the superiority or
 dictatorship of a particular social class or group, or
 "exclusive" or "elitist" political philosophies are prohibited.
 No party may be formed around a particular ethnic or cultural
 group. Among the prohibited political groupings are Communist
 and other Marxist parties, which are based on class,, and
 Fascist "elitist" parties. These are regarded as inimical to
 a Western-style democratic society and threatening to Turkey's
 fundamiental integrity. Fascists and Communists similarly are
 banned from membership in other parties. Members of the armed
 forces and certain.categories of civil servants may not join
 any political party.
 The Constitution provides for equal political rights for men
 and women. Turkey was one of the first countries to grant
 women full and equal political rights. There are currently
 11 female Members of Parliament, one of whom is a cabinet
 minister, and several women hold important positions in the
 party hierarchies. Members-of minorities, Muslim and
 non-Muslim, face no legal limitations on political
 participation as long as they accept Turkish national
 identity. Despite other limitations and restrictions on Kurds
 as an ethnic group, many Turks of Kurdish descent serve or
 have served in the Parliament, the Cabinet, and senior-
 government posts.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government permitted visits to Turkey by foreigners to
 discuss human rights during 1987 and, in most cases,
 facilitated contacts for both official and nonofficial
 visitors. The Government was less helpful to visitors
 investigating the Kurdish issue. Since the 1983 settlement of
 a five-nation complaint in-the European Human Rights
 Commission, Turkey has. undertaken to provide regular
 confidential reports to the Council of Europe and to permit
 site visits. The Government has not.permitted prison visits
 by the International Committee of the Red Cross. Turkey's
 accession to the COE Torture Convention will mean future
 visits by the COE international committee.
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association was provisionally
 formed in July 1986 and had its charter officially approved in
 1987. The Social Democratic PopulisLParty, the main.
 opposition party, also has a human rights committee and has
 actively pursued human rights issues in Parliament.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution regards all Turkish citizens as equal and
 prohibits discrimination on ethnic grounds. In the Lausanne
 Treaty, the Government undertook "to assure full and complete
 protection of life and liberty to all inhabitants of Turkey
 without distinction as to birth, nationality, language, race,
 or religion." At the same time, it has been the longstanding
 policy of Turkish governments to seek assimilation of persons
 
 
 1043
 TURKEY
 of non-Turkish ethnic backgrounds into the mainstream of
 society. The size of the non-Muslim minority communities has
 declined steadily over the years.
 Non-Muslim minority groups continue to complain about the
 restrictive nature of government policies and procedures
 regulating the operation of community schools, the purchase
 and sale of community real estate, the administration of
 church properties, and the activities of parish councils. The
 prohibition on most charitable religious organizations against
 accepting bequests also continues to be a major concern.
 Kurds can be found throughout Turkey, both as a result of
 Ottoman settlement policy and more recent migration to
 metropolitan centers. Those living outside of the
 southeastern part of the country have been assimilated more
 completely into national life. Most Kurdish speakers are
 concentrated in the economically disadvantaged southeast, and
 many live a tribal existence. Through large-scale economic
 development programs, the Government seeks to integrate fully
 both the region and its people into modern Turkey.
 The Government remains strongly opposed to any assertion of a
 Kurdish ethnic identity which could bring into question the
 unity of the Turkish State. Publication of books, newspapers,
 and any other materials in Kurdish is forbidden, as are books
 or any other materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture,
 or ethnic identity. The Kurdish language is not permitted for
 official purposes, e.g., in the courts, nor is it allowed in
 certain private situations such as receiving visitors in
 prison, even when the prisoner or visitor does not speak
 Turkish. However, there is no restriction on the use of
 Kurdish in nonofficial settings.
 As noted above, the right of indigenous minority groups to use
 their own languages is limited. Although the Lausanne Treaty
 states that "no restrictions shall be imposed on the free use
 by any Turkish national of any language in private
 intercourse, in commerce, religion, in the press, or in
 publications of any kind or at public meetings," the
 Constitution states that the official language of the country
 is Turkish. One article of the Constitution bans
 discrimination on the basis of language, while others prohibit
 the public use of "languages prohibited by law." While there
 is no legislation defining prohibited languages, the
 broadcasting and publishing laws do define "legal languages."
 Persons have been tried on a variety of charges relating to
 the use of Kurdish. All recent such trials have resulted in
 acquittals. The Government has stated that the intent of its
 bans on publishing in Kurdish (and its discouraging of
 languages such as Georgian and Laz) is to foster Turkish as
 the language of all citizens for all uses. This is part of an
 effort to inculcate in all Turkish citizens a sense of
 identity with the Turkish State and nation as opposed to
 identification with any particular group within the nation.
 In practice, the severity of the restrictions on the use of a
 minority language appears to depend on the perceived threat
 the group in question presents to the integrity of the State.
 For example, the Government faces armed Kurdish separatists
 and believes the use of Kurdish fosters separatism. The use
 of Arabic, about which there are no such concerns, is not
 similarly restricted.
 The Government has long been a leader in promoting and
 protecting women's rights. Women have full suffrage and
 
 
 1044
 TURKEY
 educational rights, have attained high office, and are
 represented in all professions and institutions. Women have
 served or are currently employed in senior positions as
 university rector and dean, ambassador, political party
 president, and army colonel. Turkish businesswomen play
 significant roles in many industries and sit on the boards of
 some of Turkey's largest private firms. Female lawyers and
 judges are relatively more common than in the United States,
 and female doctors dominate in some specialties.
 Nonetheless, the role of women in smaller communities and.
 rural areas--especially in the east--is still circumscribed by
 centuries of patriarchal tradition. Social and cultural
 constraints in these areas limit women's equal access to
 educational and professional opportunities, the Constitution
 and body of law notwithstanding.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution provides for the right to reasonable
 conditions of labor suited to the worker's age, sex, and
 capacity, and grants the right to rest and leisure and a fair
 wage. The Labor Law forbids-the employment of children under
 13 years of age and restricts children under 15 to "light work
 which will not harm their health and physical development,
 prevent their attendance at occupational training and
 orientation programs, or their ability to benefit from
 education." Children between 15 and 18 years of age may not
 be employed in underground or underwater work, nor may they be
 employed at night. Girls and women may not be employed in
 underground or underwater work, but, if over the age of 18,
 may work night shifts under conditions specified jointly by
 the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare and the Ministry of
 Industry and Commerce.
 A board composed of government, private sector, and labor
 representatives establishes national minimum wages for the
 agricultural and nonagricultural sectors. The Labor Law
 provides for a 7 1/2-hour day and a 45-hour workweek.
 In spite of constitutional guarantees, specific legal
 requirements, and labor union efforts, a considerable gap
 remains between ideals and realities of occupational health
 and safety levels. Trade unions have repeatedly complained
 that existing regulations governing health, safety, and
 working conditions are not adequately enforced. Outside the
 industrialized sector where unions exercise considerable
 influence, legal restrictions are generally ignored both on
 occupational health and safety and on child and female
 employment. In general, the difference between legal
 prohibitions against child labor and its practice is
 narrowing. But in the agricultural sector to a large degree,
 and to a lesser extent in family-operated commercial
 enterprises, young children still work at their parents'
 side. During 1987 an illegal market in the services of
 children'in a provincial town, in which children from villages
 were leased to work for nonrelatives during the school
 vacation months, received considerable newspaper coverage and
 was closed immediately by the Government.
 
 
 1045
