TURKEY
The 1987 report on Turkey is a marked improvement over previous reports. For example, it contains a lengthy description of problems suffered by the Kiu-dish minority in southeast Turkey. In addition, it no longer minimizes the incidence of torture of detainees by police and security forces. Both of these are significant changes that vastly improve the current report. Certain shortcomings remain, however, including the continued understatement of the number of prisoners held on politically related charges who are still incarcerated in Turkey and the number of Turks who are denied passports to travel outside Turkey.
With regard to torture, the report no longer tries to dismiss all reports of torture as isolated incidents of police brutality, nor does it put the exclusive blame for torture on the low educational level of the police and the lack of adequate police training. Although the report still maintains that some cases "could be defined as police brutality," it also emphasizes the systematic nature of torture in Turkey.
Similarly, unlike in previous years, the report does not overstate the government's efforts to stop torture. Projecting an image of swift reprisals for any instance of torture, the 1986 report said: "The government has responded with prompt action to suspend the alleged offenders [torturers] and investigate the circumstances of each case." But that rosy assessment ignored the fact that, while the precise number of officials investigated on charges of torture and death in detention is not known, the number clearly is considerably below the number of allegations of torture and death in detention. Reflecting this reality, the 1987 report contains a more modest and accurate statement of the government's response: "The government has made efforts to investigate assertions of torture and to prosecute the offenders." It should have added, however, that many torturers go unpunished. The report also dropped the objectionable 1986 statement that "many Turks link the mistreatment of prisoners to
154
Turkey
widespread public acceptance of the notion that the police should enforce public order by whatever means are necessary." This is a welcome change.
As evidence of the government's concern about torture and its eagerness to be accepted as a fuU member of the European Community, the report cites Turkey's signing of the Council of Europe's Convention for Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment, and Turkey's stated intention to sign a similar United Nations convention. We maintain that the government has the power to eliminate torture altogether and that this would be the best evidence of concern about torture. Nevertheless, we welcome Turkey's signing of the Convention, which indicates, at the very least, Turkey's eagerness to improve its international reputation.
As noted, the report grossly understates the estimated number of prisoners held on politically related charges who remain in Turkish prisons and detention centers. It asserts that human rights organizations estimate the number of persons currently imprisoned for nonviolent activity at several hundred. In fact, Amnesty Internationa] uses a figure of 15,000, and estimates of Turkish members of parliament and human rights advocates range from6,000 to 18,000. Concededly, estimates are complicated by the lack of distinction in Turkish law between crimes of thought and crimes of violence. Nevertheless, it is difficult to understand how the State Department came up with a figure of "several hundred" in light of these other, far larger, estimates.
The section on the denial of fair public trials fails to note that some lawyers continue to be harassed, investigated and tried for legitimate actions taken in representing clients. For example, when two Communists openly returned to Turkey in November 1987 and were promptly arrested, the two attorneys who represented them were themselves detained for two days in December. The same discussion also imderstates the difficulties encoimtered by lawyers in representing defendants in eastern Turkey who speak only Kurdish. Because Turkish law prohibits the use of the Kiu-dish lai^age during prison visits, lawyers often are effectively prevented from interviewing their clients or plaiming a meaningful defense. Legal representation under these conditions is obviously a farce.
155
Critique
In a new section on violation of humanitarian law in armed conflicts, the report accurately describes the state of guerrilla warfare in southeast Turkey, including reports that the military abuses or tortures family members of suspected terrorists, and occasionally detains and questions the populations of entire villages. The report does not, however, discuss the forced relocation of whole villages, which the government has threatened and in some cases carried out. Nor does the report address the abuses, and in some cases killings, of ordinary peasants by members of the security forces.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, the report describes accurately some of the legal restrictions imposed on the press, which proscribe advocatii^ class or racial domination (communism or fascism), the establishment of a theocratic state, or the creation of a separate state on ethnic lines. The report also suggests that the possibility of prosecution induces some self-censorship on the part of the press. But the report omits the many incidents in the past year in which magazines containing articles on the Kurdish question or other sensitive issues were seized from the newsstands or, in at least one instance, from the printer before distribution. Nor does the report discuss the many cases in which maga:dne or newspaper writers or editors have been investigated, charged and sometimes tried for their writings. Although the Turkish press is undoubtedly freer today than in the recent past to print material critical of the government — as evidenced by the many left-wng periodicals that have sprung up and are publishing regularly — that e^q^anded freedom does not justify overlooking the serious violations of press freedom that persist.
In discussing freedom of association, the report describes the government's approval of a Human Rights Association. But the report fails to mention that at least two associations — Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War and an Association for the Purification of the Turkish Langu^e — were denied permission to exist, and their founding members were investigated by the government.
The discussion of trade unions does not indicate the extent to which restrictions in the Constitution and labor laws sharply curtail union activities. The Constitution denies labor unions the right to engage in political activity or to pursue a political cause. The Trade Union Law and the Collective Bargaining,
156
Turkey
Right to Strike and Lock-out Law contain a number of onerous provisions; for example, before being able to enter into a collective bargaining contract for workers in a plant or office, a union must not only have a membership of over 50 percent at that work site, but must also have signed up at least 10 percent of all workers in its industry (e.g., 10 percent of all steel workers). The right to strike and picket is restricted in numerous ways. For example, no more than two persons are allowed to picket, and the only words permitted on a picket sign are "This work place is on strike." The law gives the Government so many options to postpone or cancel a strike that in practice this right can seldom be used legally. Union collection of dues for strike and solidarity funds is forbidden. Also, the report does not state that about half a million teachers and 1.3 million other government employees are forbidden by law from joining or organizing a imion.
Referring to the trials of the Turkish Peace Association (TPA), the report says only that the trials are on appeal and the defendants are free on bail. It does not say that in April 1987 the TPA was banned, its property was confiscated, and twelve defendants, including several prominent Turks, were convicted and given prison sentences of between six months and four years. (Since all the convicted defendants have spent considerable time in prison, only two will have to serve additional time if the sentences are upheld on appeal).
In its discussion of freedom of religion, the report says nothing about the government's repression of Turkish citizens who have protested against restrictions that interfere wth the free practice of their religion. This past year, fundamentalist Moslems protested a government ban on the wearing of headscarves by fundamentalist women university students. The state had banned the scarves in all universities and ordered that women dress in "contemporary garb." The students contended that wearing headscarves was an essential part of their right to practice the Moslem religion. When thousands of students, men and women, gathered to protest the ban, the police detained hundreds of the protesters and initiated prosecutions against 100. The level of protest eventually forced the government to lift the nationwide ban, but the government then gave decision-making authority to individual universities, some of which have retained the ban.
157
Critique
Fundamentalist Moslems complain about other restrictions on their religious freedom as well: that mosques, which are supposed to be social and cultural centers, are locked between prayer services; that mosques are run by civil servants; that the Department of Reli^ous Affairs sends out scripts for preachers to use at Friday services, rather than allowing them to prepare their own; and that Moslem men are not permitted to wear beards. Again, the report makes no mention of these.
The report declares that Turks are generally free to travel abroad and lists some categories of citizens who are forbidden to leave the country. The report says nothing, however, about the widespread belief that as many as 300,000 people have been denied their passports. To its credit, though, the report does note that as many as 13,788 Turks living abroad have been stripped of their citizenship since the military coup in 1980. '
Discussing the government's attitude toward non-governmental organizations that investigate human rights in Turkey, the report observes that "the government was less helpful to visitors investigating the Kurdish issue." This is something of an understatement. Because a Helsinki Watch mission that visited Turkey in June 1987 included an inquiry into the Kurdish minority, the government abandoned its previous policy of cooperation and refused to grant interviews with any government officials other than three mid-level officers in the Foreign Ministry.
The rei>ort includes an accurate and detailed account of the plight of the Kiu'dish minority in southeast Tiu^key, describing the government's strong opposition to any assertion of Kurdish ethnic identity. The report details the proscription of the publication of books, newspapers or any other materials in Kurdish, as well as books or other materials on Kurdish history, culture or ethnic identity. It describes the government's refusal to permit the Kurdish language to be used for official purposes, and, in some situations, such as prison visits, the authorities' restrictions against the use of the Kurdish language in private and personal meetings. The expansion of the section on discrimination against the Kurdish minority is welcome, and has generated comment in Turkey about the situation of the Kurds.
158
