Turkey
The government’s public announcement in summer 2009, and to the Turkish parliament
in November, that it was committed to ensuring the human rights of
Kurds in Turkey, was the most hopeful indication that a long-stalled reform
process might be restarted. The realization of a plan to uphold minority rights for
Turkey’s different ethnic and religious groups would represent a fundamental
departure from the variously assimilationist or repressive policies of the past, and
offers the possibility of advancing the rights of all groups.
The obstacles to change remain clear. Numerous provisions of the current constitution
restrict human rights and fundamental freedoms, and a new constitution
must be a priority. There were continuing prosecutions and convictions of individuals
who expressed nonviolent critical opinion or political views on the Kurdish
issue, among other subjects viewed as controversial. Restrictions on press freedom
remain a concern. Decisions of Turkey’s Court of Cassation continued to flout
international human rights law and the case law of the European Court of Human
Rights, and demonstrate that the judiciary remains a site of institutionalized
resistance to reform. The struggle to assert civilian control over the military in
Turkey continues: A June change to the law on military courts ensures that military
personnel will be tried in civilian courts for serious offenses, including forming
criminal gangs and plotting coups.
The most notable foreign policy achievement of the year came with the signing of
an agreement by Turkey and Armenia that opens the way to establishing diplomatic
relations and reopening the long-closed border between the two countries.
The decision is subject to parliamentary approval.
Freedom of Expression, Assembly, and Association
The criminalization of opinion remains a key obstacle to the protection of human
rights in Turkey, although debate is increasingly open and critical. Prosecutions of
journalists, writers, publishers, academics, human rights defenders, and officials
of Kurdish political parties and associations sometimes resulted in convictions.
Journalists and editors were frequently prosecuted for investigative reporting on
matters such as the conduct of the military. Temporary closure of newspapers, and long-term restriction of access to websites, including YouTube, continued.
The Doğan Media Group received two huge fines (amounting to over US$3 billion)
for alleged tax evasion. The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) representative on freedom of the media expressed concern that “unprecedented”
fines against a media group critical of the government threatened media
plurality and hence media freedom in Turkey.
Restrictions on broadcasting in minority languages were progressively lifted in
2009. January saw the opening of a Kurdish-language state television channel,
TRT Şeş, and in November there was an easing of restrictions on private channels
broadcasting in minority languages.
The Court of Cassation ruled against the closure of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT) Lambda Istanbul Solidarity Association in April. However, the
court’s ruling included the discriminatory condition that the association not
“encourage lesbian, gay, bisexual, transvestite and transsexual behavior with the
aim of spreading such sexual orientations.”
Demonstrators deemed supporters of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) are treated
similarly to the group’s armed militants by courts. Following a March 2008
precedent decision by the General Penal Board of the Court of Cassation, individuals
joining demonstrations where the PKK had called for public participation
were to be charged with “membership” in the PKK for “committing a crime in the
name of the organization.” To date, hundreds of demonstrators, a significant proportion
of them children, have been convicted or are on trial under these charges
for their participation in sometimes violent demonstrations. Most of those on trial
spend prolonged periods in pretrial detention.
Since November 2007 the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP), which has
20 members in parliament, has been faced with a closure case pending before
the Constitutional Court for alleged separatist activities.
Human Rights Defenders
Three years after the January 19, 2007 murder of Turkish-Armenian journalist and
human rights defender Hrant Dink, there was no progress in uncovering state
involvement in the conspiracy behind his killing. There have been 10 trial hearings in Istanbul against 20 defendants, including the gunman. Eight gendarmes
are on trial in Trabzon for basic negligence in failing to act on intelligence reports
pointing to plans to murder Dink. Lawyers for the Dink family have called for their
trial to be combined with the Istanbul murder trial; the lawyers have to date
applied four times to the European Court of Human Rights complaining of violations
of the right to life, fair trial, and the prohibition on discrimination.
In November 2009, 31 mainly Izmir-based members of trade unions affiliated with
the public sector workers’ trade union confederation KESK stood trial in Izmir on
charges of being members of the PKK. The evidence against them mainly referred
to their activities in support of such issues as Kurdish-language education. In
Ankara in November lawyer Filiz Kalaycı, former head of the Ankara branch of the
Human Rights Association and a member of the association’s prison commission,
stood trial with three other lawyers and the head of a prisoners’ solidarity association
on charges of PKK membership. The lawyers have been involved in the documentation
of prisoners’ complaints about prison conditions, ill-treatment, and
disciplinary punishments, and there are concerns that they have been targeted
for prosecution because of this work. Both proceedings are ongoing at this writing.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Killings by Security Forces
Police ill-treatment occurs during arrest, outside places of official detention, and
during demonstrations, as well as in places of detention. In October Güney Tuna
was allegedly beaten by seven police officers in Istanbul, leaving him with a broken
leg and serious head injury that were not recorded in a routine custody medical
report. There were far fewer reports than in the past two years of police violence
against demonstrators during May 1 demonstrations in Istanbul, although
the policing of demonstrations remains a concern, and in April security forces
were allegedly responsible for shooting dead two demonstrators during an unauthorized
demonstration near Halfeti, Urfa. From July 1 it was obligatory for all
police officers in riot gear to wear numbered helmets, for purposes of identification.
The trial of 60 prison guards, gendarmes, and police officers in connection with
the October 2008 death of Engin Çeber began in January 2009. Six of the defendants are in custody. Çeber collapsed in Metris Prison and died in hospital, an
autopsy recording that he had suffered a brain hemorrhage after being repeatedly
beaten.
Impunity
Turkish courts are notoriously lenient toward members of the security forces who
are charged with abuse or misconduct, contributing to impunity and the persistence
of torture and the resort to lethal force. Long delays and the lack of thorough
and independent investigations by prosecutors contribute to impunity.
Of particular concern is the approach of Turkey’s top court to the use of lethal
force by the security forces. In June the Court of Cassation upheld the acquittal of
four police officers for the killing of Ahmet and Uğur Kaymaz in November 2004 in
the southeastern town of Kızıltepe. The court ignored substantial forensic evidence
demonstrating that the father and 13-year-old son may have been victims
of a summary execution. Lawyers for the Kaymaz family will apply to the European
Court of Human Rights.
In July 2009 a second “Ergenekon” trial alongside the first began on the basis of
second and third indictments probing the alleged plot to overthrow the government
by senior retired military and gendarmerie personnel, figures associated
with organized crime, journalists, and academics. There are now 192 individuals
on trial, in the first such attempt in Turkey’s modern history to bring coup plotters
to justice.
The most significant attempt at bringing to justice state perpetrators of extrajudicial
killings and “disappearances” began in Diyarbakır in September with the trial
of a colonel, village guards, and informers for the murder of 20 individuals in the
period 1993-95 in Cizre, Şırnak province.
Key International Actors
United States President Barack Obama’s April 2009 visit to Turkey marked an
important turning point in restoring the credibility of the US with the Turkish public
after the US-led invasion of Iraq. The US has been supportive of moves to normalize Turkish-Armenian relations, and is dependent on Turkish support during
the withdrawal from Iraq. It now has the potential to play a role in promoting
respect for human rights in Turkey domestically for the first time in seven years.
Negotiations with the European Union over Turkey’s accession to membership did
not progress, with eight negotiation chapters remaining frozen because of stalemate
over a divided Cyprus. The EU remains the most important international
actor with the potential to foster respect for human rights in Turkey, but the deadlock
in negotiations, and the public hostility of some EU member states to eventual
EU membership for Turkey, have undermined the EU’s leverage. The
European Commission’s annual report published in October included a more positive
political assessment than in the past three years, while raising serious concerns
about human rights protection in most areas. The report acknowledged the
importance of the Ergenekon trial “as an opportunity for Turkey to strengthen confidence
in the proper functioning of its democratic institutions and the rule of
law.”
Following a visit to Turkey, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights
Thomas Hammarberg issued two reports. One was critical of Turkey’s continuing
failure to recognize religious and ethnic minority groups other than Greeks,
Armenians, and Jews—the commissioner urged Turkey to adopt numerous measures
to uphold minority rights “with a view to fully aligning law and practice with
the Council of Europe human rights standards.” The second focused on the situation
of migrants and refugees in Turkey.