Turkey
Human rights developments in Turkey were mixed during 2005. The government
shows some commitment to reform, but is clearly inhibited by antireform
elements within the judiciary, police, and army. The main achievement
of the year was sustained progress in combating torture, with the number
of reports of ill-treatment in police stations continuing to fall. Little
progress was made, however, toward guaranteeing language freedoms and
freedom of expression. In an alarming development, there were episodes of
police using unwarranted lethal violence during street disturbances. Political
violence by the Kurdish Workers’ Party (PKK) flared during the year,
increasing tension and provoking heavy-handed responses, including human
rights violations, by state forces.
In October Turkey began negotiations for full membership of the European
Union—a process expected to take a decade or more, during which time the
E.U. will continue to monitor Turkey’s protection of human rights and
respect for minorities.
Freedom of Expression and Religion
As of November 2005 no individuals were known by Human Rights Watch
to be serving prison sentences for the non-violent expression of their opinions.
However, scores of people were charged with speech-related offenses
and threatened with imprisonment, most being indicted under provisions
criminalizing insults to the president, the flag, and state institutions. The
government failed to eliminate these provisions from the revised criminal
code, introduced in June.
In October 2005 writer Cemal Tokpınar was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment
for an article suggesting that Turkey’s 1999 earthquake was a divine
punishment inflicted upon the military. The newspaper article contained no
advocacy of violence, but Tokpınar was convicted under criminal code article
216 for “incitement to religious hatred … in a manner liable to threaten public
order.” Novelist Orhan Pamuk faced charges for “insulting Turkishness.”
His supposed crime was his statement in a magazine interview, that “thirtythousand
Kurds and one million Armenians were killed in these lands.”
Women who wear the headscarf for religious reasons continue to be excluded
from higher education, the civil service, and political life. Female lawyers
who wear the headscarf are not permitted to enter courtrooms, and in July
the Ankara Bar took disciplinary action against a lawyer who wore a headscarf
while carrying out her duty to a client in a bailiff’s office.
Respect for Minorities
Turkey’s courts and state officials repeatedly obstruct language freedoms. As
of November 2005 not a single private broadcaster had been given permission
to broadcast in Kurdish. In March state television channel TRT stated
that “regulations” did not permit it to show musician Birol Topalo˘glu singing
in the Laz language. In June the Ankara governor refused to authorize the
Kurdish Democracy Culture and Solidarity Association (Kürt-Der), claiming
that the organization’s program “to secure the social and individual rights of
Kurds” was unconstitutional. In July the Bingöl governor imposed a
U.S.$800 “administrative fine” on local Human Rights Association (HRA)
President Rıdvan Kızgın for printing the association’s letterhead in Kurdish
as well as Turkish, supposedly a breach of the Associations Law requirement
that correspondence be exclusively in Turkish.
Extrajudicial Execution
In November 2005, grenades thrown into a bookshop in ˛ Semdinli, Hakkari
province, killed one man and wounded eight. Local people captured two gendarmes
and a “confessor” (a former PKK member now working for the security
forces) in the vicinity, together with a grenade and a map showing the
bookshop. Gendarmes in an armored vehicle fired on a crowd gathered at the
scene of the crime, killing another man. The “confessor” and the armored
vehicle commander were arrested but the other two gendarmes were
released.
Freedom of Assembly
Police repeatedly used unwarranted force to break up peaceful demonstrations
in 2005. In March, Istanbul police assaulted demonstrators who had
gathered for International Women’s Day. Male and female demonstrators
were beaten and sprayed with pepper gas. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip
Erdo˘gan briefly condemned the police violence, but upbraided the press for
bringing the incident to public notice.
Still more alarming, the police frequently used lethal force when public gatherings
gave way to disturbances. In various incidents, eight demonstrators
were shot dead by police. For example, in November, police shot and killed
five demonstrators in Hakkari province who were protesting the S˛ emdinli
attack.
Torture and Ill-treatment in Police Stations and Psychiatric
Hospitals
Reports of ill-treatment continue to decline thanks to improved safeguards
for detainees, including the right to see a lawyer from the first moments of
detention. Police compliance with laws and regulations is generally good,
even in remoter areas of the southeast. In some provinces, delegations from
local human rights boards, including bar association and medical chamber
representatives, made unannounced monitoring visits to police stations and
gendarmeries. There were, however, still some reports of beating and torture
in police stations. For example, in October 2005, four minors reported they
had been tortured at police headquarters in Ordu, where no monitoring visits
had been conducted. The boys said police officers had stripped and beaten
them, squeezed their testicles, and threatened them with rape. The medical
reports showed that the boys, released without charge, suffered extensive
bruising.
In January 2005, the Turkish parliamentary human rights commission reported
that, during a visit to Saray Rehabilitation Center, a psychiatric institution
in Ankara, it had discovered children tied to their beds and imprisoned naked
in cold rooms. Mental Disability Rights International reported in September that psychiatric hospitals in Istanbul and Izmir were inflicting electroconvulsive
treatment (ECT) on patients without muscle relaxants and anesthesia.
The Council of Europe’s Committee for the Prevention of Torture had
already condemned this painful and dangerous practice in a 1997 visit to
Turkey. The report also described how children were subjected to ECT, and
had their hands and feet bound to their beds for long periods.
Internal Displacement
Most of the 378,335 Kurdish villagers forcibly displaced by security forces
during the conflict of the 1980s and 1990s are still unable to return to their
homes in the southeast. The government’s Return to Village and
Rehabilitation Project has failed to provide even the most basic infrastructure,
and villagers are unwilling to return to settlements that do not have
electricity, telephone service, or a school. Implementation of a 2004 law to
compensate the displaced has been uneven, with some villagers receiving
appropriate sums while others’ claims were unfairly dismissed.
The threat of violence from village guards—paramilitaries armed and paid by
the government to fight the PKK—remains an important obstacle to return.
Some returning villagers were attacked by village guards during the year. In
March 2005, a village guard shot and killed thirteen-year-old Selahattin
Günbay, near Nusaybin in Mardin province, because he was allegedly grazing
animals on the guard’s pasture.
Human Rights Defenders
The government took some steps to recognize the value of human rights
organizations, and invited them, together with other Turkish civil society
groups, to a consultation about reform and the E.U. process in September
2005. Nevertheless, human rights defenders were once again threatened with
physical violence and subjected to numerous criminal prosecutions as well as
efforts to discredit them as unpatriotic or treacherous. In May, speaking at
the funeral of a soldier killed by a mine, Gen. Hürflit Tolon reproved human
rights organizations for their absence. The widely reported comment
alarmed defenders, as similar statements by the military preceded the nearfatal shooting of HRA President Akin Birdal in 1998. In June 2005, Istanbul
HRA President Eren Keskin and two board members, who had narrowly survived
an attack by a lone gunman in 2001, received death threats from the
Turkish Revenge Brigade, the extreme right-wing group that had assumed
responsibility for the Birdal attack.
Key International Actors
In October 2005, the attention of Turkey and the international community
was focused on the E.U.’s decision, after extended discussion, to open membership
negotiations. The E.U. maintains a strong and effective engagement
with the Turkish government on human rights issues. Confronted with media
reports of the police attack on the International Women’s Day demonstration
in March, visiting E.U. troika representatives declared that they were
“shocked by images of the police beating women and young people demonstrating
in Istanbul.” In September E.U. Enlargement Commissioner Olli
Rehn expressed “serious concern” about the prosecution of Orhan Pamuk
and visited the writer in his home.
In February 2005, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
(ECRI) in a report on Turkey mentioned non-Muslim minorities’ difficulties,
including administrative barriers to building places of worship and training
clergy. Noting persistent suspicion of minorities of any kind, ECRI urged the
government to establish an agency to combat racism and intolerance.
In January 2005, the U.N. special representative on human rights defenders
published a report on her 2004 visit to Turkey. She expressed concern about
the harassment of human rights defenders, and called on state officials and
the media to refrain from stigmatizing human rights defenders as “enemies.”
She also urged that human rights defenders be given full access to places of
detention. In May, during an informal visit to Turkey, the U.N. special representative
on internal displacement highlighted emerging problems in the
implementation of the law on compensation.
The European Court of Human Rights issued scores of judgments against
Turkey concerning torture, unfair trial, arbitrary detention, and extrajudicial execution. In July 2005, the court found the Turkish government responsible
for violations of the right to life concerning twenty-two people shot dead by
police during disturbances in Istanbul in 1995 ( ˛ Sim˛sek and others v. Turkey).