TURKEY
This Report reflects the U. S. •government's determination to maintain friendly relations with Turkey, a key NATO ally. While the Report cites many of the major human rights abuses that exist in Turkey, it often presents them in a way that tends to minimize their significance. Additionally, the Report occasionally indulges in value judgments that are not supported by the facts that follow, producing a rather disjointed account.
The Report attempts to bolster the Reagan Administration's defense of its support for Turkey's military government on the ground that Turkey is "in transition to democracy." The Administration has often noted that the military government that took power in the September 1980 coup has been following a precise timetable in restoring democratic freedoms by allowing a Constitutional referendum in November 1982 and parliamentary elections in November 1983. This approach is furthered in the Report, which mentions the 1982 referendum at the very beginning, noting that the Constitution was approved by 91 percent of the voters.
It does not mention that pressure was used to bring people to the polls and that public discussion of the Constitution before the referendum was restricted. It does not mention that the Constitution has been criticized as an authoritarian document which limits rights and freedoms. It
-68-
does mention, without comment, that General Evren, who was endorsed in the referendum as President of the Republic for a seven-year term, was the only candidate. Only much later in the Report is there mention of the fact that the Constitution prohibits political activity by former political leaders for a period of ten years.
With regard to the 1983 parliamentary elections, the Report, in noting that the majority of voters gave their support to Turgut Ozal's Motherland Party, points out that Mr. Ozal's party was the only participating party not endorsed by the military government. It also points out that the range of alternatives in the election was "severely limited." It does not attempt to analyze the reasons behind Mr. Ozal's victory, which has been seen by many as the result of a widescale protest vote against the regime that has been praised by the United States for shepherding Turkey back to democracy. Nevertheless, the fact that the military government has apparently gone along with election results that are not to its liking is a positive step and the Report is correct in stressing this.
The ability of the new government to function independently is, of course, strictly limited as long as martial law remains in effect. The authors of the Report are aware of this and point out that martial law will remain in effect "for at least the next few months" and with it the right of the military "to censor the media, to limit
-69-
political expression, including the right to assemble, and to restrict trade union activities," as well as "to search and arrest without warrants and to try suspects in martial law courts."
As in previous State Department Country Reports, the Report goes into some detail in describing the terrorist activity that existed in Turkey prior to the 1980 coup and which is used to justify the military takeover. The figures given are precise: 33,000 acts of political violence between December 1978 and September 1980 are contrasted to less than 7,500 violent acts in the three years since the military coup. It is noted that the numbers continue to decrease.
When it comes to the number of political prisoners in Turkish jails and the frequency of the use of torture, however, the figures in the Report are less precise: "Since 1980 there has apparently been a decline in the number of complaints of torture and an increase in the number of convictions [of torturers], although the available data are not sufficiently detailed to determine their precise signif icance."
As in the 1982 Country Reports, the Report, pointing out that torture was used in Turkey prior to 1980, commends the military government for admitting to torture and for taking steps to punish torturers. The Report cites just about every case and statistic relating to the punishment of torturers that have been made known by the Turkish government. It is
-70-
much less detailed with regard to specific cases of torture that have been reported, devoting just one general paragraph to this. It does not, for example, describe any of the specific cases of torture, including cases of death resulting from torture, that have been documented by Amnesty International, nor does it mention complaints of torture that were made in court by defendants in the DISK labor union trial. It does not mention the torture of Orhan Taylan, a defendant in the Turkish Peace Association trial, which was reported by Helsinki Watch in a November 1983 report. It does not mention an official transcript from a trial in Diyarbakir, published in the same Helsinki Watch report, which contains testimony by prisoners who claim that they were raped anally with truncheons to prevent them from testifying in their own defense. Since the number of alleged cases of torture in Turkey is overwhelming compared to the number of cases in which torturers are reported to have been punished, it seems appropriate that some of the former cases be reported in as much detail as the latter.
The authors of the Report seem uncertain about the fact that hunger strikes took place in at least five military prisons in Turkey in July 1983. News of the strikes is attributed to reports in foreign newspapers "based on a story in one Turkish newspaper." This echoes the attitude of U.S. Embassy officials in Ankara when they met in September 1983 with members of a U.S. Helsinki Watch fact-finding mission
-71-
and claimed that it was difficult to confirm "rumors" of such strikes. Yet the members of the Helsinki Watch fact-finding mission were given copies of numerous petitions while they were in Turkey written by the hunger strikers or by members of their families. Some of these petitions, describing torture of various kinds, arrests of family members, and humiliating strip searches, were subsequently published in the November 1983 Helsinki Watch report.
The State Department Report, using official Turkish government statistics, claims that there are 21,121 political prisoners in Turkey who have been sentenced, charged or are under investigation. It does not mention that there are unofficial estimates ranging from 40,000 to 100,000 political prisoners. The Report states that "the new Constitution includes the right to be arraigned, tried or released within a reasonable time." It does not mention that thousands of young people have been held in prison for several years while their mass trials drag on without conclusion. Some of them will ultimately be acquitted, but they will have already "done time."
Strikingly absent from the Report is any mention of the severe repression of the Kurdish-speaking people of Turkey, about one-eighth of the population and among the most tragic of Turkish human rights victims. In our Critique of the 1982 Country Reports, we called attention to this problem, yet the 1983 Country Reports say even less on this subject than
-72-
before. U.S. State Department officials, perhaps in deference to Turkish officials' sensibilities, have skirted the issue entirely. The Kurds are barely mentioned and then only in passing. No acknowledgment is made of cultural repression, of the fact that thousands of Kurds have been imprisoned, or that the Turkish government refuses to acknowledge the Kurds as a separate ethnic group, strictly forbidding the use of the Kurdish language and customs.
Also absent, although present in last year's Report, is any mention of actions that have been brought against Turkey in the Council of Europe and the European Parliament, although such actions have taken on momentum in 1983.
In addition, the Report omits any mention of the fact that sentences of less than six months are not subject to appeal. When the authorities wished to overturn the sentence of newspaper publisher Nadir Nadi, for example, it could only be done by appeal from the Minister of Defense. In mentioning the establishment of a dress code for universities, the Report fails to explain the severity of the code, which applies not just to clothing but includes such things as the prohibition of beards for professors and students.
The Report gives excellent, detailed information about restrictions of free speech and the press that exist in Turkey and points out that as recently as November 1983 the National Security Council passed a new restrictive press law that permits, among other things, the banning of publications
-73-
before distribution. The Report also gives a good description of the centralization of the universities and the dismissal of hundreds of professors.
The election of a civilian government in Turkey in 1983, the fact that several major parties that were precluded from the November elections will be permitted to participate in the municipal elections in March, and the possibility of an end to martial law in 1984 do provide some grounds for cautious optimism with regard to Turkey. Such improvements do not, however, justify downplaying the very severe violations of human rights that continue to plague the Turkish people at the start of 1984.
-74-
