Turicey
State Department's report on Turkey is one of the longest and most detailed of the 1995 Country Reports. Only the report on China occupies as many pages. The report succeeds in identifying the major human rights problems in Turkey. However, the language describing the human rights violations is relatively mild, given the context. The report is thorough in describing what changes took place in Turkey in 1995 in the area of human rights and what remained the same. However, it downplays the seriousness of the issues it discusses. Some areas of gross human rights violations are mentioned without any indication of how widespread they are; other areas are discussed without any commentary. In an effort to address all the topics covered in previous Country Reports, some serious human rights violations are mentioned only superficially. The facts reported, which are thorough and accurate, add up to a picture much more serious than the conclusions of the report imply. These discrepancies appear to reflect the variety of authorial hands and institutional interests that have gone into drafting and editing the report on Turkey, a key U.S. ally and aid recipient.
As a consequence of this discrepancy between its facts and its conclusions, the report contradicts itself in many places. For example, in one of its introductory sentences, the report states: "Civilian authorities remain publicly committed to the establishment of a state of law and respect for human rights but torture, excessive use of force, and other serious human rights abuses by the security forces persisted through 1995." The statement gives the impression that the security forces are the only violators of human rights; no law, no government and no court has any involvement in the numerous violations listed in the pages that follow. But one does not have to read very far into the report to find out that this is not the case. However, the report repeats this contradictory formulation in later sections — for example, in its discussion of torture.
The report's introduction discusses the armed conflict between the government and the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKIC) which has been going on for over a decade. As in previous years, the report refers to the PIGC as a "terrorist" organization and refers to its goal of creating a separate state of Kurdistan in southeastern Turkey — even though this is
229
Critique 1995
no longer the PICIC's stated aim. The State Department never acknowledges that this "armed conflict" is a significant source of the human rights violations that are discussed at great length in the rest of the report. The disproportionate effect of the government's human rights violations on the Turkish Kurds is not acknowledged by the State Department.
The strongest sections of the 1995 report are those that deal with torture and infringements on freedom of speech. The Turkish Constitution specifically bans torture, as do the European and U.N. Conventions to which Turkey is a party. Given the high number of cases, the report takes allegations of torture seriously and discusses certain cases of torture in great detail. Despite this, the report repeats the Turkish government's claim that torture is not "systematic," without comment or qualification. This is strange coming from a government which also states that torture is "closely tied to the State's fight against terrorism." The report does not question how, if this is the case, torture can be anything but systematic on the state's part. The rest of the section provides ample evidence that even if torture itself is not systematic, the state's intentional blind eye to torture certainly is. It is impossible to be convinced of the Turkish government's determination to fight torture if, of the 547 complaints of torture and mistreatment filed in the first seven months of 1995, only 337 reached the administrative investigation stage and only 15 resulted in convictions.
The report lists positive improvements throughout the year in Turkish law without commenting on their lack of implementation. This problem is apparent in the section on freedom of expression, an area the report focuses on in some detail. However, here again the report introduces the topic positively, continues to discuss some clear-cut violations of human rights, but does not directly qualify the positive opening to this section. The year's most positive development in this regard was the reform of Article 8 of the Turkish Anti-Terror Law. Instead of making "separatist propaganda" a crime "irrespective of the methods, aims and ideas," the law now requires the courts to prove intent. While, as the report mentions, certain imprisoned writers were freed as a result of the change in Article 8, at the end of 1995 about 100
230
Turkey
people remained in prison as a result of their writings or spoken words, with thousands more still on trial. The report fails to mention that some of those released after the amendment to Article 8 were in fact prosecuted again for the same offenses, using the amended version of the law. For example. Lawyer Erin Keskin, former Secretary General of the Istanbul Branch of the Human Rights Association, was released in November 1995 only to be indicted for the same offenses relating to articles she published on the Kurdish issue in 1993. The revised version of Article 8 still permits the prosecution of people for their non-violent opinions. At the time the reform was introduced. Amnesty International made the following statement in a press release:
It is difficult to believe in the sincerity of a democracy package which permits Turkish citizens to be imprisoned for the expression of their non-violent opinions, exposed to secret detention and brutality in police stations, or abducted by plainclothes policemen, never to be seen again. It is difficult not to believe that the package was designed principally in order to deflect international and domestic criticism of a worsening human rights record.
(It should be noted that Amnesty issued this statement before the reforms were enacted, and that some 90 prisoners were in fact released when the reforms became law in October 1995 — even though many of them were subsequentiy rearrested.)
Moreover, prosecutors now use lesser known provisions of the Anti-Terror Law to restrict freedom of expression. For example, in 1995, more cases were brought under Articles 6 and 7 of the Anti-Terror Law, which ban publishing of propaganda by "terrorist" organizations. The Turkish Penal Code's Article 312, which makes it a crime to "provoke enmity," has also been the source of a higher number of court cases recently. The report fails to mention that Turkey has the dubious honor of imprisoning more journalists than any other country for the second consecutive year.
In December 1995, a Turkish State Security Court confiscated all copies of the December issue of the magazine Savasa Karsi Bans (Peace
231
Critique 1995
Against War). The issue contained an excerpt of a November 1995 report by the Arms Project of Human Rights Watch, entitled Weapons Transfers and Violations of the Lam of War in Turkey. This was an internationally visible example of the many confiscations of newspapers, magazines and other publications throughout 1995 for violating one of many Turkish code provisions restricting freedom of speech. While the confiscations of pro-Kurdish publications have decreased markedly since the repeal of Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law, confiscation of publications still goes on regularly as a consequence of the laws restricting freedom of expression described in the report.
In almost all areas, the report makes comparisons between the situation in Turkey in 1995 and the situation in the preceding year. While this is helpful to the reader, in some areas it detracts from the significance of the problem. Since each area is analyzed in terms of whether the total number of incidents has increased or decreased since 1994, those areas in which incidents have decreased tend to lose their importance in the overall scheme of the report. With no commentary to follow these observations, the report loses sight of how certain human rights violations in Turkey remain serious, even if the overall numbers are lower. For example, in the introduction to the section on Political and Other Extrajudicial ICillings, the report states that: "The number of deaths in detention and mystery killings was down significantly in 1995"; however, it goes on to state that six deaths in detention were reported in the first nine months of 1995, as well as 98 political killings of civilians by "unknown perpetrators."
In the same way, the section on disappearances opens with the statement: "The [Human Rights Foundation of Turkey] reports three disappearances, which ended in death." The third paragraph of the section finally discusses the hundreds of other disappearances in 1995. While it is correct that the number of disappearances in 1995 is down compared to 1994, the report does not say that the number of disappearances in 1994 was the highest recorded by Amnesty International for any country in the world that year. While the numbers decreased in the beginning of 1995, October and November saw a significant increase. On October 30, six people, including three children,
232
Turkey
reportedly "disappeared" after being detained near Dargecit, in the Mardin province. Two people "disappeared" in Istanbul in circumstances that suggested they were abducted by police.
The report states that "two million persons have been displaced." It also mentions that there have been no adequate government programs to take care of these people. However, the report falls short of elaborating on the problems that arise when two million people are displaced by the security forces of their government. The Human Rights Watch World Report for 1995 points out that 2,200 villages have been either partially or totally depopulated, most of them burned down by Turkish security forces.
The report admits that United States weapons have "been used in operations against the PKIC during which human rights abuses have occurred," and adds: "It is highly likely that such equipment was used in support of the evacuation and/or destruction of villages." However, it does not discuss (at any greater length than what is implied by the above statement) what a February 1996 article in the San Francisco Chronicle called "the mountain of evidence that most of the aircraft, helicopters, tanks, artillery pieces, mortars, machine guns and assault rifles used to bomb and bum those Kurdish villages and kill and scatter the people came out of American factories and were paid by U.S. government loans and grants." Human Rights Watch has stated that "the Clinton administration, which is fully aware of Turkey's misuse of U.S. weaponry, has consistently refused to link arms transfers to improvements in Turkey's human rights record, and has downplayed Turkish violations for strategic reasons." According to Human Rights Watch, the U.S. government has adopted a significantly less critical attitude toward Turkey than have other governments.
The State Department report also fails to discuss the broader relationship between the United States and Turkey. It ignores the fact that Turkey, having received $5.3 billion in military aid from the United States over the past decade, is now the third largest recipient of U.S. aid (after Israel and E^q^t). Had the State Department acknowledged these political considerations in its report, the reasons for the discrepancy
233
Critique 1995
between the facts contained in the report and its less than forthright conclusions might have been more readily apparent to the reader.
234
f:
