 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty Parliament (the Grand Na-
 tional Assembly) which elects the President. Suleyman Demirel was elected Presi-
 dent in 1993, and Tansu Ciller, chairperson of the center-right True Path Party
 (DYP), became Turkey's first female Prime Minister in the same year.
 For the past decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist
 Kurdistan Workers Party (PK), whose stated goal is the creation of a separate
 state of Kurdistan in southeastern Turkey. A state of emergency, declared in 1987,
 continued in 10 southeastern provinces where the Government faces substantial ter-
 rorist violence from the PKK (see Section 1.g.). A regional governor retains author-
 ity over those 10 provinces, as well as 3 adjacent ones. A state of emergency allows
 the civilian governor to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including restric-
 tions on the press and removal from the area of persons whose activities are deemed
 hostile to public order. The state of emergency decree was most recently renewed
 in November 1994.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) are charged with mnainin   ulcodri
 the cities a resposibility which the Jandarma (gendarmerie) carries out in the
 countrysiae. In 1994 the regular Turkish armed forces, mainly the army, took on
 a primary role in combating the PKK in the state of emergency region and thus as-
 sumed a greater internal security function than in previous years. Despite the Ciller
 Government's pledge in 1993 to end torture and to establish a state of law based
 on respect for human rights, torture and excessive use of force by security personnel
 persisted throughout 1994.
 Turkey has a mixed economy in which state enterprises account for nearly 40 per-
 cent of the manufacturing sector. A series of economic crises culminated in the an-
 nouncement on April 5 of-a major economic reform program, including the privatiza-
 tion of state-owned enterprises. Although the balance of payments improved and in-
 flation slowed, prices still increased over 100 percent in 1994. The size of the state
 bureaucracy, the budget deficit the inadequate tax system, and the inefficient state
 sector block economic growth. 'he conflict in the southeast continued to be a major
 drain on the economy.
 The human rights situation in Turkey worsened significantly in 1994. The police
 and security forces often employed torture during periods of incommunicado deten-
 tion and interrogation, and the security forces continued to use excessive force
 against noncombatants. PKK terrorists murdered noncombatants, targeting village
 officials and teachers and also committing random murders in their effort to intimi-
 date the populace.
 Parliament lifted the immunity of pro-Kurdish Democracy Party (DEP) members
 of Parliament (M.P's), opening the way for indictment and prosecution of five DEP
 M.P.'s and one independent, largely for the expression of views during their tenure
 as M.P.'s. The Constitutional Court subsequently closed the DEP, allowing two
 other M.P.'s to be prosecuted. The trial concluded on December 8 with convictions
 for disseminating separatist propaganda and for supporting or being a member of
 an armed band, which resulted in sentences ranging from 3 years and 6 months
 (suspended) to 15 years.
 Various agencies of the Government continued to harass, intimidate, indict, and
 imprison human rights monitors, journalists, lawyers, and professors for ideas
 which they expressed in public forums. Disappearances and mystery murder cases
 continued at a high rate in the southeast. The PIK and the radical Islamic
 I4zbullah (not related to the Lebanese Hizbullah) appear responsible in some cases.
 In other cases, however, the evidence implicated government security forces. In
 many human rights cases, the targts of abuse were ethnic Kurd or their support-
 ers. Moreover, the Government "m   uently prosecutes polie or security officers for
 extrajudicial killings, torture, and other abuses; in the cases which produce a convic-
 tion, lenient sentences were usually given. The resulting climate of impunity that
 has been created probably remains the single largest obstacle to reducing unlawful
 killing, torture, and other human rights abuses.
 The Government used the 1991 Anti-Terror Law, with its broad and ambiguous
 definition of terrorism, to detain both alleged terrorists and a broad range of peopRle
 on the charge that their acts, words, or ideas promote separatism and "threaten the
 indivisible  Ity of the State." In September the Government formed a Committee
 on Freedom of Thought to examine changes to the Anti-Terror Law and other laws
 that severely restrict freedom of expression. By mid-October the Committee had
 made recommendations to Parliament which, if enacted and properly implemented,
 could significantly expand freedom of expression. However, at year's end, Par-
 liament had not enacted these changes.
 
 
 994
 
 While the Criminal Trials Procedure Law (CMUK), passed in November 1992, has
 improved attorney access for those charged with common crimes, certain of its provi-
 sions, such as early attorney access, do not apply to those detained under the Anti-
 Terror Law or within the state of emergency region. In 1993 Parliament annulled
 the article of the Constitution under which the Government had a monopoly on
 radio and television broadcasting, and in April 1994 passed regulatory legislation
 for the legal operation of private broadcasting.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political murders and extrajudicial
 killings attributed to Government authorities and terrorist groups continued at the
 relatively high 1993 rates. Government authorities were responsible for the deaths
 of detainees in official custody, suspects in houses raided by security forces; and
 other types of civilian deaths in the southeast. The Human Rights Foundation of
 Turkey (HRF), a Turkish nongovernmental organization which documents the
 human rights situation, claimed that government security forces were responsible
 for 33 extrajudicial killings in the first 10 months of 1994. A substantial number
 of 'mysterykillings,a" in which the assailant's identity was unknown, also occurred.
 Human rights organizations also maintain that security forces were complicit in
 a number of these 'mystery killings." The Government maintains that the
 Hizbullah, an Islamic terrorist group, carried out 107 "mystery killings" in the first
 9 months of 1994. The number of"mystery killings" remained high during the first
 10 months of 1994 and, according to the HRF, 316 civilians were assassinated by
 unknown attackers, mostly in the east and southeast of the country. Many were
 leaders or prominent members of the Kurdish community, physicians, human rights
 monitors, local politicians, and members of the Democracy Party (DEP). In the past
 2 years, at least 26 members of the DEP and its successor, the People's Democracy
 Party (HADEP), have been murdered.
 A parliamentary committee, which commenced its investigation in 1993, contin-
 ued to investigate mystery murders which have occurred since 1970, but had issued
 no report by year's end.
 The HF reported that 18 persons died under suspicious circumstances while in
 official custody in the first 9 months of 1994, some as a result of torture. Of these,
 officials claimed that at least five committed suicide, a claim they have made fre-
 quently in past cases of deaths in custody. In one such case, Can Demirag, detained
 by Istanbul police in connection with a murder, was found dead on August 23 in
 his cell in the Kadikoy security directorate where he was being interrogated. Police
 claimed Demirag had committed suicide by hanging himself with a sheet on the iron
 grating of the ventilation window in the cell; the Istanbul prosecutor's office opened
 an investigation into his death, but by year's end had not released any information.
 By law, authorities are obliged to investigate all deaths in custody, but prosecu-
 tions of security force members for such deaths are rare. In one case, however, in
 September, the Istanbul Beyoglu district prosecutor's office brought murder charges
 against police officer Abdullah Bozkurt on the grounds that in March he shot to
 death university student Vedat Han Gulsenoglu in the Istanbul Kasimpasa district
 police station. The prosecution requested a 30-year sentence for murder.
 In the southeast there were a number of murders of persons who, according to
 the authorities, had been released or were not in custody, but whose families were
 certain they were being held. For example, the Diyarbakir State Security Court
 (SSC) took Necati Aydin into custody in March. On April 4, the judge signed a re-
 lease for Aydin, but he never emerged to meet his waiting family. On April 9, the
 bodies of Aydin and a friend, Mehmet Ay, were found buried to their necks near
 a river along the Diyarbakir/Silvan road. The Government states that the
 Diyarbakir Third State Security Court released Aydin and Ay on their own recog-
 nizance, and that they later turned up dead.
 In April, five village guards (a government-employed paramilitary force in the
 southeast) abducted Diyarbakir tradesman Serif Avsar in broad daylight. Avsar's
 family followed them to a Jandarma station, yet authorities denied they were hold-
 ing Avsar. He was found dead on May 7. The village guards and an informant are
 on trial for Avsar's murder. The Government maintains the murder resulted from
 an interclan dispute.
 Regarding other ongoing cases, in the death in detention of Vakkas Dost, the po-
 liceman Nurettin Ozturk is still at large, and the trial is continuing. The trial in
 the case of Yucel Ozen in continuing. The trial of the 11 police officers in the
 Basalak case is ongoing.
 
 
 995
 Human rights groups and parliamentarians continued to accuse Turkish security
 forces of carrying out extrajudicial killings and using excessive force during raids
 on alleged terrorist safe houses rather than trying to arrest the occupants. During
 the first 10 months of 1994, 27 people died in such raids, according to human rights
 groups. In Istanbul, two trials were started against police who had participated in
 two Dev Sol (Devrimci So!, a Marxist terrorist group) safe house raids in November
 1993 in which three persons died. In another case stemming from a May 1991 safe
 house raid in Istanbul in which 2 died, 12 security officers were acquitted.
 In an April 1993 shoot-out in Tuneli, 12 Dev Sol militants were killed. No inves-
 tigation was initiated; according to security forces, an investigation was unnecessary
 since it was an armed clash.
 Prominent credible human rights organizations, Kurdish leaders, and local Kurds
 asserted that the Government acquiesces in, or even carries out, the muzders of ci-
 vilians. Government officials appeared to be investigating more of the reported mur-
 ders than in past years. Some victims had previously been detained, abused, or
 threatened by security forces. Human rights groups reported the widespread and
 credible belief that a counterguerrilla group associated with the security forces had
 carried out at least some "mystery killings." The Government maintains that two
 factions of the Hizbullah committed most "mystery killings." In June the Diyarbakir
 SSC prosecutors office launched the first trial against 35 members of Hizbullah's
 Menzil faction, claiming that the defendants were responsible for 39 armed attacks,
 resulting in 25 deaths and 32 injuries. A second trial against members of
 Hizbullah's Ilim faction began at the Diyarbakir SSC in July.
 On September 4, 1993, unknown persons fatally shot Mehmet Sincar, a DEP
 member of Parliament (MP) fiom Mardin, in the city center of Batman. Twelve per-
 sons were arrested in connection with the murder, and the case is currently being
 tried. Sincar's widow has accused government forces of committing the murder and
 has brought the case before the European Human Rights Commission.
 Four members of the HADEP, successor party to the banned DEP (see Section
 2.b.), were assassinated in the southeast during September. No evidence as to the
 identity of the perpetrators has been brought to light, and no arrests were made
 in these cases. Faik Candan, former Ankara provincial Chairman of DEP prede-
 cessor HEP, was found dead on December 14, shot four times in the head, neck,
 and chest, according to press reports.
 In contrast to 1993, there were no assassinations of journalists in 1994, but at
 least one journalist disappeared (see Section 1.b.). A istributor of the pro-PKK
 newspaper Ozgur Ulke was killed in the explosion that ripped through the paper's
 Istanbul building on the night of December 3. Moreover, as of October, none of the
 five murders of journalists committed in 1993, nor those previously, had been
 solved.
 Although terrorists carried out political murders primarily in rural southeast
 Anatolia, they also launched several deadly attacks during 1994 in urban areas. On
 January 14, bombs killed three on intercity buses in central Turkey, and on Feb-
 ruary 12 an explosion at Istanbul's Tuzla train station killed 5 cadets and wounded
 26. The RKK claimed responsibility for the Tuzla incident, but did not publicly claim
 responsibility for the bus explosion, although most people believe it was responsible.
 Killings perpetrated by the P   included those of state officials (Jandarma, local
 mayors, imams, and schoolteachers), state-paid paramilitary village guards and
 their family members, young villagers who refuse to be recruited, and PKK guerril-
 las-turned-informants. On January 1, the PKK intercepted two buses on the
 Diyabakir-Elazig highway, took eight people into a field and shot them. On July 30,
 the PKK killed seven vilage   ards in an attack on Konaga village in Van prov-
 ince. The PKK publicly claimedto have killed "179 village guards, including a lead-
 ing village guard and 32 of his relatives" and 66 collaborators, agents,
 counterguerrua organization members, (and) police officials," during the month of
 June. Teachers continued to be a main target of terrorist activities. During the year
 the PKK killed 20 teachers.
 b. Disappearance.-Disappearances continued in 1994, while most of those re-
 ported in 1993 and earlier remained unsolved. Some disappeared after witnesses re-
 ported that security forces had taken them into custody.  March, Nazim Babaoglu,
 Urfa correspondent for the pro-Kurdish daily, Ozgur Gundem, disappeared. The
 Government maintains that Abdulvahap Timurtas, who disappeared in August 1993
 in Yenikoy village, Sirnak province was not taken into custody, and that a village
 b that name does not exist. His father accuses the security forces of abducting him.
 is brother Tevfik Timurtas died under torture on January 5, 1991, in Cizre, ac-
 cording to the HRF. The Government says it received 28 clams of missing relatives
 in the first 9 months of 1994.
 
 
 996
 The Government, human rights organizations, and the media report that the PKK
 routinely kidnaps young men or threatens their families as part of its recruiting.
 PIKK terrorists continued their abductions of local villagers, teachers, ournalists,
 and officials in the southeast. For example, on January -6 the PKK kidnaped two
 journalists and held them for 4 months. The PKK again kidna d two foreign tour-
 ists during the summer and eventually released them unharmed.
 c. Torture and Other Cruet, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, Turkey's accession to the U.N. and Euro-
 pean Conventions Against Torture, and public pledges of successive governments to
 end torture, the practice continued. Human rights attorneys and physicians who
 treat victims of torture state that most persons charged with, or suspected of, politi-
 cal crimes usually suffer some torture during periods of incommunicado detention
 in police stations and Jandarma headquarters before they are brought before a
 court. The HRF and private attorneys reported that there was no indication of ei-
 ther the amelioration of treatment of those charged under the Anti-Terror Law or
 an overall decrease in the incidence of torture in 1994. In 1994 women again
 charged sexual abuses while under official detention by security officials.
 Although the implementation of the CMUK on December 1, 1992, facilitated more
 immediate attorney access to those arrested for common crimes, its provisions of im-
 mediate attorney access do not apply to those detained in the state of emergency
 region nor to those detained under the Anti-Terror Law. Some attorneys in the
 southeast reported that some common criminals are booked on political charges,
 thereby depriving them of access to or by an attorney. The CMUK's allowable, maxi-
 mum prearraigment detention periods still exceedCouncil of Europe maximums.
 Human rights observers report that the system whereby the arresting police offi-
 cer is also responsible for interrogating the suspect is conducive to torture because
 the officer seeks to obtain a confession that would justify the arrest. According to
 those familiar with Turkish police operations, in petty criminal cases, the arresting
 officer is responsible for following up on the case, whereas in major cases such as
 murder and political or terrorism-related crimes, "desks" responsible for the area in
 question are respnsible for the interrogation.
 Commonly employed methods of torture reprted by the Human Rights Founda-
 tion's Torture Treatment Centers include: high-pressure cold water hoses, electric
 shocks         on the soles of the feet, beating of the genitalia, hanging by the
 arms, blindfoldig, sleep deprivation, deprivation of clothing, systematic beatings,
 and vaginal and anal rape with truncheons an, in some instances, gun barrels. n
 southern Turkey, a security official boasted of having deprived a suspect of sleep
 for 6 days to obtain a confession.
 In a case in Istanbul in July, Yelda Ozcan, a former representative of the iRF,
 stated to several human rights organizations that a chief commissioner at the
 Beyoglu security directorate had stripped and beaten her. She obtained a medical
 report and lodged an official complaint against the commissioner. In another case,
 in April a 17-year-old female stdent stated she had been beaten, hosed with pres-
 surized water, and raped with a truncheon by police at Istanbur's Bahcelievler sta-
 tion, then released without charges having been filed.
 Although the Government asserted that medical examinations occur once during
 detention and a second time before either arraignment or release, former detainees
 asserted that some medical examinations took place too long after the event to re-
 veal any definitive findings. According to the HRF, practice varies widely. In some
 cases proper examinations are conducted; in others, doctors sign papers handed to
 them; some examinations are cursoiy, some are done in the presence of police offi-
 cials, and some doctors are at times under pressure to submit false or misleading
 medical certificates, denying evidence of torture.
 Credible sources in the human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate only about one-half of the formal complaints involving tor-
 ture and prosecute only a small fraction of those. Under the nti-Terror Law, offi-
 cials accused of torture or other mistreatment may continue to work while under
 investigation and, if convicted, may only he suspended.
 Special provincial administrative boards, rather than regular courts, decide
 whether to prosecute in such cases, and suspects' legal fees are paid by their em-
 ploying agenies. Under the state of emergency, any lawsuit directed at government
 authorities must be approved by the regional governor. Because approval is rare,
 this blocks legal pursuit of torture allegations. Under the Administrative Adjudica-
 tion Law, an administrative investigation into alleged torture cases is conducted
 under the civil service adjudication law to determine if there is enough evidence to
 bring a law enforcement officer to trial. Under the CMUK, while prosecutors are
 empowered to initiate investigations of police officers or Jandarma suspected of tor-
 tuSg or maltreating suspects, in cases where township security directors or
 
 
 997
 Jandarma commanders are accused of torture, the prosecutor must obtain permis-
 sion to initiate an investigation from the Ministry of Justice because these officials
 are deemed to have a status equal to that of judges.
 According to the Government, in the first 9 months of 1994, prosecutors consid-
 ered 963 complaints of torture or maltreatment. Of those, 314 cases were opened,
 355 were in preparation, 187 were dropped, in 25 cases the court decided it did not
 have the authority to pursue the case, and in 47 cases the court referred the case
 to another court. There were 11 convictions, 22 acquittals; in one case the complaint
 was withdrawn. Most of these cases were in Istanbul and Ankara; few were m the
 southeast.
 In the few instances in which law enforcement officers are convicted of torture,
 sentences tend to be light. In July Ekrem Guner, a noncommissioned officer, was
 convicted of torturing two persons in Ordu in 1989 sentenced to 2 years in prison,
 suspended from duty for 5 months and 15 days, and fined TL 375,000 (roughly $12).
 In July the Ankara administrative court ordered the Interior Ministry to pay
 Mediha Curabaz TL 10 million (roughly $300) in compensation for torture she sus-
 tained in August 1991 by the Adana police. The Adana provincial administrative
 commission had refused to try the police officers involved on charges of rape and
 torture, despite a medical report which confirmed the charge of rape. The trial of
 six security officers accused of torturing Baki Erdgan (who died in custody) in Soke
 district of Aydin province in August 1993 began in May and was continuing at
 year's end. In April the torture conviction of two officers and two noncommissioned
 officers in the 1985 torture and death of schoolteacher Siddik Bilgin was overturned
 on appeal, and the officers were acquitted on retrial. The case ofNazli Top, a nurse
 (pregnant at the time) who alleged she was tortured and raped with a truncheon
 in April 1992 before police released her without charge, came to trial in December
 1993. The trial continues.
 As Turkey recognizes the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights and
 the European Commission of Human Rights, Turkish citizens may file applications
 alleging violations of the European Convention on Human Rights with the Commis-
 sion. Some 250 cases are currently before the Commission. In February the Govern-
 ment promised the Commission to pay compensation to the villagers of Yesilyurt in
 Cizre province whom Jandarma troops forced to eat human excrement in January
 1989. A total of 300,000 French francs in compensation is to be paid.
 In January authorities sent a Prime Ministerial circular to the Ministries of Jus-
 tice, Interior, and Foreign Affairs, directing that police prepare monthly reports on
 the incidence of ill-treatment and torture and ensure that medical examinations are
 carried out carefully to provide accurate forensic evidence. While statistics generally
 have been submitted as required, there is no evidence that the reporting require-
 ment has had any effect on the incidence of torture.
 As of September, 4,149 applications claiming torture, maltreatment, or arbitrary
 detention had been filed with the parliamentary Human Rights Commission, since
 its September 1991 inception. In each case, the Commission had written to the of-
 fices of the public prosecutor, the governor's office, and the security directorate gen-
 eral, and there is no indication that these communications have had any effect or
 that the Commission has followed up on these cases. The HRF's torture rehabilita-
 tion centers in Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul reported that, within the first 6 months
 of 1994, they had received a total of 196 applications for treatment.
 Police continue to force women in custody and others to undergo virginity testing
 even though the state minister in charge of women's affairs condemned the practice
 in 1992. The tests are imposed particularly on women who file a criminal complaint
 alleging a sexual crime. Although legally only a court or a prosecutor may order
 them, police continue to impose the tests to on female detainees. Though women
 may refuse the exams, they are rarely informed of that right.
 Prison conditions remained another problem area in 1994. As recently as early
 November, the Justice Ministry announced plans to build new prisons and upgrade
 old ones to deal with the increase in the number of inmates convicted of terrorist
 crimes. The refurbished Eskisehir Prison and four others were to reopen by the end
 of the year. As in 1993, groups of inmates carried out hunger strikes to protest poor
 conditions and their treatment by prison guards, and one inmate was killed and sev-
 eral injured in an October riot at Diyarbakir Security Prison. The Government
 promised prison reform in 1993, but at the end of 1994 Parliament had not enacted
 it. Torture in prisons has decreased in the last few years, but continues to occur.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.In order to take a person into custody,
 a prosecutor must issue a detention order, except in limited circumstances such as
 when a person is caught in the act of committing a crime. The detention period for
 those charged with common, individual crimes is 24 hours. Those detained for com-
 mon, collective crimes may be held for 4 days, and the detention period may be ex-
 
 
 998
 tended for an additional 4 days. Under the CMUK, suspects are entitled to imme-
 diate access to an attorney and may meet and confer with the attorney at any time.
 In practice, this access continued to improve for detainees charged with common
 crimes.
 Persons detained for individual crimes which fall under the Anti-Terror Law must
 be brought before a judge within 48 hours, while those charged with crimes of a
 collective, political, or conspiratorial nature may be detained for up to 15 days in
 most of the country and up to 30 days in the 10 southeastern provinces under a
 state of emergency. There is no guaranteed attorney access under law for persons
 whose cases fall under the jurisdiction of the state security courts; these include
 those charged with smuggling and with crimes under the Anti-Terror Law. Attor-
 neys and human rights organizations airm that this lack of access is a major factor
 in the continuing, widespread use of torture by police and security forces.
 The decision concerning access to counsel in such cases is left to the independent
 prosecutor, who generally denies access, usually with the explaation that t would
 p udice an ongoin  in  ation. We Justice and Interior Ministries generally
 ae not intervened in prosecutors' decisions or police actiona denying access to
 counsel. Although the Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request speedy
 arraignment and trial, judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained
 indefinitely, sometimes for years. While many cases involved persons accused of vio-
 lent crimes, it is not uncommon for those accused of nonviolent political crimes to
 be kept in custody until the conclusion of their trials.
 By law, a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after ar-
 rest. Once formally charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is arraigned by a judge
 and allowed to retain a lawyer. After arraignment the judge may release the ac-
 cused upon receipt of an appropriate guarantee, such as bail, or order him detained
 if the court determines that he is likely to flee the jurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 Authorities detained large numbers of people on several occasions in 1994, includ-
 ing the detention in February of 100 people at the funeral of Cengiz Arguc a Com-
 munist militant, in Adana (all but 5 were released within a day); and the detention
 during Nevroz (Kurdish New Year) of 200 persons in Diyarbakir after a celebrant
 reportedly shot   a plice car. In most such cases, the majority of detainees are
 subsequently release d without charges being filed; many have reported being tor-
 tured during such detentions. In the southeast there were several roundups of eth-
 nic Kurd in the wake of a crime. For example, after 5 P'K militants killed 1 po-
 liceman and wounded 5 near Igdir in April, police reportedly captured the 5 mili-
 tants and claimed that "175 PKK supporters" were captured mn the ensuing security
 oelrations.
 There is no external exile, and Turkey's internal exile law was repealed in 1987.
 In 1990, however, under decree 430, the Government granted the southeast regional
 governor the authority to "remove from the region," for a priod not to exceed the
 duration of the state of emergency (now in its eighth year), citizens under his ad-
 ministration whose activities (whether voluntary or forced) "give an impression that
 they are prone to disturb general security and public order." There were no known
 instances of the use of this broad authority in 1994. Human rights monitors and
 residents of towns in the southeast report that officials continued to rely on "admin-
 istrative transfers" to remove government employees thought liable to "create tru-
 ble."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judcial system is composed of general law
 courts, state security courts (550), and military courts. There is also a Constitu-
 tional Court. Most cases are prosecuted in the general law courts, which include the
 civil, administrative, and criminal courts. Appeals are heard either by the High
 Court of Appeals or the Council of State. Prvincial administrative boards estab-
 lished under the Anti-Terror Law decide whether cases in which state officials are
 accused of misconduct should be heard in criminal court. Military courts, with their
 own appeals system, hear cases regarding infractions of military law by members
 of the armed forces. In 1993 and 1994, the military court tried several cases of civil-
 ians charged with speech that purportedly discouraged military service (see Section
 2.a.).
 Eight state security courts composed of five members-two civiian judges, one
 military judge, and two prosecators-try defendants accused of crimes such as tar-
 rorismn, drug smuggling, membership in illegal organizations, and espousing or dis-
 seminating ideas proited by law as "damaging the indivisible unity of the State."
 Their verdicts may be appealed only to a specialized department of the High Court
 of Appeals dealing with crimes against state security.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and par-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decres with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war.
 
 
 999
 The Constitution requires that judges be independent of the executive in the dis-
 charge of their duties and provides for the security of their tenure. The High Coun-
 cil of Judges and Prosecutors, which is appointed by the President and includes the
 Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and is re-
 sponsible for oversight of those in the lower courts. The Constitution also prohibits
 state authorities from issuing orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of
 judicial power. In practice, the courts generally act independently of the executive.
 Defendants normally have the right to a public trial, and, under the Constitution,
 can be proven guilty only by a court of law. By law, the bar association must provide
 free counsel to indigents who make such a request to the court. Costs are borne by
 the association. There is no jury system; all cases are decided by a judge or panel
 o f judges.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independent prosecutor's files after
 arraignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving viola-
 tions of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the President or
 "defaming Turkish citizenshipu defense attorneys may be denied access to files
 which the State asserts deal with national intelligence or security matters.
 In 1994 state security courts predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror
 Law. The State claims these courts were established to try efficiently those sus-
 pected of certain crimes. In fact, the law provides that those accused of crimes fall-
 ing under the jurisdiction of these courts may be detained twice as long before ar-
 raignment as other defendants, and the heavy caseload often means that cases drag
 on for years. These courts may hold closed hearings and may admit testimony ob-
 tained during police interrogation in the absence of counsel. According to govern-
 ment figures, 1,277 persons were tried under the Anti-Terror Law, and 8,682 people
 are serving sentences for terrorist crimes. The trial of 12 Diyarbakir lawyers
 charged with acting as couriers for the PKK continues at the Diyarbakir State Secu-
 rity Court. The attorneys were released on their own recognizance in December
 1993 and January 1994. The trial of nine Erzurum lawyers, charged with similar
 crimes, began on November 16.
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against either mi-
 norities or women, with the following two caveats: (1) as legal proceedings are con-
 ducted solely in Turkish, and the quality of interpreters varies, some Kurdish-
 speaking defendants may be seriously disadvantaged; and (2) although women re-
 ceive equal treatment in a court of law, some discriminatory laws remain on the
 books, although most have been rendered inoperative by a constitutional court deci-
 sion. Under the civil code, the husband is the head of the household and determines
 the legal domicile of the family. Draft civil rights legislation which would have
 eliminated all existing legal inequalities between men and women has been stalled
 in Parliament since 1993. In 1994, civil service security clearance procedures were
 changed, which should allow numerous professors who were blackballed in the late
 1970s to be reemployed.
 Human rights monitors hesitate to estimate the number of persons in custody
 who might reasonably be considered political prisoners. They estimate only that
 "thousands" have been detained. Acco~ing to government statistics, 1,277 persons
 were charged under the Anti-Terror Law though October 1, 1994. Many are charged
 for attempting peacefully to exercise their right of freedom of speech, association,
 or some other internationally recognized human rights.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. Government officials may enter a private resi-
 dence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance of a judicial
 warrant. These provisions are generally respected in practice outside the state of
 emergency region.
 A judge must decide whether to issue a search warrant for a residence. If delay
 may cause harm, prosecutors and municipal officers authorized to carry out prosecu-
 tors' instructions may conduct a search. Searches of private premises may not be
 carried out at night, unless the delay will be damaging or the search will result in
 the capture of a prisoner at large. Exceptions include persons under special observa-
 tion by the Security Directorate Gneral, places anyone can enter at night, places
 where criminals gather, places where materials obtained through the Commission
 of Crimes are kept, gambling establishments, and brothels. In the 10 provinces
 under emergency rule, the Regional Governor can and does empower security au-
 thorities to search ithout a warrant residences or the premises of political parties,
 businesses, associations, or other orianizations. According to the HRF the practice
 of security authorities in these provinces to search, hold, or seize witihout warrant
 persons, letters, telegrams, and documents is unconstitutional. Roadblocks are corn-
 
 
 1000
 
 monpiace in the southeast, and security officials regularly search vehicles and trav-
 lers.
 Security forces have compelled the evacuation of villages in the southeast to pre-
 vent villagers from giving aid and comfort to the PKK (see Section 1.g.). The Gov-
 ernment admits to village and hamlet evacuations but claims they occur as the con-
 sequence of pressures by and fear of the PKK and because security operations
 against the PKK in the region make continued occupancy unsafe.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and V'wlations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since 1984 the separatist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) has waged an in-
 creasingly violent terrorist insurgency that has claimed over 15,000 lives, as many
 as 2,000 of them during 1994. The PKK's campaign of violence in southeast Turkey
 is directed against both security forces and civilians, most of whom are Kurds,
 whom the PKK accuses of cooperating with the State. The TNP, Jandarma, and
 armed forces, in turn, have waged an increasingly intense campaign to suppress ter-
 rorism, targeting active PKK units as well as those they believe support or sym-
 pathize with the PKK, and committing many human rights abuses in the process.
 According to government figures, in the first 10 months of 1994, 3,577 PIK, 963
 security force members and 940 noncombatants were killed. In that same period,
 1,563 civilians, 2,308 security force members and 137 PKK were wounded.
 Government security forces forcibly evacuated and sometimes burned villages, for
 the purpose of preventing their inhabitants from providing aid and comfort to PKK
 guerrillas or in retaliation for a PKK raid on a nearby Jandarma post. Some villag-
 ers who migrated to the cities told reliable sources that they had been evacuated
 for refusing to participate in the paramilitary village guard system. Some lost all
 their belongings when their houses were burned.
 In May the-Interior Minister, replying to a question in Parliament, stated that
 871 villages and hamlets in the state of emergency region had become empty since
 July 1987. The Interior Minister asserted that the villages and hamlets were
 emptied because of PKK pressure or economic reasons. The Minister of Defense that
 same month stated that to control PEK activity in the region, 50 settlement centers,
 displacing approximately 10,000 persons around Mount Ararat and Tenduruk
 Mountain, would be evacuated and that those regions would be declared a military
 zone. These statements were the first official confirmations of village evacuations in
 the southeast, including evacuations at government behest. In October, 17 village
 evacuations in Tunceli Province finally brought the issue into the national spotlight.
 According to government figures, as of October 1, 1,046 villages and hamlets had
 been evacuatedi 75 by the regional governorship for security reasons; 125 of the
 residents' own accord for secunty reasons; 812 because of PICK pressure; and 34 for
 economic reasons. According to a government report, to date approximately
 $227,000 in compensation has been paid to villagers displaced in the southeast,
 largely as a result of PIK activity, and $545,000 was to be spent in 1994 to con-
 struct housing for displaced villagers in Sirnak and Binol provinces. The Govern-
 ment has stated that it is providing housing and financial assistance to those dis-
 placed in Tunceli Province.
 On March 26, a Turkish air force plane bombed up to four villages in Sirnak prov-
 ince, killing approximately 20 persons, according to press reports. Journalists were
 not allowed into the area. The Government stated that the inhabitants had left the
 villages some time before and that the PKK had then moved in, along with some
 civilians. When the PKK was hit, the Government explained, there was perforce
 some collateral damage.
 During the first 6 months of 1994, approximately 10,000 Turks of Kurdish ethnic
 origin left the southeast for northern Iraq, claiming the Government had forced
 them out. The Government believes the villagers moved to northern Iraq at the be-
 hest of the PKK and views most of them as PIK  supporters.
 The Government organizes, arms, and pays for a civil defense force in the south-
 east known as the village guards. Participation in the paramilitary militia by local
 villagers is theoretically voluntary, but villagers are caught between the two sides.
 If the villagers agree to serve, the PKK may target them and their village. If the
 villagers refuse to participate government security forces may retaliate against
 them and their village. The vilfage guards have a reputation for being the least dis-
 ciplined of the Government's security forces.
 There were instances in which physicians were prosecuted for giving medical care
 to alleged PKK terrorists, a practice that could deter other physicians from extend-
 ing such aid. For example, Dr. Ilhan Diken was tried in Diyarbakir State Security
 Court for treating a wounded PKK militant, an offense for which the prosecution
 demanded a 5-year sentence. Diken's sentence of 3 years 9 months, of which he will
 serve 33 months, was affirmed by the Court of Appeals.
 
 
 1001
 Government state of emergency decree 430, codified in 1990 and most recently re-
 newed in November, imposes stringent security measures in the southeast. The re-
 gional governor may censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile
 (see Section 1.d.). The decree also provides for doubling the sentences of those con-
 victed of cooperating with separatists. Informants and convicted persons who cooper-
 ate with the State are eie for rewards and reduced sentences. Provisions in the
 decree that specifically prohibited court challenges to the regional governor's admin-
 istrative decisions were amended in 1992 to permit limited *udicial review.
 The year 1994 witnessed a series of PIK attacks on Turkish petroleum wells and
 power transformers, temporarily halting oil production. In August post and tele-
 communications (PTT) publications revealed that the PKK had caused $2 million in
 damage to the domestic PT network in the Southeast and its radio link stations
 in Hakkari, Diyarbakir, Igdir, Mus, and Agri Provinces.
 For the 1993-94 school year, according-to the Education Minister, 4,000 schools
 were closed in eastern and southeastern Turkey. Alternate government figures indi-
 cate that 3,395 schools were closed during that perio& 1,839 due to lack of security
 and fear of terrorism, 2,202 for lack of teachers, 89 for insufficient students, 92 be-
 cause of the migration or evacuation of residents from the area, and 213 because
 they had been attacked and burned. In Tunceli province alone, 12 teachers were
 killed and 273 of 314 schools remained closed throughout the 1993-94 school year.
 Although the Government opened more regional boarding schools, promised to re-
 open closed schools for the 1994-95 school year, and maintains that a supple-
 mentary TL 1876 billion ($5,340,000) allocation was made to schools in the region,
 the Education Minister in September announced that 4,000 schools in the southeast
 were closed due to village evacuations undertaken for security and other reasons.
 Villagers and human rights groups complained that Jandarma actions and secu-
 rity forces' searches for PHK terrorists and their supporters resulted in expulsions,
 beatings, torture, and the arbitrary killing of innocent civilians. Government secu-
 rity forces on many occasions fired on the homes of villagers suspected of harboring
 PICK terrorists, causing an unknown number of casualties and destroying villagers
 property, including livestock.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite constitutional provisions guaranteeing
 freedom of speech and press, the Government increasingly restricted these freedoms.
 For those who "insult the President, the Parliament, and the arm ," the Criminal
 Code provides penalties ranging from a 3-year minimum sentence fr insulting the
 President to a 6-year maximum for insulting other branches of government. Judges
 generally examine evidence rigorously and dismiss many charges brought under
 these laws. Konya metropolitan Mayor Hail Urun was sentenced to 1 year for "in-
 sulting Ataturk, the founder of the Turkish Republic" at a Refah Party meeting in
 Konya province in 1992. The sentence was commuted to a fine of TL 1825 000 (a -
 proximately $50). In some cases, the laws provide for increased punismenit if the
 offense is committed in a publication. The press law permits prosecutors to halt dis-
 tribution of a newspaper or magazine without a court order and requires that each
 publication's "responsible editors" bear legal responsibility for the publication's con-
 tent. Many have faced repeated criminal proceedings. As of September, an estimated
 100 persons were in custody for freedom of expression crimes. The State claimed
 that, as of September, 36 court cases were under way against a total of 19 journal-
 ists all under the Anti-Terror Law.
 Throughout the year, SSC prosecutors ordered the confiscation of numerous issues
 of leftist and pro-Kurdish periodicals, including Aydinllk, Emegin Bayragi, Denge
 Azadi, Ozgur Gelecek, Gercek, Newroz, Hedef, Ozgur Gundem, and Ozgur Ulke, al-
 though most continue to publish. Many editions of Kurdish-oriented periodicals were
 seized before they could be distributed nationally to newsstands.
 Court proceedings were instituted against a number of editors and publishers.
 The Anti-Terror Law, which provides that "written and oral propaganda *** aim-
 ing at damaging the indivisible unity of the state of the Turkish Republic *** (is)
 forbidden, regardless of the method, intention and ideas behind it," severely re-
 stricts freedom of speech and has been used against writers, journalists, publishers,
 politicians, musicians, and students. Ismail Besikci served 10 years in prison be-
 tween 1971 and 1987 because of his publications on the Kurdish question in Turkey.
 He has been brought to court more than 100 times and has been in prison again
 since November 1993. The Court of Appeals has upheld a total of 14 years and 6
 months in prison terms and TL 850 million ($26,500) in fines. Were all the sen-
 tences and fines against him to be upheld, they would total 51 years and 11 months
 in prison and TL 3.45 billion ($108,000) in fines.
 
 
 1002
 
 A number of pro-Kurdish politicians were detained under, or otherwise affected
 by, the Anti-Terror Law in 1994 for speeches made both within Turkey and beyond
 the country's borders. Those affiliated with the pro-Kurdish Democracy Party (DEP)
 were particularly targeted. In March, based on a request from the Ankara SSC chief
 prosecutor Parliament partially lifted the immunites of six DEP, one independent
 and one Isiamist Refah Party (RP) member. RP deputy Hasan Mezarci is behin triea
 for insulting Ataturk; the liftg of the immunity of one of the six DEP M.P. s was
 overturned- and the other five DEP M.P.'s (who lost their status as M.P.'s when the
 DEP was disbanded in June) and the independent were tried for treason in the An-
 kara SSC. The bulk of the prosecution's case appeared to rest on speeches and ex-
 pression of opinions.
 After the Constitutional Court closed the DEP in June, two other former DEP
 MP's were arrested on July 1 and an indictment on similar charges was issued
 against them. Their trial commenced on October 26 and was later merged with that
 o e original six defendants. On December 8, the eight defendants were convicted
 of a combination of charges, including dissemination of separatist propaganda, being
 a member of an armed society or band, and knowingly supporting such a band. The
 sentences ranged from 3 years and 6 months (suspended) to 15 years. Both defense
 and prosecution plan to appeal the decision. Six others left the country and are cur-
 rent-y in Europe.
 An April resolution of the Council of Europe's (COE) parliamentary assembly
 strongly criticized the lifting of immunity of the deputies. In a written statement,
 the Turkish parliamentary delegation to the COE, including the current Foreign
 Minister, opposed the resolution, asking that their colleagues respect the Turkish
 Parliaments legitimate proceedings and-emphasizing Turkey's right to combat ter-
 rorism.
 In another case, trade union chairman Munir Ceylan, convicted of disseminating
 separatist propaganda, began serving a 20-month sentence for an article that ap-
 pe       the July 21, 1991, issue of Yeni Ulke. In June journalist Haluk Gerger
 began serving a 20-month prison term for a message he sent to a meeting held in
 Ankara on May 22, 1993. On March 18, Dr. Flkret Baskaya began serving a 20-
 month term in connection with his book, "Bankruptcy of the Paradigm: An Introduc-
 tion to Critics of the Official Ideology.' In July the Konya SSC sentenced Seydi
 Bayram, president of the Kuthaya branch of the HRA, to 20 months' imprisonment
 for using the word "Kurdistan in an article in a local newspaper. In February
 Mehmet Ali Baris Besli, owner and editor in chief of Ogni magazine, which is pub-
 lished in the Laz dialect, was put on trial at the Istanbul SSC on charges of separat-
 ism relating to articles published in the November 1993 issue of the magazine. On
 May 13, former mayor of Diyarbakir Mchdi Zana was imprisoned for testimony he
 ha iven to the Human Rights Subcommittee of the European Parliament. The Ap-
 peals Court upheld the sentence on November 3. According to government figures,
 407 newspapers, 490 periodicals and 35 books were confiscated during the first 9
 months of 1994.
 Military courts tried several cases against journalists and antiwar activists whose
 activities were alleged to discourage compulsory military service. Erhan Akyildiz
 and All Tevfik Berber were each sentenced to 2 months in prison for a program they
 produced in December 1993 on a private television station. The military appeals
 court later overturned the conviction and remanded the case to the military trial
 court. The retrial ended in acquittal. In November the military court sentenced re-
 spected journalist Mehmet All Birand and two others to 5 months in prison for a
 television program on military service during which militarypersonnel spoke; they
 will appeal. As of the end of the year, actress and musician Bilgesu Erenus was to
 stand trial in a military court on charges of speaking out against military service
 at a 1993 meeting.
 Legislative reforms in 1991 partially removed the ban on the use of the Kurdish
 language. Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects contin-
 ued to be widely available, although suppression continued as well. In April the
 Tunceli governorship banned the sale of 39 Kurdish- language cassettes. One Kurd-
 ish-language weekly, Welat, is publishing currently; its editor in chief was brought
 to court in the spring on charges of violating the Anti-Terror Law. Several others
 publish in a combination of Turkish and K  ih. Potential customers are afraid to
 purchase Kurdish- language materials because possession of such items may be in-
 terpreted as evidence of Pe pathies. Kurdish-language broadcasts are still ie-
 al, thou"h in June Prime Minister Ciller stated that the possibility of private
 bradcasting and education in languages other than Turkish might be discussed. By
 years end, however the Government had taken no further action. President
 Demirel stated that kurdish television and education would constitute concessions
 to terrorists and should be allowed only after the terrorism ends.
 
 
 1003
 Newspaper correspondents and distributors in the southeast, especially those for
 the pro-Kurdish press, were harassed and reported being beaten and tortured in po-
 lice stations during periods of detention. The pro-PKK COzgur Gundem was harassed
 consistently since its April 1992 inception. It closed permanently in April 1994 when
 the appeals court began to ratify a series of closure orders against the paper for pro-
 moting separatism and printing the views of the banned PKK. Most of Ozgur
 Gundem's staff moved to Ozgur Ulke, which opened shortly after its predecessor's
 closure and continues to publish.
 Turkish press coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be unreliable,
 underreporting in some instances and grossly sensationalizing in others. Govern-
 ment decree 430 requires self-censorship of all news reporting from or about the
 southeast, and, upon the request of the regional governor, gives the Interior Min-
 istry the authority to ban distribution of any news viewed as misrepresenting events
 in the region. In the event such a government warning is not obeyed, the decree
 provides for a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days for
 subsequent offenses.
 In general, the mainstream Turkishlanguage press limited its independent re-
 porting of news related to the southeast, Aside from the access of Ozgur Gundem
 and Ozgur Ulke correspondents to the southeast and reporting in the English-lan-
 guage Turkish Daily News, most papers relied on official reports. In response to
 growing criticism, the Justice Minster in September established a commission to
 define freedom of thought and propose changes in the law, in particular the Anti-
 Terror Law. Journalists also face security concerns, includin threats from the PKK
 which, for a time in late 1993, 'banned" journalists and distributors from the South-
 eastern region.
 Until mid-1993 Turkish Radio and Television (TRT) had a legal monopoly on
 broadcasting. Private radio stations began operating in 1991. In July 1993, Par-
 liament voted to repeal Article 133 o-the Constitution, thereby eliminating the
 State's monopoly and permitting the establishment of private radio and television
 stations. In April 1994, Parliament passed, and the President signed, regulatory leg-
 islation, pursuant to which it is illegal for stations to threaten the country's unity
 or national security and limiting the private broadcast of television programs in Ian-
 uages other than Turkish. However, state-run cable television carries a number of
 Eupean stations. At the end of 1994, some 40 private radio stations were operat-
 ing in Ankara and approximately 60 in Istanbul. Countrywide, there were 20 pri-
 vate television stations. With the increasig availability of satellite dishes and
 cable, many Turkish viewers may now watch foreign broadcasts, including several
 Turkish-language private channels.
 While the Culture Minister lifted bans against all formerly prohibited books at
 the end of 1991, the Education Ministry continued to make recommendations on the
 "utility" of books proposed for school curriculum or libraries. Books declared "with-
 out utility" are not allowed.
 Academic freedom is also severely restricted in practice by the provisions of the
 Anti-Terror Law. For example, professors have been convicted and sentenced for
 books they have written. The Constitution and the law governing political parties
 proscribe student and faculty involvement in political activities, aithough the Ciller
 Government's democratization package, before Parliament since May, would lift
 those restrictions.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Peaceful assemblies are per-
 mitted upon prior notification to government authorities, who may restrict them to
 designated sites. Authorities may deny permission if they believe the gathering is
 likely to disrupt public order. For example, the Izmir governorship refused to allow
 a meeting planned on the first anniversary of the Sivas incidents in which 37 were
 killed in an antisecular riot.
 Security forces forcibly broke up a number of planned demonstrations in 1994. On
 January 13, 5,000 civil servants gathered in downtown Ankara to protest low wages.
 They were met by police barricades; the police dispersed the demonstrators through
 kicking and the use of truncheons, injurng 30 persons. On May Day, a demonstra-
 tion in downtown Ankara turned violent when pic beat demonstrators, including
 M.P. Salman Kaya. Ten persons, three of whom were police, were injured in the
 melee. Following the May Day demonstration, Ankara security director Orhan
 Tasanlar, who assaulted some demonstrators in the January civil servants' dem-
 onstration was suspended from duty pending an investigation but reinstated on
 May 18. 8n September 4, police detained, and released 5 hours later, 24 persons
 participating in a World Peace Week festival on Istanburs Besiktas wharf Those
 detained carried posters stating 'Peace Now" in five languages.
 In June the Constitutional Court ordered the closing of the DEP on the grounds
 that it "acted in a separatist manner and functioned against the Constitution and
 
 
 1004
 laws." Many of its members formed the HADEP (People's Democracy Party) and
 were soon subjected to similar investigations.
 Associations and labor unions are prohibited by law from having ties to political
 parties or engaging in political activities (see Section 6.a.). Police raided a number
 of associations nd organizations in 1994 and harassed some of their members. For
 example on May 7 the Iskenderun governorship closed the Iskenderun office of the
 Human Rights Association (HRA) on the grounds that, through a press statement,
 the HRA had "acted against the associations law and functioned to incite people."
 In May the Adana governorship closed the Adana HRA branch for 16 days, as well
 as the Ozgur Der association because it had in its possession some "documents with
 ideological content." On december 28 the Diyarbakir Governor closed the
 Diyarbakir Branch of the HRA for 1 month
 Associations must submit their charters for government approval, a lengthy and
 cumbersome process.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and pivate dissemination
 of religious ideas. About 99 percent of Turkey's population is Muslim. Under Turk-
 ish law, religious services may take place only in designated places of worshi. In
 Adna, Turkey's fourth largest city, the only approved sites are mosques, one ew-
 ish synagogue, and one Roman Catolic church. A Protestant expatriate group eti-
 tioned to have a house of worship designated for its use. The petition has een
 "under consideration" in Ankara since at least 1992. In February 1994, the Peace
 and Tolerance Conference, involving a wide range of religious figures, took place in
 Istanbul.
 Although Turkey is a secular state, religious instruction in state schools is coin-
 pulsor  for Muslims. Upon written verification of their non-Muslim background,
 non-Musm are exempted by law from Muslim _religious instruction, although stu-
 dents who wish to attend may do so with parental consent.
 Turkey's Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam) is estimated to
 number at least 12 million. There are, however, no government-paid Alawi religious
 leaders, no religious affairs directorate funds go to the Alawi community, and some
 Alawis allege informal discrimination in the form of failure to include any Alawi
 doctrines or beliefs in religious instruction ciasses. Alawis are disgrnted oy what
 they regard as the Sunni bias in the religious affairs directorate and the dirc-
 torat's tendency to view the Alawis as a cultural group rather than a religious sect.
 Many prosecutors regard proselytizing and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamic extremists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they
 deem such activities to have political overtones. Since there is no law prohibiting
 proselytizing, police sometimes arrest Islamic extremists and evangelical Christians
 frdisturbing the peace. Courts usually dismiss such charges.
 Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul, and the number of Chris-
 tians in the south has been declining as the younger generation leaves Turkey for
 Europe and North America.
 The status of only three minorities--Armenians, Jews, and Greeks--was recog-
 nized under the Lausanne Treaty. Other religions may not acquire additional prop-
 erty for churches. The Catholic Church in Ankara, for example, is confined to diplo-
 matic property. The Sate must approve the operation of churches, monasteries, syn-
 agogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations, such as hospitals and orphan-
 ages.
 The Jewish communityis well integrated into Turkish society, although it fears
 the possibility of rising Islamic extremism The only problems the Jewish commu-
 nity reported in 1994 were petty thefts; facsimiles sent early in the year by the Mus-
 lim fundamentalist terrorist organization da-c, urging Turks to cease doing busi-
 ness at Jewish-owned establishments; and some damage to tombstones.
 The activities of Greek Orthodox and Armenian churches and their affiliated oper-
 ations are carefully monitored and closely calibrated to the state of political rela-
 tions between Turkey and Greece and between Turkey and Armenia. In November,
 the Istanbul Deputy Governor for the first time calledin and questioned the Arme-
 nian Patriarch on the Chu h's actities.
 The Ministry of Education tightly controls the curriculums in foreign-language
 schools. Greek educators cmplain that the Turkmis Mnstry of Education is ex-
 tremely slow to approve Greek-language textbooks, including those in such non-
 controversial subjects as mathematics and the natural sciences. They claim that,
 rather than allowing the use of texts from Greee, the Ministrywants them to use
 Greek translations of Turkish textbooks. In September the Turkish and Greek Gov-
 ernments eased a longstanding problem of schoolteachers for Istanbul's Greek com-
 munity and for Turks in Western Thrace. Because there was no physical education
 teacher at one of the Greek high schools, a few graduating seniors were initially de-
 
 
 1005
 nied their diplomas. The problem was worked out in time for them to enroll in uni-
 versity in the fall, but many Greek students report difficulty in continuing their
 education in Turkey and go to Greece, often never to return.
 The Greek Patriarchate (Istanbul is the see of the ecumenical Patriarchate of the
 Eastern Orthodox faith) has consistently expressed interest in reopening the semi-
 nary on the island of Halki in the Sea of Marmara. The seminary has been closed
 since the 1970's when the State nationalized all private institutions of higher learn-
 ing. Turkish officials, however have used a variety of excuses to keep it closed.
 During the last few years, tfiere have been instances of graffiti, stones tossed over
 the walls, and press attacks on the Patriarchate and the Patriarch. In May three
 bombs were found inside the Patriarchate walls. Police defused them and since
 then have provided enhanced protection for the Patriarchate. While the Patriarchate
 views the Turkish authorities as responsive to its needs, it has undertaken its own
 security improvements.
 The Armenian Patriarchate has reported similar attacks against Armenian
 churches in the city as well as problems similar to those of the Greek Patriarchate.
 Armenian church officials also complain of petty harassment from local officials
 (such as delays or refusals in receiving buildiig permits) and growing encroachment
 by certain Muslim extremist groups on lands belonging to the Armenian community,
 especially on the Princes' Islands in the Sea of Marmara.
 The Islamic terrorist organization Ibda-c claimed responsibility for bombs which
 exploded on May 19 in front of Istanbul's Santa Maria and Saint Antoine churches,
 causing some damage.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Under Turkish law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (be-
 cause of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff local religious councils)
 revert to government possession. Some non-Muslim minorities particularly the
 Greek Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, the shrinking Armenian 6rthodox and Jew-
 ish communities, are faced with the danger of losing some of their houses of wor-
 ship.
 . Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey and the
 freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted only by the national economic situation, civic obligations (e.g.,
 milit ary servie), or criminal investigation or prosecution. Each Turkish citizen (ex-
 cept those regularly woiking abroad) must pay a departure tax of $100 for every
 deparur from the country. This tax is to be phased out in 1995.
 rave in the southeast sometimes is restricted for security reasons. Roadblocks,
 set up by both Turkish security forces and the PIK, can seriously impede travel
 in the region. Allegedly, security forces on occasion closed off villages and surround-
 igregions making it impossible to investigate reports of human rights abuses.
 Although Turkey is a signatory to the U.N. Convention on Refugees, it officially
 accords refugee status only to claimants from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
 Union. Asylum seekers from elsewhere are referred to the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for third-country resettlement.
 The Government has cooperated with the UNHCR in dealing with large groups
 of Iraqis and Iranians seeking to qualify as refugees. Since July 15, 1994, Turkey
 has exercised its right to make decisions on the qualifications of individual refugees.
 The Turkish Government now screens Iranians who claim asylum before referring
 those it considers bona fide to UNHCR for resettlement. During the screening proc-
 ess, UNHCR may provide technical assistance to the Turkish Government. In addi-
 tion, at least 15,000 Bosnians have found temporary refuge in Turkey, the majority
 living with friends and relatives and another 3,000 in camps established by the
 Turkish Government with UNHCR support.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 According to the Constitution, citizens have the right and ability to change their
 government peacefully. Turkey has a multiparty parliamentary system, in which
 elections are held at least every 5 years on the basis of mandatory universal suf-
 frage for all citizens aged 21 and over. As of October, at least 25 political parties
 were operating in Turkey, 10 of which were represented in Parliament. The Grand
 National Assembly (parliament) elects the President as Head of State every 7 years,
 or when the President becomes incapacitated or dies.
 There are no restrictions in law against women or minorities voting or participat-
 ing in politics, but the Government has made repeated efforts to frustrate political
 activities of those who emphasize their Kurdish ethnicity. As noted in Section 2.b.,
 the Constitutional Court closed the pro-Kurdish DEP in 1994. It immediately re-
 
 
 1006
 formed as HADEP. Additionally, the Constitution forbids students, university fac-
 ulty members, and trade unionists from active participation in party politics.
 In February the Interior Ministry discharged three democratically elected mayors
 in the southeast, all from the DEP. Kozik (Batman province) mayor Abdullah
 Kaya; Kurtulan (Siirt province) mayor Cemil Akul; and *ce (Diyarbakir province)
 mayor Nazmi Balkas. In September the Istanbul SSC sentenced Kaya anT Balkas
 to 20 months in prison each and fined them TL 210 million ($700) each for allegedly
 separatist statements they had given to the newspaper Ozgur Gundem.
 In the runup to nationwide local elections held on March 27, there were serious
 threats to the safety of candidates in the southeast. A number of DEP candidates
 were threatened and a few killed, and party offices of several political parties were
 bombed. As of the end of the year, none of the perpetrators had been apprehended.
 On February 24 the DEP withdrew from the elections, claiming it was not safe for
 its candidates. 6n March 1, the PKK demanded that people bioycott the elections
 and threatened to kill both candidates and voters who went to the polls. The elec-
 tions went forward peacefully throughout the country.
 Apart from banning the DEP, the Constitutional Court formally closed the small
 Greens party on the grounds that its executives had not submitted their financial
 accounts and other necessary documents for the year 1988; and it also closed the
 Turkish Socialist Party because its platform allegedly aimed at destroying the unity
 of the country and its people.
 The Constitution calls for equal political rights for men and women; however, only
 eight women representing three parties were elected to the Parliament in 1991. In
 addition to Prime Minister Ciller, there is one female Cabinet Minister. Political
 parties now recruit female delegates for their party conferences and electoral lists.
 Women's committees are active within political party organizations, although formal
 youth and women's wings are not permitted under the Constitution.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Right-
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association (HRA), officially approved in 1987,
 has branches in 50 provincial capitals, but at year's end 13 ha en closed, all of
 them in the east and southeast. It claims a membership of about 20,000. In 1990
 the HRA established its companion Human Rights Foundation (HRF) which, in ad-
 dition to operating torture rehabilitation centers in Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul,
 serves as a clearinghouse for human rights information. Other nongovernmental or-
 ganizations include the Ankara-based Turkish Democracy Foundation, the Istanbul-
 based Helsinki Citizens Assembly, and human rights centers at a number of univer-
 sities.
 Government agents have increasingly harassed human rights monitors, as well as
 lawyers and doctors involved in documenting human rights violations. Some have
 reported receiving death threats from unknown parties. At least one human rights
 monitor was killed. A number have been aggressively prosecuted as well. In Decem-
 ber, a SSC trial opened against Yavuz Onen, President of the HRF, and Fevzi
 Argun, head of the HRF'S Documentation Center, for allegedly separatist language
 in the booklet "File of Torture." They were acquitted in January along with four de-
 fendants from the HRA who had been indicted for their publication of "A Cross-Sec-
 tion of Burned-Down Villages." in December three members of the beard of the
 Diyarbakir HRA were arrested on charges of separatism and four others were being
 sought for their 1992 publication of "Report On The State Of Emergency Region,
 1992.
 Some government officials, including some prosecutors and police, punitively
 apply various laws to restrict the HRA's activities. For example, officials ordered
 various branches of the HRA closed for periods of weeks or months generally on
 charges that they had violated the associations law through publication of a press
 statement or allegedly separatist material (see Section 2.5.). An BRA president in
 southern Turkey said he and his board remained under surveillance, and one in
 eastern Turkey noted that many board members had left the city or resigned be-
 cause they were concerned about their personal safety.
 The president of the Siirt ERA, who was arrested on February 26 1993 and de-
 tained for 3 months on charges of giving aid and comfort to the PkK, was again
 arrested on January 21, 1994, after which the local branch closed. He was released
 in October, but charges against him have not been dropped. Sedat Aslantas, chair-
 man of the Diyarbakir HRA branch and vice chairman of the Turkish BRA, was
 arrested on May 13 by the Ankara SSC on charges related to a joint press statement
 issued in May 1993 by Diyarbakir union and association leaders. That trial contin-
 ued as of the end of the year. On December 5, he was imprisoned for 3 years based
 on an earlier case involving his speech during an HRA congress in October 1992.
 
 
 1007
 The HRA representative in the town of Derik, Mardin province who was detained
 six separate times in 1993, has moved away, and the local HKA office is closed.
 Muhsin Melik, founder of the Sanliurfa branch of the HRA and former president
 of the DEP branch office, was shot and killed on June 2. Before his death, he identi-
 fied his assailants as police officers. There have been no arrests in connection with
 this case. Other HRA offices closed for similar reasons include those in Sirnak,
 Nusaybin, Tunceli, Dogubeyazit, and Cizre. Many of these investigations and pros-
 ecutions, as well as many arrests of human rights monitors, stemmed from alleged
 violations of the law on associations or the hoding of illegal demonstrations. Sur-
 veillance and harassment of HRA members in the southeast continues on a regular
 basis.
 Since 1991, Parliament has had a Human Rights Commission. The Commission
 is authorized to oversee Turkey's compliance with the human rights provisions of
 Turkish law and international agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, inves-
 tigate alleged abuses, and prepare reports. Claiming it is underfundd and lacks the
 necessary powers to subpoena witnesses or documents, the Commission has been in-
 active and ineffective. In August the State Minister in charge of human rights an-
 nounced the establishment of a human rights advisory department connected to the
 Prime Ministry would be established to investigate allegations of human rights vio-
 lations and monitor international human rights developments.
 While representatives of diplomatic missions who wish to monitor the state of
 human rights in Turkey are fiee to speak with private citizens, security police may
 place such visitors in the southeast and the east under surveillance, and the pres-
 ence of security officials may have an intimidating effect upon those interviewed.
 Access to government officials or facilities has been restricted at times, although in
 1993 and 1994 high-level visitors obtained most of the appointments they requested,
 including access to detention facilities. However, in August a delegation from
 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki was unable to obtain the cooperation of the Regional
 Super Governor's office to investiate PKK human rights abuses outside of
 Diyarbakir. In September Amnesty International's principal researcher for Turkey
 was declared persona non grata. Also in September, the Foreign Minister announced
 his intention to restrict foreign visitor access to judges and prosecutors.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Relgon, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all Turkish citi-
 zens as equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds.
 The Government officially recognizes only those religious minorities mentioned in
 the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), which guarantees the rights of Greek Orthodox, Ar-
 menian Apostolic, and Jewish adherents. Despite constitutional provisions, discrimi-
 nation remains a problem in several areas.
 Women.-Traditional family values in rural Turkey place a greater emphasis on
 advanced education for sons than for daughters. Far fewer girls than boys continue
 their education after primary school. The illiteracy rate for women is approximately
 29 percent, some 10 percent higher than for the population as a whole. Turkey's
 civil code, which prohibits granting gender-based privileges or rights, retains some
 discriminatory provisions concerning marital rights and obligations. Because the
 husband is the legal head of household, the wife automatically acquires the hus-
 band's surname with marriage; the husband is authorized to choose the domicile
 and represents the conjugal unit. As parents, husband and wife exercise their rights
 ointly, but when they disagree, the husband's view prevails. Women's groups have
 jobbied to change this provision. Divorce law requires that the divorcing spouses di-
 vide their property according to property registered in each spouse's name. Because
 in most cases property is registered in the husband's name, this can create difficul-
 ties for women who wish to divorce. With regard to inheritance laws, a widow gen-
 erally obtains one-fourth of the estate.
 Although spousal abuse is a serious and widespread problem, it is still considered
 an extremely private matter, involving societal notions of family honor. Few women
 go to the police, who in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic disputes and
 frequently advise women to return to their husbands. Turks of either sex may file
 civil or criminal charges but rarely do. A combination of laws and ingrained societal
 notions make it difficult to prosecute sexual assault or rape cases. By law, penalties
 may be reduced if a woman was not a virgin prior to a rape. Penalties may also
 be reduced if a judge deems the woman to have acted provocatively. There are sev-
 eral shelters for battered women, and at least two consultation centers, Istanbul's
 the Purple Roof Foundation and Ankara's Altindag Center. In a 1-year period, 400
 women applied to one major city shelter.
 
 
 1008
 Particularly in urban areas, women are improving their position overall, including
 in the professions, business, and the civil service, although they continue to face dis-
 crimination to varying degrees. Numerous women have become lawyers, doctors
 and engineers since the 1960s. In March a woman for the first time was elected
 chief justice of a court of appeals. Women comprise about 36 percent of the work
 force; approximately 80 percent of working women are employed in agriculture.
 They generally receive equal pay for equal work in the professions, business, and
 civil service jo s, although a large ]percentage of women employed in agriculture and
 in the trade, restaurant, and hotel sectors work as unpaid family help. The arbi-
 trary barrier to women becoming governors and subgovernors (government-ap-
 pointed positions) has been breached and women may now take the examination
 required to become a subgovernor. Several have been appointed subgovernors, and
 one governor is a woman.
 Independent women's and women's rights associations exist, but the concept of
 lobbyin for women's rights has not gained currency.
 Childen.-The Government is committed to flithe     children's welfare and is
 working to expand opportunities in education and health, including further reduc-
 tion of the infant mortality rate.
 Children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in southeastern Anatolia.
 School closings and the migration of many families, forced or voluntary, have up-
 rooted children to cities which are hard pressed to find the resources to extend
 basic, mandatory services, such as schooling. The Government is establishing re-
 gional boarding schools in the southeast to help combat this problem but not enough
 to meet the need. The HRF claims that 78 children were subjected to torture be-
 tween January 1989 and July 1994.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minoritie.-The Constitution, following the Treaty of
 Lausanne, does not recognize the Kurds in Turkey as a national, racial, or ethnic
 minority. Many human fights abuses are targeted at Kurds who insist on publicly
 or politically asserting their Kurdish ethnic identity, and their supporters.
 Kurds who are long-term residents in industrialized cities in western Turkey have
 been, for the most part, assimilated into the political, economic, and social life of
 the nation. Kurds who are currently migrating westward (including those displaced
 by the conflict in the southeast), bring with them their Kurdish culture and village
 identity;, many simply are not prepared for urban life.
 Most parliamentary representatives from southeastern Turkey are ethnic Kurds,
 but representatives of Kurdish ethnic origin have been elected from districts far re-
 moved from the southeast. Several Cabinet Ministers, more than 25 percent of
 M.P.'s and other government officials claim an ethnic Kurdish background.
 The increasing violence of the fighting in the southeast is polarizing ethnic Turks
 and Kurds and creating a climate of intolerance. Particularly in cities such as
 Adana and Mersin, which have witnessed a large influx of Kurds fleeing the vio-
 lence in the southeast, tensions continue to rise. With PKK bombings in Aegean re-
 sort towns and Istanbul, tensions have also spread westward, making it difficult,
 for example, for some otherwise qualified new migrants to find work in the western
 cities.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communication in Kurdish
 legalized some spoken and printed Kurdish communications. Under the political
 parties law, however, all discussion that takes place at political meetings must be
 in Turkish. Kurdish may be spoken only in "nonpolitical communication." Court pro-
 ceedings (and all government functions, including public education) continue to be
 conducted in Turkish, disadvantaging those Kurdish-speaking defendants who have
 to rely on court-provided translators. Moreover, materials dealing with Kurdish his-
 tory, culture, and ethnic identity continue to be subject to confiscation and prosecu-
 tion under the "indivisible unity of the State" provisions of the Anti-Terror Law.
 The Roma population is extremely small, and there were no reported incidents of
 public or government harassment directed against Roma during 1994.
 People With Disabilities.-To date legislation dealing with the disabled is piece-
 meal, and there is little legislation regarding accessibility for the disabled. Certain
 categories of employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent of their
 employee pool, although there is no penalty for failure to comply.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Most workers have the right to associate freely and
 form representative unions. Exceptions are schoolteachers (both public and private),
 civil servants, the police, and military personnel. Upon taking office in June 1993,
 the Government of Prime Minister Ciller renewed the pledge to bring Turkish labor
 legislation into conformity with the standards of the International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO), and its intention to grant trade union rights to civil servants (including
 
 
 1009
 teachers). In early 1994, the Government introduced in Parliament a bill to grant
 to civil servants the legal right to form unions, which includes some collective bar-
 gaining rights. The draft law would also allow the Government to determine wheth-
 er to pernit a particular strike by civil servants. In May a combination of center-
 right and Islamist-right political party deputies voted against the draft in tar-
 liamentary committee. The Government and Parliament must now reconcile teir
 differences on this legislation. Permission for civil servants to form trade unions and
 for unions to engage in political activity will require amendments to the Constitu-
 tion-a procedure further complicated by the need to gain support among the oppo-
 sition parties in order to secure the requisite two-thirds maorty.
 The aw states that unions and confederations may be founded without prior au-
 thorization based on a petition to the governor of the province where the union's
 headquarters are to be located. Although unions are independent of the Government
 and political parties, they must have government permission to hold meetings or
 rallies and must allow police to attend conventions and record the proceedings. The
 Constitution requires candidates for union office to have worked 10 years in the in-
 dustry represented by the union. Some 14 percent of the total civilian labor force
 (agd 15 and above) are unionized. There are three confederations of labor unions
 in Turkey: the Turkish Confederation of Workers Unions (Turk-Is), the Confed-
 eration of Turkish Real Trade Unions (Hak-Is), and the Confederation of Revolution-
 ary Workers Unions (DISK). There are also some independent unions.
 Unions and their officers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly
 affecting members' economic and social interests, but the Constitution prohibits an y
 union role in party politics (such as organic or financial connections with any politi-
 cal party or other association). In practice, unions have been able to convey ciearly
 in election and referendum campaigns their support for, or opposition to, given polit-
 ical parties and government policies. In May the Government proposed a "democra-
 tization" package. One of its proposals would allow unions and other groups (women
 and students, for example) to have formal links to political parties. Prosecutors may
 request labor courts to order a trade union or confederation into liquidation based
 on alleged violation of specific legal norms. The Government, however, may not
 summarily dissolve a union.
 The right to strike, while guaranteed in the Constitution, is partially restricted.
 For example, workers engaged in the protection of life and property and those in
 the mining and petroleum industries, sanitation services, national defense and edu-
 cation do not have the right to strike. Collective bargaining is required before a
 strike.
 The law specifies the series of steps a union must take before it may strike or
 an employer may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding mediation is the last of those
 steps. In sectors in which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through bind-
 ing arbitration. A party that fails to comply with these steps forfeits its rights. The
 struck employer may respond with a lockout but is prohibited from hiring strike-
 breakers or using administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done by strik-
 ers. Article 42 of Law 2822, governing collective bargaining, strikes, and lockouts,
 prohibits the employer from terminating workers encouraging or participating in a
 legal strike. Unions are forbidden to engage in secndary (solidarity), wildcat, or
 general strikes.
 The Government also has the statutory power to suspend strikes for 60 days for
 reasons of national security or public healt  and safety. Unions may petition the
 Council of State to lift such a suspension, but if this appeal fails the strike is subject
 to compulsory arbitration at the end of the 60-day period. Some 24 strikes, involving
 about 1,800 workers took place in the first 10 months of 1994. The Government dig
 not suspend any strikes in 1994.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bdies, as long as these organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) approved DISK as an affiliate in December 1992. Turk-Is is a long-
 standing member. Hak-Is applied for ICFTU affiliation in 1993. The application re-
 mains pending with the ICFTU.
 In June the Parliament reapproved ILO Convention 158 (termination of employ-
 ment at the initiative of the employer), a measure which the late President Ozal
 had vetoed in 1992 after the Parliament had passed it. President Demirel signed
 the measure. As mentioned in Sections 2.a. and 2.b. above, in some instances labor
 union members have been the subject of government limits on freedom of speech
 and assembly.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 
 
 1010
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at a given work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10-percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 unions, and particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that rep-
 resents nearly 80 percent of organized labor in Turkey.
 The ILO has called on Turkey to rescind this 10-percent rule. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however, and the
 Government has not until now pursued a change. However, the government rep-
 resentative informed the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards that the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Security now proposes to remove the 10-percent nu-
 merical restriction, and that its proposal hac been communicated to the social part-
 ners.
 The law on trade unions stipulates that an employer may not dismiss a labor
 union representative without rightful cause. The union member may appeal such a
 dismissal to the courts and, if the ruling is in the union member's favor, the em-
 ployer must reinstate him and pay all back benefits and salary.
 Union organizin and collective bargaining are permitted in the duty-free export
 processing zones at Antalya, Istanbul, Izmir, and Mersin. Workers in those zones,
 however, are not allowed to strike during the first 10 years of operation. Until then,
 settlements not otherwise reached will be determined by binding arbitration.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and statutes pro-
 hibit compulsory labor. The laws are enforced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution and labor laws
 forbid employment of children younger than 15 years of age, with the exception that
 those aged 13 and 14 may engage in light part-time work if enrolled in school or
 vocational training. The Constitution also prohibits children from engaging in phys-
 ically demanding jobs, such as underground mining, and from working at night. The
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces these laws only in the organized industrial
 sector.
 In practice, many children work because families frequently need the supple-
 mentary income. An informal system provides work for young boys at low wages,
 e.g., in auto repair shops. Girls are rarely seen working in public, but many are kept
 out of school to work in handicrafts, especially in rural areas. Turkey is participat-
 ing in the ILO's international program on the elimination of child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. In recent years it has done so annually. In July
 the nominal minimum wage in Turkish lira (TL) was increased by a pproximately
 67 percent over the year before. The monthly minimum wage rate (after taxes),
 which became effective September 1, is approximately $86 for workers older than
 16 and about $73 for workers under 16 at the exchange rate prevailing in Septem-
 ber.
 It would be difficult for a single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on
 the minimum wage without support from other sources. Most workers earn consid-
 erably more. Workers covered by the labor law who constitute about one-third of
 the total labor force, also receive a hot meal, daily food allowance; transportation
 to and from work; a fuel allowance; and other fringe benefits which, according to
 the Turkish employers' organization, make basic wages alone only about 37 percent
 of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek, although most unions have
 bargained for fewer hours. The law prescribes a weekly rest day. Labor law limits
 the number of overtime hours to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. The
 labor inspectorate of the Ministry of Labor effectively enforces wage and hour provi-
 sions in the unionized industrial, service, and government sectors.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. Law
 1475 allows for the shutdown of an operation if a five-man committee, which in-
 cludes safety inspectors, employee, and employer representatives, determines that
 the operation endangers workers' lives. In practice, financial constraints, limited
 safety awareness, carelessness and fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to
 occupational safety and health by workers and employers alike.
