 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliament (the Turkish
 Grand National Assembly-TBMM) which elects the president. In parliamentary elec-
 tions in October 1991, the center-right Correct Way Party (DYP) won a 27-percent
 plurality of the national vote, and DYP leader Suleyman Demirel formed a coalition
 Government with the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP) and became Prime
 Minister. The TBMM in 1989 elected Turgut Ozal as President.
 A stati of emergency declared in 1987, at the time martial law was rescinded,
 continued in 10 southeastern provinces where the Government faced increasing ter-
 rorist violence in its efforts to combat Kurdish separatist insurgency (see Section
 1.g.). Three adjacent provinces also remained under the authority of the regional
 governor for security purposes. The state of emergency allows civilian governors to
 exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including restrictions on the press and
 removal from the area of persons whose activities are believed inimical to public
 order. Government decrees renewed in November retained stringent security meas-
 ures in the state of emergency region.
 Turkey experienced an upsurge in terrorist violence in 1992. The efforts of the
 Turkish authorities to respond had a significant impact on the human rights situa-
 tion. The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma (gendarmerie) in
 the countryside are responsible for maintaining public order. Acknowledging pro-
 longed domestic and international concern about the actions of these security or-
 gans, the Government promised to establish a state of law based on human rights
 and to put an end to the use of torture by security forces. These objectives were
 not achieved during the Government's first year in office and incidents of abuse and
 excessive use of force by security personnel persisted thuroughout 1992. Total mili-
 tary expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Dis-
 armament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were $3.15 billion. The Govern-
 ment has undertaken efforts to restructure and reequip its military forces which
 will most likely result in long-term reductions but short-term increases to fund the
 transition.
 Turkey's economy has a strong free market orientation, although state-owned en-
 terprises still account for an estimated 38 percent of manufacturing. Approximately
 80 percent of Turkey's exports are industrial sector goods. Through November 1992,
 inflation was running at an annual rate of 68.6 percent, and annualized real eco-
 nomic growth of the economy through September was 5.8 percent.
 Turkey's primary human rights problem included torture of persons in police or
 security forces custody during periods of incommunicado detention and interroga-
 tion; political killings; "mystery killings;" disappearances; terrorist acts by armed
 separatists, leftwing extremists, fundamentalist Islamic extremists, and unknown
 persons; use of excessive force against noncombatants by security forces; and restric-
 tions on freedom of expression and association. While the 1991 Anti-Terror Law
 uashed capital sentences and nullified the so-called thought crimes articles of the
 ena Code, it introduced a broad and ambiguous definition of terrorism, under
 which not only alleged terrorists but ordinary citizens suspected of "threatening the
 indivisible unity of the State" by acts or ideas have been detained.
 In May Parliament passed a judicial reform package that gave all suspects the
 right  to  immediate   access  to  legal counsel and     shortened  permissible
 prearraignment detention periods to between 24 and 96 hours. President Ozal ve-
 toed the bill and returned it for reconsideration; after agreeing to exclude from its
 provisions suspects detained for offenses within the jurisdiction of state security
 courts Parliament passed a truncated version of the bill, the Criminal Trials Proce-
 dure Law (CMUK), in November. The CMUK does not apply to political offenders
 and those accused of terrorist acts. Western governments, parliaments, and non-
 governmental organizations publicly expressed disappointment at the Turkish Gov-
 ernment's slow pace in implementing reforms to curb torture, its failure in most
 
 
 932
 cases to try, convict, and punish those who engage in torture, and its failure to in-
 vestigate effectively "mystery killings" and disappearances.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrojudicial Killing.-The number of political murders and
 extrajudicial killings increased in 1992. In addition to deaths at the hands of gov-
 ernment authorities (including deaths in official custody and by forces combating
 terrorists) and those attributable to terrorist groups, there were a substantial num-
 ber of"mystery killings" that could not be attributed to rival factions and led to alle-
 gations by human rights groups, journalists, and other independent observers of se-
 curity forces' complicity.
 Both local and international human rights organizations reported that during
 1992 at least 15 persons died in suspicious circumstances while in official custody,
 some possibly as a result of torture. Police claimed five of the deaths, including
 those of three teenaged suspects, were "suicides." One teenaged youth was said to
 have hanged himself with a blindfold. A 16-year-old girl was reported to have shot
 herself in the back of the head with a gard's gun. Another alleged suicide was that
 of Nurettin Aslan, 55, detained as a gug smuggler, who died after plunging down
 an eighth-floor stairwell in Istanbul. In Batman, a 65-year-old detainee suspected
 of separatism died in similar circumstances. There is no public record indicating
 that the Government made a serious effort to investigate these cases.
 August police raids against Dev Sol (Devrimci Sol, the Revolutionary Left) safe
 houses in Ankara led to claims of extrajudicial execution. Witnesses alleged that five
 terrorists who died could not have escaped because barred windows would have
 forced them to leave by the building's single door. They charged that police delib-
 erately killed rather than captured the occupants. The Turkish Human Rights Asso-
 ciation (HRA) immediately acted to revoke the membership of Minister for Human
 Rights Mehmet Kahraman, who had accompanied police and observed the house
 raids. Other house raids in Istanbul and Ankara brought similar charges of
 extrajudicial killings. The Human Rights Foundation (HRF) reported instances in
 which police in Istanbul and elsewhere fatally shot innocent passers-by from their
 vehicles while in pursuit of suspected criminals and killed and injured civilians by
 using gunfire to break up peaceful demonstrations.
 One international human rights organization claimed that at least 100 unarmed
 civilians were killed by security forces ring on peaceful demonstrations or ran-
 domly firing on residential areas in "retaliation" for attacks by the Kurdish separat-
 ist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) (see Section 1.g.). The European Parliament
 said 205 people were killed during 1992 in extrajudicial executions carried out by
 security forces. Prime Minister Demirel maintained that the issue in Turkey was
 not a question of human rights abuse but rather the need to combat terrorists.
 The number of 'mystery killings" increased during 1992, especially in the south-
 east where unknown persons murdered more than 100 Kurdish men-journalists,
 local politicians, members of the People's Labor Party (HEP), and others identified
 as sympathetic to Kurdish causes. The Government failed to initiate any form of
 public inquiry and did not charge anyone in connection with the murders of these
 civilians. In August Prime Minister Demirel said that the State knew who had car-
 ried out some 55 unsolved murders but had not been able to capture and arrest the
 culprits. An international human rights organization reported two cases in which
 bystanders apprehended the alleged murderers and turned them over to officials;
 however, the individuals were never brought to trial. In July unknown assailants
 killed Razman Sat. Following his detention by police in March, Sat, in a complaint
 of abuse filed with the prosecutor, stated that he had been told, 'The next time, we
 will kill you in the street." Based on such incidents, some human rights organiza-
 tions and local Kurds charged that the Government acquiesces in or even sponsors
 murders of civilians.
 Siddik Tan, a HRA board member in Batman who survived a 1991 car-bombing,
 was shot dead by unidentified men in June 1992. Harbi Arman, an HEP board
 member who disappeared from Diyarbakir in January was found dead 4 days later;
 Vedat Fidanci, kidnaped from Silvan on August 24, was found dead 2 weeks later;
 an autopsy revealed he had been tortured.
 Twelve journalists, most of them working for leftist or pro-Kurdish newspapers,
 were assassinated in 1992. They included Musa Anter, a well-known Kurdish writer
 and journalist (a previously unknown nationalist group, Grey Arrow, claimed re-
 sponsibility); Halit Gungen the first reporter killed in 1992 who had written for the
 leftwing ilki Bine Dogr (Towards the Year 2000) about purported connections be-
 tween the Hizbullah Islamic terrorist group and a counterguerrilla force allegedly
 
 
 933
 linked to Turkish security forces; and Izzet Kezer, who worked for the mainstream
 Sabah newspaper and was shot and killed by security forces in Cizre after the vio-
 lence that followed the Kurdish New Year celebration. The Government has stated
 that it is investigating these murders.
 Political murders by terrorists occurred predominantly in the southeast re *on but
 also in the major metropolitan areas of Istanbul, Ankara, Izmir, and Adana.Victims
 of killings likely perpetrated by the PKK included state officials, paramilitary vil-
 lage guards (and sometimes members of their families), and persons suspected of
 being supporters of rightwing terrorist groups. In a 3-day period in September, the
 PKclaimed responsibility or the murders of two judicial officers whose homes in
 Diyarbakir province were raided at night, and for the executions of an SIP official,
 a village headman, and a prominent member of the Assyrian Christian community
 after forcing them from their cars at a daylight roadblock of a major highway near
 Mardin. During 1992 at least a dozen village guards were found hanged from utility
 poles with money stuffed into .their mouths and notes allegedly from the PKK in
 their pockets; several dozen more died when they were allegedly shot after being
 identified as village guards at roadblocks erected by PKK militants on highways in
 southeastern Turkey. PKX terrorists also made nighttime raids on homes of village
 guards, killing them and family members.
 Islamic fundamentalists, too, were targets of political murders, including the fol-
 lowing deaths: fatal shootings in Diyarbekir and Mardn of religious leaders known
 as Hizbullah sympathizers; a fatal shooting in Izmir of a pro-Hizbullah truckdriver
 just arrived from Nusaybin; and critical gunshot wounds to a Kiziltepe shopkeeper
 and lethal ones to his teenaged son, both known Hizbullah followers.
 Dev Sol, a violent Marxist-Leninist group, continued its urban terror campaign
 despite being weakened by police actions against it in 1991 and 1992. Among 41
 killings attributed to the group, Dev Sol claimed responsibility for assassinating a
 retired admiral in Istanbul in July and shooting dead two Istanbul policemen in
 April, as well as for launching rocket attacks against the U.S. Consulate General
 in Istanbul and various Turkish government installations, banks, and businesses.
 Islamic Jihad claimed they killed an Israeli diplomat in Ankara in May. Death
 threats signed Islamic Jihad-b (Fist of Islam) were received by 28 prominent Turks
 including parliamentarians, human rights monitors, and a doctor who assisted Iraqi
 Kurdish refugees.
 b. Disappearance.-Disappearances continued to occur in 1992 while those re-
 ported in 1991 (Huseyin Toraman, Muharrem Bozan, Yusuf Eristi, Haydar Altun)
 remained unsolved. Mehmet Demir, an HEP official in Siirt and allegedly a PKK
 sympathizer, vanished after leaving his shop on January 10. Eyewitnesses rprted
 he was forced into a minibus by security forces checking identity papers nearby; po-
 lice denied ever having had Demir in custody. No official investigation into the case
 was initiated.
 Security forces' complicity was alleged in several other disappearances, includin
 that of Hasan Gulunay, who vanished en route to a real estate office in Istanbul
 on July 20 and was reportedly taken to the Gayrettepe political police center. Au-
 thorities denied having detained Gulunay; however, his driver's license was found
 on the body of a man who died in detention in Artvin, several hundred miles from
 Istanbul.
 PICK terrorists continued frequent abductions of local villagers, teachers, religious
 figures, and officials in the southeast.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution outlaws torture, and Turkey is a signatory to the U.N. and Euro-
 pean Conventions against Torture. Nevertheless, despite the Government's public
 commitments, pervasive and credible reports of torture continue throughout Turkey.
 As Turkey has recognized the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights,
 Turks are ee         applicatns alleging violations of the Europen  Convention
 on Human Rights with the European Commission, and several have done so.
 Human rights attorneys and physicians who treat alleged victims of torture contend
 that most persons charged with or merely suspected of political crimes are tortured,
 and also contend that significant numbers of those detained for ordinary crimes are
 subjected to police brutality. This mistreatment continues to occur in police stations
 and Jandarma headquarters, largely during periods of incommunicado detention be-
 fore a suspect is brought before a court.
 Allegations of such abuses are not consistently investigated, and perpetrators
 rarely sanctioned. Credible reports from former detainees and professionals who re-
 habiitate alleged victims indicate that commonly employed methods include: high-
 pressure cold water hoses, electric shocks, beating of the genitalia, hanging by the
 arms, blindfolding, sleep deprivation, deprivation of clothing, systematic beatings,
 
 
 including beatings on the soles of the feet, vaginal and anal rape with truncheons
 and, in some instances gun barrels.
 For example, Nazli top, a nurse who was 3 months pregnant when she was de-
 tained in Istanbul in April, alleged she was tortured and raped with a truncheon
 during 10 days of detention before police released her without charge, calling it a
 case of mistaken identity. The Forensic Medicine Institute provided documentation
 of the injuries she suffered from beatings on the stomach and breasts, electric
 shocks to her genitals and abdomen, and suspension by her arms. Top filed criminal
 charges against her alleged torturers. The case is under review by the Istanbul pro-
 vincial administrative board which has the authority to determine whether to pros-
 ecute. The BRA provided hospital photos of third-degree burns on the feet, legs, and
 back of teenager Sevki Akinci, whom security forces allegedly compelled to stand in
 a fire until he collapsed.
 Other detainees give similar descriptions of methods em loyed by police. Huseyin
 Karavar said he was subjected to 9 days of torture at Urfa police headquarters
 where, despite being weak from surgery 2 weeks earlier he was repeatedly sub-
 jected to electric shocks and deprived of water and sleep. kamazan Savci, an appli-
 cant for treatment at the HRF's Istanbul Torture Rehabilitation Center, was de-
 tained for "looking suspicious. and alleged he was beaten, sub ected to hanging by
 the arms and electric shocks, and finally had a big toenail pulled out before being
 released without charge. An 80-year-old woman said Diyarbakir police beat her and
 fou r other family members when the police failed to find her grandson at home.
 Another detainee, picked up for a common crime and held for 48 hours at
 Istanbul's Kapikule station, alleged that police beat him, administered electric
 shocks, pulled out his moustache with a tweezers, raped him anally with a trun-
 cheon, and finally put him in a cell to be savaged by a German shepherd; he dis-
 played bruises and multiple bite marks at a press conference. The Turkish Medical
 Association condemned the torture of Dr. Huseyin Usta in Izmit and demanded that
 those reportedly responsible, including the Kocaeli province security director and
 governor, be punished. In September international human rights organizations al-
 leged torture in Adana of several persons, including a leftist publisher, who were
 forced to lie atop an ice block until their body temperatures fell dangerously low.
 Although the Government asserted that medical examinations occur once during
 detention and a second time before either arraignment or release, former detainees
 asserted that some government-ordered medical examinations took place too long
 after the event to allow any definitive findings, some examinations were cursory,
 and some were done in the presence of police officials.
 Credible sources in the human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate only about one-half of the formal complaints involving tor-
 ture and prosecute only a small fraction of those. According to government figures,
 in the first 8 months of 1992, 13 cases of mistreatment came before the courts in
 the area under the control of the Jandarma. As of November 1, the trials were con-
 tinuing. According to government figures through August, judicial authorities re-
 ceived 293 complaints, involving 523 suspects, containing allegations of torture or
 mistreatment by state officials; 306 public trials were launched against 409 sus-
 pects, and 180 suspects were convicted. Those found guilty have historically received
 light sentences. A trial charging 76 prison officers with beating 19 prisoners at
 Elazig type E prison in April began in September with the prosecutor seeking sen-
 tences of "no less than 6 months for the defendants, who include two prison direc-
 tors. In May, six police officers were brought to trial for the Novenber 1991 death
 in custody of Yucel Ozen. The court case is continuing. HRF reported that 16 deaths
 in detention occurred during 1992.
 No government reforms that could contribute to a reduction of abuse were effec-
 tively implemented, and the number of allegations of torture increased. As of the
 end of June, more than 90 torture claims had reached the press; some 500 applica-
 tions were filed with the parliamentary Human Rights Commission, but none had
 been investigated. The HRF's Torture Rehabilitation Centers in Ankara, Izmir, and
 Istanbul reported that their caseload of persons under treatment had increased from
 about 125 at the end of 1991 to 240 in September 1992.
 The new judicial reform law bans the use of confessions obtained by torture as
 evidence in courts but does not apply to defendants arrested under provisions of the
 Anti-Terror Law. Under the Anti-Terror Law, officials accused of torture or other
 mistreatment may stay on the job while under investigation and may only be sus-
 pended if convicted. Special provincial administrative boards, rather than regular
 courts, decide whether to prosecute such cases, and suspects' legal fees are paid by
 their employing agencies.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Except in limited circumstances, such as
 when a person is caught in the act of committing a crime, a prosecutor must issue
 
 
 935
 a detention order. The detention period for those charged with common or individual
 crimes is generally 24 hours, but persons detained because of individual crimes fall-
 ing under the provisions of the Anti-Terror Law must appear before a judge within
 48 hours. Those charged with any crime of a collective or conspiratorial nature may
 be detained Ip to 15 days. Access to counsel is not permitted during these periods
 of detention. In the 10 southeastern provinces under a state of emergency, incom-
 municado detention for collective crimes may last up to 30 days.
 The Turkish Criminal Procedure Code provides for an accused person to have the
 right of access to counsel "at any and every stage of the proceeding," and states that
 "a person under detention may at any time meet, confer with, and correspond with
 his attorney." In practice, however, such access is often denied.
 Under existing law, a detainee's next of kin must normally be notified "in the
 shortest time" after arrest. Once formally charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is
 arraigned before a judge and allowed to retain a lawyer. Once arraigned, the judge
 may release the accused on presentation of an appropriate guarantee, such as bail,
 or order him held in detention if the court determines that he is likely to flee or
 destroy evidence.
 According to Prime Ministry circulars (1989 and 1990) and a more recent Justice
 Ministry circular (1991), suspects detained for individual or collective crimes are to
 be allowed access to an attorney. Nevertheless, access to lawyers did not improve
 for most detainees, particularly those charged with collective or political crimes. Be-
 cause the final decision is left to the independent prosecutors, such access is rou-
 tinely denied, usually with an explanation that access would prejudice an ongoing
 investigation. The Justice and Interior Ministries have generally not intervened in
 prosecutors' decisions or police actions denying access. Although the Constitution
 specifies the right of detainees to request speedy conclusion of arraignment and
 trial, judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained indeterminately,
 sometimes for years. While many cases involve persons accused of violent crimes,
 it is not uncommon for those accused of nonviolent political crimes to be kept in cus-
 tody until the conclusion of their trials.
 Large-scale detentions occurred several times during 1992, especially in the south-
 east, including those of an estimated 800 to 1,000 persons detained after a protest
 march that blocked a highway near Nusaybin in June and many hundreds detained
 following Kurdish New -Year celebrations that turned violent in March in Cizre,
 Sirnak, and other southeastern towns. On September 28, 11 HEP members were
 taken into police custody for investigation into charges of advocating separatism in
 connection with alleged PKK propaganda heard during the last HEP convention.
 The State Security Court prosecutor gave the Ankara Security Directorate 10 days
 to obtain the testimony of the HEP executives; the HEP leaders were detained when
 they went to the Directorate to testify. A group of lawyers requested access but were
 not allowed to see them. HEP district officials as well as the founder were arrested.
 Most of those taken into custody in such mass detentions are released within 24
 hours with no charges riled. For example, in the Sirnak detentions in August, only
 about 30 out of 400 persons remained in custody and under investigation a week
 later (see Section 1.g.). Among arbitrary detentions during the year were those of
 16 people, including Musa Anter (see Section l.a.) and Ismail Besikci (see Section
 2.a.), who tried to lay a black wreath at the Press Council building in Istanbul in
 March and were taken into detention for 'making an unauthorized demonstration;"
 10 persons detained in Ankara for laying a black wreath at the Interior Ministry
 to protest Nazli Top's torture (see Section I.c.) and a 17-year-old detained for hang-
 ing a poster in Istanbul.
 There is no formal external exile, and Turkey's internal exile law was lifted in
 1987. In 1990 the Government gave authority to the southeast regional governor to
 "remove from the region," for a period not to exceed the duration of the state of
 emerency, citizens under his administration whose activities (whether voluntary or
 forced) "gve an impression that they are prone to disturb general security and pub-
 lic order. Although there were no known instances of this broad authority having
 been used in 1992, credible reports from human rights monitors and residents o
 towns in the southeast indicate that officials used "administrative transfers" of gov-
 ernment employees to remove persons thought "prone to disturb order."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is composed of general law
 courts, state security courts, and military courts. The majority of cases are pros-
 ecuted in the general law courts, which include the civil courts administrative
 courts, and criminal courts. Appeals are heard in either the High Court of Appeals
 or the Council of State. There is also a Constitutional Court and a Court of Cassa-
 tion. The Anti-Terror Law set up provincial administrative boards that decide
 whether cases involving state officials accused of misconduct should be heard in
 
 
 criminal court. Military courts, with their own appeals system, hear cases relating
 to infractions of military law by members of the armed forces.
 The Constitution declares that judges should be independent of the executive in
 the discharge of their duties and provides for the security of their tenure. The High
 Council of Judges and Prosecutors, appointed by the President and including the
 Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and oversees
 those of the lower courts. The Constitution also prohibits authorities from giving or-
 ders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial power. A September Na-
 tional Security Council statement appearing to urge the Constitutional Court to
 close the HEP drew press criticism or conflicting with constitutional strictures on
 this point. In general, the courts act independently of the executive, and in many
 instances courts dismiss charges brought by prosecutors.
 Defendants normally have the right to a public trial, and the Constitution states
 that no one shall be found guilty until proven guilty in a court of law. The law re-
 quires the Bar Association to provide free counsel to indigents who make such a re-
 quest to the court. Costs are borne by the Association. There is no jury system; all
 cases are decided by a judge or panel of judges. Defense lawyers generally have ac-
 cess to the independent prosecutor's files after arraignment and before the trial (a
 period of a few weeks). In cases involving violations of the Anti-Terror Law and
 some other laws, such as insulting the President, or "defaming Turkish citizenship,"
 access may be denied to files dealing with national intelligence or security matters.
 Eight state security courts, composed of five members-two civilian judges, one
 military judge, and two prosecutors--try defendants accused of crimes such as ter-
 ronsm, drug smuggling, membership in illegal organizations, and espousing or dis-
 seinating ideas prohibited by law as "damaging the indivisible unity of the State
 with its territory and nation. In 1992 these courts predominantly dealt with cases
 overed by the Anti-Terror Law. Their verdicts may be a p pealed only to a special-
 ized department of the High Court of Appeals dealing with crimes against state se-
 curity. Although these courts are defended on the grounds that they were estab-
 lished to try suspects of certain crimes more efficiently and speedily, in fact suspects
 accused of crimes under the security courts' jurisdictions are permitted by the Anti-
 Terror Law to be detained twice as long before arrainent as in other cases. State
 security courts may hold closed hearings and may amt testiony obtained during
 police interrogations without presence of counsel or under torture if it is corrobo-
 rated by other sources. According to government figures, 2,039 people were de-
 tained, and 533 people are serving sentences for violations of the Anti-Terror Law.
 The 16-year-old student "N A.," whose 4-month detention for having hung a "No
 to war" poster on a classroom wall was reported in 1991, stood trial in the Istanbul
 State Security Court and was sentenced in August to 6 months and 20 days in pris-
 on.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and pro-
 cedural rules of the Parliament, except that it may not consider "decrees with the
 force of law" issued during a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war. The
 Constitutional Court was examining the constitutionality of several provisions of the
 Anti-Terror Law but had rendered no decision by year's end. Figures provided by
 the Government indicate that 25 cases continued in the three martial law courts
 as of the end of September. A draft bill proposing to transfer all remaining martial
 law court cases to civil courts and end the operations of the martial law courts has
 been accepted by the National Defense Committee and forwarded for consideration
 to the Parliament.
 In part because mass detentions lead to enormous fluctuations in the number of
 detainees from day to day, human rights monitors hesitate to offer figures on the
 numbers of persons in custody who might reasonably be considered political pris-
 oners. In a January 1992 report, the HRF identified some 1,500 prisoners whom it
 considers political prisoners. In some state security court cases, the persons con-
 cerned were charged for attempting to exercise their right to freedom of speech, as-
 sociation, or some other internationally recognized human right.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. Government officials may enter a private resi-
 dence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance of a judicial
 warrant. These provisions are generally respected in practice; however, in 1992 the
 English-language Turkish Daily News published several complaints about violations
 of te rivacy of correspondence, especially correspondence coming into Turkey from
 abroad.
 In the 10 provinces under a state of emergency, the governor (or regional gov-
 ernor) may empower authorities to search residences or the premises of political
 parties, businesses, associations, and other organizations without a warrant. Au-
 
 
 937
 thorities in these provinces may also search, hold, or seize without warrant persons,
 letters, telegrams, and documents. Roadblocks are commonplace in the southeast,
 and security officials, in search of smugglers and terrorists, regularly search vehi-
 cles and travelers.
 According to newspaper reports, in several separate episodes during 1992, school
 officials forced teenaged girls who had been seen in the company of boyfriends to
 undergo virginity tests. Several of the girls so examined either attempted or success-
 fully committed suicide.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 jicts.-Since 1984 a continuing and increasingly violent insurgency by the separat-
 ist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) has claimed about 6,000 lives, more than a third
 of them during 1992. The PKK's cam psign of violence in southeast Turkey is di-
 rected bth against security forces and against civilians who the PKK believes co-
 operate with the State. In addition to casualties among security forces and mili-
 tants, there were at least 400 noncombatant deaths (as of September 30) as a result
 or actions by terrorist groups anid security forces.
 The PKK attacked rural Jandarma posts inflicting casualties, and also continued
 sporadic nighttime rocket attacks against urkish towns, ostensibly aiming at secu-
 rity establishments but in fact causing death, injury, or damage in surrounding
 neighborhoods. In a series of attacks on oil exploration sites and storage facilities,
 the PCK killed three petroleum engineers, wounded a fourth, and set fires. The
 PKK continued its attacks against the educational system, killing or threatening to
 kill teachers in many districts and burning down schools. The Government pledged
 to send 1,700 new teachers to the southeast for the opening of the 1992-93 school
 year, regional officials conceded, however, that some teachers had resigned rather
 than accept the assignment. The Government converted some local school buildings
 into security force barracks. As a result, schools again failed to operate during the
 1991-92 school year in most rural areas of southeastern Turkey.
 Government security forces on many occasions Irnd on homes of villagers sus-
 pected of harboring PKK terrorists, thereby causing an unknown number of casual-
 ties and destroying villagers' property, inluding livestock. In August, for example,
 security forces fired on homes and shops in the provincial town of Sirnak for 44
 hours, killing 14 civilians, causing heavy damage, and forcing more than 20,000
 residents of Sirnak and the immediate vicinity (virtually the entire population of the
 area) to leave their homes. Government officials alleged that a massive and heavily
 armed PICK force had attacked by night; however, the final death toll (4 security
 personnel and 14 civilians) and the rma arrest figure (37) east doubt on the accu-
 racy of that statement. Observers stated that government buildings, police head-
 quarters, and residential blocks were largely undamaged. Journalists and other out-
 siders were prohibited from entering Sir-nak for days after the incident, and the
 eventual reports of fact-finding delegations from various political parties and the
 HRA concluded that security forces had used excessive force there. The Governor
 of Sirnak said "there may have been some mistakes.d
 Celebrations of the Kurdish New Year also led to charges of indiscriminate firing
 and excessive use of force by security personnel in at least three cities in southeast-
 ern Turkey. A 22-hour gun "battle" in Sirnak left houses and shops .pckmarked by
 bullets, but no damage to government buildings. The New Year death toll was close
 to 100 (including the Sabah journalist mentioned in Section l.a.).
 Villagers complain that Jandarma and security team searches for PIK terrorists
 and for evidence of ocal support for them have resulted in expulsions, beatings, tor-
 ture, and arbitrary killing of innocent civilians. Examp le include a press report of
 a drunken shooting spree by security forces in a southeastern town near Bingol in
 which 16 civilians were reported wounded and much property destroyed. Area hos-
 pitals reportedly refused to treat the victims without certificates from the local
 andarma command onfirming that they were not terrorists. International human
 rights groups reported that following a September 29 raid by Jandarma and village
 guards on the village of ilisar, in which 4 persons were killed and approximately
 30 were arrested, 5 detainees subsequently were brought to the hospital in Cizre
 bloody and unable to walk without assistance; police prevented the doctor treating
 them from writing a medical report documenting their injuries. Human rights
 groups cited "purklish newspaper reports that, in apparcnt  etaliation" for an at-
 tack on a military vehicle by PKK guerillas in Kulp, security forces fired randomly,
 killing and wounding civilians, and detained scores of people. One civilian, Vahit
 Nurin, reportedly died after being doused with gasoline and set on tire.
 Government decree 430, codified in December 1990 and renewed in November, im-
 poses stringent security measures in the southeast. The regional governor may cen-
 sor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile (see Section 1.d.). The
 decree also provides for doubling the sentences of those convicted of cooperating
 
 
 with separatists. Informants and convicted persons who cooperate with the State
 are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences. Provisions in the decree that specifi.
 cally prohibited court challenges to the regional governor's administrative decisions
 were later amended to provide limited judicial review.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press. However, in 1992 there were significant limitations on these freedoms.
 The unsolved murders of 12 journalists (see Section l.a.) and the failure of the Gov-
 ernment to arrest even a single suspect drew international opprobrium as well as
 criticism inside Turkey. The International Press Institute (IPI) and the Committee
 to Protect Journalists (CPJ) sent fact-finding missions to interview Turkish officials
 and members of the press. [PI demanded an end to the murders and protective
 measures for journalists, while the CPJ's researcher stated publicly that he had
 seen evidence implicating Turkish security forces in at least some of the deaths. Ar-
 ticle 19, a publication of the International Center on Censorship, charged Turkey
 with "censorship by bullet" and claimed the killings ofjournalists nad become a sys-
 tematic campaign. In August Prime Minister Demirel and Interior Minister Sezgin
 made separate public statements claiming that the murdered correspondents were
 "not journalists as we know them" and indicated they were spokesmen for terrorists.
 The September 20 assassination of Musa Anter (see Section l.a.), the oldest and
 most prominent of those killed, led Turkish Press Council Chairman Oktay Aksi and
 many columnists to decry government inaction and to express fear that Anter's
 death was meant to intimidate other journalists.
 Prosecutions against authors, publications, and publishers continued under the
 provisions of the Anti-Terror Law. It provides that "written and oral propaganda
 * * * aiming at damaging the indivisible unity of the State of the Turkish epublic
 with its territory and nation (is) forbidden, regardless of the method, intention and
 ideas behind it." The law provides both for significant prison sentences and prohibi-
 tively expensive fines, and in practice both are imposed. A Zaman (Times) writer
 spent 2 months in prison for criticizing the armed forces; the editor of the journal
 Social Liberation was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment and a substantial fine
 for violating the "law to fight terrorism." A journalist for Flag of Labor served 10
 months for praising activities proscribed by the laws." As of June 30, some 41 mag-
 azines and newspapers had been confiscated by court decision, along with 12 books.
 Numerous issues of leftist and pro-Kurdish periodicals, including virtually every
 edition of Yeni Ulke, were ordered confiscated by state security court prosecutors
 throughout the year, and court proceedings were instituted against several editors
 and publishers. A correspondent for the daily, Ozgur Gundem (Free Agenda), was
 arrested and charged with giving aid and comfort to the PKK. Istanbul correspond-
 ents of Ozgur Gundem and Mucadele were detained for attending a meeting of
 squatters protesting urban renewal projects. The Kurdish weekly Azadi alleged offi-
 cial harassment, pointing to seizures of its papers, obstacles to publication,
 confiscation or prohibition of Azadi advertising posters, unusual difficulty in secur-
 ing distribution, police harassment of journalists, and the impoundment of the sec-
 ond edition of the paper on orders of the State Security Court in Istanbul. Many
 editions of Kurdish-onented periodicals were seized before they could be distributed
 nationally to newsstands.
 The Communist Party was legalized by the 1991 abolition of a law prohibiting ad-
 vocacy of a state based on class or race dominance. However, the Constitutional
 Court outlawed both the Turkish United Communist Party and the Socialist Party
 in 1992 (see Section 3). As of December 15, the Court was considering whether to
 close HEP for allegedly violating the law on political parties and the Constitution.
 On September 28, 11 members of the HEP executive board were taken into custody
 for interrogation and ordered detained under a prosecutor's order for 10 days. All
 but three were subsequently released. The three were charged under the Anti-Ter-
 ror Law with making separatist propaganda at HEP's September 19 convention. The
 chief prosecutor of the State Security Court sought on three separate occasions to
 have Parliament's Constitutional and Justice Commission lift the immunity of the
 22 HEP deputies. The lastest occasion, in November, was based on their participa-
 tion in the REP convention where some allegedly pro-PKK sloganeering was heard.
 The prosecutor's first two requests, in December 1991 and May 1992, were made
 so that their behavior at their November 1991 swearing-in ceremonies--one spoke
 in Kurdish; a second added a slogan to the oath; and all wore Kurdish colors--could
 be investigated under the treason provisions of Article 125 for endangering the in-
 te grity of the State.
 Lslative reforms in 1991 partially removed the ban on using the Kurdish lan-
 guage and prompted a surge of Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on
 
 
 939
 Kurdish subjects, although suppression continued. A weekly Kurdish-language
 news a r began publishing in Istanbul in early 1992. It published one issue before
 Istanbul police raided its premises in March, confiscated its files, and took an 18-
 year-old  e  in  custody on suspicion of disseminating separatist propaganda. The
 _oprietor thereafter abandoned the enterprise. One Kurdish-language newspaper,
 publishing currently. Kurdish-language broadcasts are still illegal.
 Sociologist and writer Dr. Ismail Besikci, who has spent yesrs in Turkish jails and
 who was on trial in 1991 for "defaming Turkish citizenship and the Turkish Repub-
 lic," was acquitted. Besikci's pro-Kurdi~sh views, however, ontinued to prompt state
 security court prosecutors to open proceedings against his works; he spent much of
 1992 in and out of jails and courtrooms defending his writings. One of his con-
 fiscated books had been published in 1976 and had never been previously con-
 fiscated or labeled separatist propaganda. Besikci and his publisher face charges in
 30 separate cases. His publisher was also sentenced to several major fines.
 Journalists someties face harassment and mistreatment by police and other au-
 thorities. In 1992 journalists attempting to enter Diyarbakir on the anniversary of
 Vedat Aydin's death were taken from their vehicles and beaten by police. Many
 southeastern correspondents, especially for the pro-Kurdish press, alleged they were
 beaten and tortured in police stations during periods of detention. An American
 freelance journalist detained by security forces at a roadblock near Diyarbakir on
 October 2 had her luggage searched and her notes seized. After a translator arrived
 and assured security forces that the notes contained no proseparatist information,
 the journalist was released unharmed and her belongings returned.
 The public prosecutors' aggressive application of the law also affects the content
 of Turkey's press. Publications must designate a "responsible editor" who is legally
 accountable for a publication's contents. Many have faced repeated criminal proceed-
 ings. Gunes newspaper correspondent Deniz Teztel, the only journalist reported con-
 fined at the end of 1991, was released in January 1992. Her trial in Ankara State
 Security Court on charges of "attempting to destroy the constitutional order through
 violence," continued as of November 30. The editor of the rightwing monthly Son
 Mesaj was indicted by the Istanbul State Security Court because of two inflamatory
 articles about Jews which the court says "attempt to provoke people into racial and
 religious discrimination."
 Decree 430 requires self-censorship on all news reporting from or about the south-
 east and gives the Interior Ministry the authority to ban, upon the regional gov-
 ernor's proposal, the distribution of any news regarded as misrepresenting events
 in the region. It provides for the suspension of operations for 10 days for a first of-
 fense and30 days for subsequent offenses if a government warning is not obeyed.
 The Turkish press demonstrated its fidelity to the self-censorship strictures in mid-
 October when all mainstream dailies ignored Ozgur Gundem's photo and print cov-
 erage of an alleged PKK captive being dragged behind a Turkish tank. The Govern-
 ment claimed that security forces had dragged a corpse they suspected was
 boobytrapped. The Government nonetheless promised to investigate the incident.
 There is limited independent reporting on southeastern Turkey. After the Turkish
 Daily News published a series on problems in the southeast, its editor received a
 telephone call from the chief of the Turkish General Staff suggesting that the paper
 should focus equally on deaths of members of the security forces. The Criminal Code
 provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the Parliament, and the
 army," ranging from a 3-year minimum sentence for insulting the President to a 6-
 year maximum for insulting the other branches of government. Although judges
 have generally been rigorous in examining evidence and have dismissed many
 charges brought under these laws, police still detain people and prosecutors still
 charge them, resulting in Iong and expensive trials in many cases. In September a
 case was brought against the Turkish Daily News for calling President Ozal "cheeky
 and irresponsible" in a March editorial; the public prosecutor is seeking a term of
 5 years' imprisonment and a maximum fine or the writer and the "responsible edi-
 tor."
 Turkish radio and television (TAT) is a government monopoly. Opposition figures
 assert that its broadcasts have a progovernment bias, despite coverage of opposition
 leaders and their parties. A government commission generally apportions party ac-
 cess to television and radio during election and referendum campaigns based on the
 proportion of parliamentary seats that each party holds. Since 1991 Turkish viewers
 withaccess to cable facilities or satellite dishes have been able to watch foreign
 broadcasts, including several Turkish-language private channels. Although legisla-
 tion authorizing their broadcasts has not been completed, private radio stations
 have begun operating in Turkey as well.
 While Culture Minister Fikri Saglar lifted bans against all formerly prohibited
 books at the end of 1991, the Education Ministry continued to make recommenda-
 
 
 tions on the "utility" of books proposed for school curriculums or libraries. Books de-
 clared "without utility" are not allowed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.--Peaceful assemblies are   r-
 mitted with prior notification to government authorities but may be restricted to
 designated sites. Permission may be denied if the authorities believe the assembly
 (for example, a May Day rally or the laying of a black wreath at a government
 building) is likely to disrupt public order. Some 300 people tried to demonstrate in
 Igdir in protest against Turkish military operations in northern Iraq. Security forces
 forcibly broke it up, and one demonstrator died.
 The law prohibits associations and labor unions from having ties to political par-
 ties or engaging in political activities. Police raided the Istanbul HRA and closed
 some HRA branches in various cities in Turkey during 1992. Police also raided of-
 fices of the Patriotic Women's Association, the Kartal Culture and Art Association,
 the Unemployed Persons Association, and the Freedom Association, confiscating doc-
 uments and padlocking premises.
 Associations must submit their charters for government approval, which is a
 lengthy and cumbersome process. The Constitution and the law governing political
 parties proscribe student and faculty involvement in political activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular State
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship (in specifically designated
 places of worship), and private dissemination of one's religious ideas. Turkey's popu-
 lation is 99 percent Muslim. Turkish law states that relig ous services can take
 place only in designated places of worship. In Adana, Tur'ey's fourth largest city
 with a population exceeding 1 million, the only approved sites are mosques, one
 Jewish synagogue, and onegRoman Catholic church. A Protestant expatriate group
 has petitioned to have a house of worship designated for its use; the petition is
 under consideration in Ankara. Although Turkey is a secular State, Islamic religious
 instruction in state schools is compulsory for Muslims. Turkish law exempts non-
 Muslims from Muslim religious instruction upon written verification of their non-
 Muslim background, although students who wish to attend may do so with parental
 consent. The Alawi Muslim minority expressed interest in Alawi religious instruc-
 tion in schools.
 Many prosecutors view proselytism and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamic fundamentalists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when
 their activities are deemed to have political overtones. However, courts dismissed
 virtually all charges brought against Islamic fundamentalists and Turkish and for-
 eign Christians during the year. Police also continued their surveillance and deten-
 tion of evangelical Christians refused to renew some residence permits and ex-
 pelled some from the country. he Foreign Ministry asserts that such expulsions are
 administrative measures taken against activities harmful and disturbing to public
 order. Some such detainees denied having broken Turkish laws, and almost all as-
 serted they were never granted even an administrative hearing before actions were
 taken against them. One American citizen successfully fought the revocation of his
 residence permit through the Turkish courts in 1992 and was granted a new resi-
 dence permit.
 Among Turkey's non-Muslim religious groups, there are some 60,000 Armenians,
 25,000 Jews, 20,000 Syriac Christians, 18,000 Arab Orthodox, 4,000 Greek Ortho-
 dox, and several thousand Roman Catholics and Chaldean Christians. Most reli-
 gious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. The State must approve the operation
 of churches, monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations
 such as hospitals and orphanages. The Jewish community reported no problems in
 1992, and the Government contributed to commemoration of the 500th anniversary
 of Turkey's receiving Jews expelled from Spain.
 Armenian and Greek churches and their affiliated operations are subject to care-
 ful official monitoring of their activities. The curriculums in their schools are tightly
 controlled by the Ministry of Education. Greek and Armenian theological seminaries
 in Turkey, ordered closed in 1971, have not been allowed to reopen. Armenian and
 Greek churches claimed that legal and bureaucratic regulations hindered their abil-
 ity to manage or dispose of their considerable real estate holdings.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation deter repairs to some re-
 ligious facilities. Under Turkish law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (i.e.,
 due to prolonged absence of clergy or of lay persons to staff local religious councils)
 revert to government possession. Some non-Muslim minorities, particularly the
 Greek Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, Armenians and Jews, are faced with the
 danger of losing their houses of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Turkish citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey
 and freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to
 
 
 leave may be restricted only on account of the national economic situation, civic obli.
 gations (i.e., military service), or criminal investigation or prosecution. Each Turkish
 citizen must pay a departure tax of $100 for every departure from the country.
 Travel in the southeast is sometimes restricted for security reasons. Roadblocks, set
 up by both the PKK and security forces, seriously impede travel in the regon.
 Turkey sheltered more than half a million Kurds and other Iraqis w o fled the
 Gulf War. The Government has since cooperated with the efforts of 1"Provide Com-
 fort II" to establish and maintain a secure zone in northern Iraq for returning refu.
 gees. Turkey still hosts some 3,500 refugees who did not feel they could return to
 Iraq. An additional 4,000 Iraqi refugees granted residence permits by the Turkish
 Government in 1991, are living indepenaently in Turkey. Virtually all of the 60,000
 Iraqi Kurdish refugees who arrived in 1988 achieved either repatriation to Iraq or
 resettlement in third countries by October 1992, according to the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The Government does not recognize the
 Iraqi Kurds' claims to refugee .status but in line with historic practice has agreed
 not to return them to Iraq.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Turkish citizens have the right and ability to change their government peacefully.
 Turkey has a multiparty parliamentary system, in which elections are held at least
 every 5 years on the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for all citizens aged 20
 and over. At year's end, 20 political parties were operating in Turkey. Several politi-
 cal parties banned after the 1980 military takeover benefited from a 1992 Constitu-
 tional Court decision ratifying legislation permitting them to reorganize and to re-
 sume custody of building and assets that had belonged to them before their closure.
 The Turkish United Communist party, which had been decriminalized in 1991, was
 outlawed in 1992 along with the Socialist Party on grounds that they violated Arti-
 cle 14 of the Constitution which prohibits "establishing the hegemony of one social
 class over others."
 The Grand National Assembly (Parliament) elects the President as Head of State
 every 7 years as it did in 1989. The 1991 parliamentary elections gave the Correct
 Way Party (DYP) a plurality of 27 percent of the vote and 178 seats in the 450-
 member unicameral Parliament. The DYP formed a coalition with the Social Demo-
 cratic Populist Party (SHIP) to achieve a parliamentary majority. To prevent political
 fragmentation, seats are allocated on a weighted proprtionalrepresentation basis
 in which parties that poll less than 10 percent of the total national vote are ex-
 cluded. The 1991 elections brought five parties into Parliament; however, part
 alignments have since changed, and nine parties are now represented, alonside al-
 most two dozen independent deputies, who resigned from the parties under whose
 banners they won election.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and women; however,
 only 8 women, representing 3 parties, were elected to the 450-seat Parliament in
 1991. There are two women Cabinet ministers. Members of minorities Muslim and
 non-Muslim, face no legal limitations on political participation. The HEP was har-
 assed by authorities during the year (see also Section 2.a.) and was under threat
 of being banned by the Constitutional Court.
 Section 4. GovernmentaL Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association (HRA), officially approved in 1987,
 has branches in 50 provincial capitals, including branches in Adana and Konya,
 which at year's end were closed pending court cases against them. It claims a mem-
 bership of about 20,000. In 1990 the HR established its companion Human Rights
 Foundation (HRF) which, besides operating torture rehabilitation centers in Ankara,
 Izmir, and Istanbul, serves as a clearinghouse for information on human rights.
 Some government officials, including some prosecutors and  lice, punitively apply
 the various laws that prmit restrictions of their activities. For example, the Gov-
 ernment contended that HRA statements on some subjects violated the law on asso-
 ciations which restricts political activities to political parties. It ordered various
 branches of the HRA closed for periods of weeks or months. The Sirnak HRA office
 was closed by order of the Governor, and most of its personnel were either detained
 (including its president) or left the area. The Nusaybin  RA was closed in June and
 its bard indicted. Police have also raided HRA branches in Istanbul, Adana,
 Diyarbakir, and elsewhere and confiscated written materials.
 The Adana HRA president said he and his bard are under surveillance and have
 received colice threats for filing complaints against alleged torturers. Many HRA
 branch ofcers have spent time in detention or under arrest, and Diyarbakir board
 
 
 942
 member Siddik Tan was assassinated in June (see Section L.a.). The president of
 the Istanbul chapter of the HRA was unable to accept an invitation to visit the
 United States during 1992 because of ongoing police investigations and pending
 prosecutions against the organization. Many of these investigations and prosecu-
 tions, as well as many arrests of human rights monitors, stemmed from alleged vio-
 lations of the law on associations or the holding of illegal demonstrations.
 Parliament's multiparty Human Rights Commission, authorized in 1990 and oper-
 ative in 1991, failed to take any action, although it supposedly has the authority
 to oversee Turkey's compliance with the human rights provisions of Turkish law and
 of international agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, to investigate alleged
 abuses, and to prepare reports. After the Commission s chairman resigned in April,
 the Commission did not choose a successor until late November, and was, in effect,
 inactive through that month. Even its announced investigations (the 1991 dis-
 appearance of lHuseyin Toraman, the circumstances surrounding New Year's vio-
 lence in the southeast, and individual complaints) yielded no known results. While
 representatives of diplomatic missions or foreign private organizations who wish to
 monitor the state of human rights in Turkey are free to speak with private citizens,
 official visitors to the southeast may be followed by security police, and the presence
 of security officials may have an intimidating effect upon those interviewed. Access
 to government officials or facilities at times may be restricted. However, for the first
 time Helsinki Watch visitors to Turkey obtained every appointment they requested
 as well as access to detention facilities.
 In April and September, the European Parliament's human rights group sent fact-
 finding missions to southeastern Turkey. The September report charged that "state
 terrorism * * * occurs so often and on such a scale that it must be sanctioned at
 the highest level" and recommended a UNHCR mission to southeast Turkey under
 the Rapporteur on Torture and an investigation into recent disappearances there by
 the UN. Working Party on Enforced and Involuntary Disappearances.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular State, regards all Turkish citi-
 zens as equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds.
 The Government officially recognizes only those minorities mentioned in the Treaty
 of Lausanne (1923), which guarantees the rights of Turkey's non-Muslim religious
 minorities.
 Ethnic and religious minorities face difficulties in maintaining distinct separate
 identities within Turkish society. Some Alawis allege informal discrimination, in the
 form of failure to include any Alawi doctrines or beliefs in religious instruction
 classes and limits on university entrance and professional advancement. Alawis, an
 offshoot of Shi'ite Islam, total 12 to 20 million adherents in Turkey.
 Millions of Turkish Kurds who were long-term residents in industrialized cities
 in western Turkey are by and large fully integrated into the political, economic, and
 social life of the nation. However, some Kurdish-owned houses and shops in
 Balikesir, Kusadasi, and Alanya were attacked after funerals for soldiers kilred in
 southeastern Turkey. The Kurds who are currently migrating westward bring with
 them their Kurdish cultural identity from the villages of the east. Most parliamen-
 tary representatives from southeastern Turkey are ethnic Kurds, but representa-
 tives of Kurdish ethnic origin have been elected from districts far removed from the
 southeast. A number of Cabinet ministers, as well as other government officials,
 claim an ethnic Kurdish background.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communication in Kurdish
 legalized some spoken and printed Kurdish communications, except for broadcast-
 ing. Court proceedings (and all government functions, including public education)
 continued to be conducted in Turkish, and the varying quality of court-provided
 translators disadvantages Kurdish-speaking defendants. Moreover, materials deal-
 ing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic identity continued to be subject to
 confiscation and prosecution under the "indivisible unity of the State" provisions of
 the Anti-Terror Law. Foreign publications were confiscated for criticizing govern-
 ment policy towards the Kurds. There was at least one reported instance in which
 a judge denied Turkish citizens of Kurdish origin the right to give their child a
 Kurdish name.
 The Gypsy population is extremely small, and no reported incidents of public or
 government harassment directed against a Gypsy tribe occurred during 1992.
 The Greek community complained of harassment by police, restrictions on free-
 dom of expression and religion, discrimination in education involving teachers,
 books, and curriculum, limitations on the right to control their charitable institu-
 tions, and the denial of their ethnic identity. The Government denied allegations by
 members of the Greek minority that they must refer to themselves as C 'ristian
 
 
 943
 Orthodox Greek." The Government approves teacher candidates and new textbooks
 in step with the reciprocal approval by the Greek Government for the Turkish mi-
 nority in Thrace.
 Although women are improving their situation in Turkish society, including the
 professions, business, and civil service, they continue to face discrimination to vary-
 ing degrees. Many traditional values prevent many women from entering some ca-
 reer fields. Turkey's first female vali (governor) was appointed in 1991. The Con-
 stitution prohibits women from engaging in physically demanding jobs and from
 working at night. Applicable laws are effectively enforced.
 Traditional family values in rural Turkey piace a greater emphasis on advanced
 education for sons than for daughters. Primary education reached all children in
 1992, but attendance levels thereafter declined dramatically for females. In 1992
 Parliament passed a law increasing universal mandatory education from 6 to 8
 years. Women comprise about 36 percent of the paid Turkish work force and gen-
 erally receive equal pay for equal work. Although seldom enforced, some laws that
 discriminate against women remain on the books. For example, the husband deter-
 mines the legal domicile of the family, and a married woman needs her husband's
 consent to be a legal partner in a company.
 Spousal abuse is still considered an extremely private matter, although interest
 in the problem is growing. The police do not normally intervene in domestic dis-
 putes. Turks of either sex may file civil or criminal charges but rarely do. Turkish
 aw and courts make no discrimination between the sexes in laws concerning vio-
 lence or abuse. In July the Purple Roof Foundation (which runs homes for battered
 women) opened a "helo shelter" telephone line; it attracted 3,300 callers in its first
 3 months, even under Transportation Ministry regulations restricting its operating
 hours to weekdays. The Government also has opened shelters in major cities for
 abused women (and their children) who have left their homes.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Most workers have the right to associate freely and
 form representative unions. Exceptions are schoolteachers (both public and private),
 civil servants, the police, and military personnel. Upon taking office in November
 1991, the Government of Prime Minister Demirel declared, as part of its pledge to
 bring Turkish labor legislation into conformity with the standards of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO), its intention to grant trade union rights to civil
 servants. Implementation requires a three-step process: parliamentary ratification
 of ILO Conventions 87 on freedom of association and 151 on freedom of association
 in the public sector, amendment of the relevant article of the Constitution; and revi-
 sion of the law on trade unions.
 In practice the Government has taken a cautious step-by-step approach to fulfill-
 ing this commitment. On November 26 Parliament ratified seven 0ILO conventions,
 including Conventions 87 and 151 as well as Convention 59 on minimum age of em-
 ployment in industry. President Ozal subsequently vetoed the ratification of ILO
 Convention 158 on the termination of employment at the behest of the employer.
 Permission for civil servants to form trade unions and for unions to engage in politi-
 cal activity will require amendments to the Constitution-a procedure further com-
 plicated by the need to gain support among the opposition parties u order to secure
 the requisite two-thirds majority.
 The law states that unions and confederations may be founded without prior au-
 thorization based on a petition to the governor of the province where the union's
 headquarters are to be located. Although unions are independent of the Government
 and political parties they must have government permission to hold meetings or
 rallies and must alfow police to attend conventions and record the proceedings.
 Union officers may serve no more than eight consecutive 3-year terms in a given
 union position. The Constitution requires candidates for union office to have worked
 10 years in the industry represented by the union.
 Unions and their officers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly
 affecting members' economic-and social interests, but the Constitution prohibits any
 union role in party politics (such as organic or financial connections with any politi-
 cal party or other association). In practice, unions have been able to convey clearly
 in election and referendum campaigns their support for, or opposition to, given polit-
 ical parties and government policies. Prosecutors may request labor courts to order
 a trade union or confederation into liquidation based on alleged violation of specific
 legal norms. The Government, however, may not summarily dissolve a union.
 After the 1980 military coup, the Turkish Confederation of Revolutionary Workers
 Unions (DISK) was suspended, its property and assets seized, and some 1,500 of its
 active members arrested. More than 260 of the latter were subsequently convicted
 of subversion. Following the repeal of the "thought crimes" provisions of the Penal
 
 
 944
 Code, the Military Court of Appeals in July 1991 lifted the 11-year ban on DISK
 activity, and DISK held national conventions to amend its bylaws and elect officers
 in December 1991 and January 1992. In March after a lengthy legal battle, the
 Constitutional Court ordered the return to DISIK of financial assets and property
 (estimated to be worth nearly $300 million). Complete recovery of these assets and
 property must await the passage of legislation.
 The right to strike, while guaranteed in the Constitution, is partially restricted.
 For example, workers engaged in the protection of life and property and those in
 the petroleum industry, sanitation services, national defense, and education do not
 have the right to strike. Collective bargaining is required before a strike. The law
 specifies the series of steps a union must take before it may strike or an employer
 may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. In sectors
 in which strikes are prohibited disputes are resolved through binding arbitration.
 A party that fails to comply with these steps forfeits its rights. The struck employer
 may respond with a lockout but is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using
 administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done by strikers. Unions are for-
 bidden to engage in secondary (solidarity), wildcat, or general strikes. The Govern-
 ment also has the statutory power to suspend strikes for 60 days for reasons of na-
 tional security or public health and safety. Unions may petition the Council of State
 to lift such a suspension, but if this appeal fails the strike is subject to compulsory
 arbitration at the end of the 60-day period.
 The Government suspended two strikes during 1992: those by 10,600 state agri-
 cultural workers and by 55,000 municipal employees. The Agrcultural Workers
 Union was briefly successful in getting the Council of State to ift the suspension,
 but after a government reappeal the Council accepted the Government's argument,
 and the strike was once again suspended. The municipal workers' strike was sus-
 pended after 2 weeks, when the Government determined that the lack of garbage
 collection in midsummer was a major public health hazard. Some 92 strikes, involv-
 ing about 61,000 workers, took place in the first 10 months of the year. All were
 peaceful, and most resulted in sizable wage and benefit settlements.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bodies, but not affiliations with organizations hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions approved DISK as an affiliate in December. Turk-Is is a longstanding mem-
 ber.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at a given work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10-percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 unions, and particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that rep-
 resents nearly 80 percent of organized labor in Turkey. The ILO has called on Tur-
 key to rescind this 10-percnt rule, and the recently rlegalized DISK, which is seri-
 ouslydisadvantaged by it, raised the issue with the ILO in 1992. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however, and the
 Government has not announced any plans to repeal it. Antiunion discrimination by
 employers is prohibited by law. An effective means for resolving complaints of such
 discrimination exists within the system of labor courts.
 Union organizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the duty-free export
 processing zones at Antalya, Istanbul, Izmir, and Mersin. Workers in those zones,
 however, are not allowed to strike during the first 10 years of operation. Until then,
 settlements not otherwise reached will be determined by binding arbitration.
 In a report issued in March, the ILO reiterated that current Turkish labor legisla-
 tion was incompatible with freedom of association on five specific points: the prohi-
 bition on political activity by trade unions; restrictions on the right to strike; the
 ban on strikes by teachers; the use of compulsory arbitration to end strikes sus-
 pended for reasons of national security or public health and safety; and the denial
 of collective bargaining rights to unions with insufficient membership.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 the Constitution and statutes and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution and labor laws
 forbid employment of children younger than 15, with the exception that those aged
 13 and 14 may engage in light part-time work if enrolled in school or vocational
 training. The Constitution also prohibits children from engaging in physically de-
 manding jobs, such as underground mining, and from working at night. The laws
 are effectively enforced by the Ministry of Labor only in the organized industrial
 sector.
 
 
 In practice, many children work because families frequently need the supple-
 mentar income. There is an informal and essentially unsupervised apprenticeship
 stem in which young boys work at low wages, e.g., in auto repair shops, in the
 hope of learning a trade. Girls are rarely seen working in PUblic, but many are kept
 out of school to work in indoor handicrafs, especially in rural areas.
 In 1992 the Government took steps to improve the enforcement of existing laws
 aginst child labor. With technical assistance from the ILO, it established a child
 lator unit within the Ministry of Labor tasked with training labor inspectors for bet-
 ter enforcement of child labor laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 mimimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. I.n recnt years it has done so annually. On July
 21, the minimum wage was increased by 81percent over the year before. Inflation
 increased about 67 percent during the same period.
 Without support from other sources, it would be diffwi.lt for a single worker, and
 impossible for a family, to live on the minimum wage. Most workers earn consider-
 aby more. In addition to wages, workers covered by the labor law, who constitute
 about one-third of the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or food allowance
 daily; transportation to and from work; a fuel allowance; and other fringe benefits
 which, according to the Turkish employers' organization, makes basic wages alone
 only about 34 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek, although most unions have
 bargained for fewer hours in the workweek. Labor law limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. The labor inspectorate of
 the Ministry of Labor in the unionized industrial, service, and government sectors
 effectively enforce wage and hour provisions.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. In prac.
 tice, financial constraints, limited safety awareness, carelessness, and fatalistic atti-
 tudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and health by workers and em-
 ployers alike. A breakdown of safety procedures on March 3 resulted in the worst
 mining[ disaster in Turkish history; 263 workers died in a gas explosion at the Kozlu
 coal mine, near Zonguldak.
