TURKEY
The 1991 report on Turkey is one of the State Department's more accurate and comprehensive accounts of the Turkish human rights situation. Relying in part on information accumulated by the Turkish Human Rights Association, the report identifies and discusses in some detail most of Turkey's significant human rights problems, including the torture of persons in police custody, the failure of the government to prosecute and convict alleged torturers, and the absence of the right of detained persons to have an attorney present during interrogation.
Nevertheless, the report continues to understate the pervasiveness of Turkey's human rights problems in southeastern Turkey, that area of the country in which Turkey's Kurdish minority resides and in which most of the more egregious human rights violations occur. It neglects to discuss, for example, the persecution of domestic human rights monitors in southeastern Turkey, the harassment, detention and torture of journalists reporting about or from the southeast, and the widespread detention of civilians from towns near the Syrian border by security forces. Most importantly, however, the report fails to note the alarming increase in extrajudicial executions in southeastern Turkey in which the Turkish government was implicated.
This year's report correctly notes that the torture of those detained by police prior to their arrest remains widespread. The report mentions by name individuals who claimed to have been tortured, along with a description of the treatment to which they were subject. In addition, unlike its predecessor reports, it notes that 18 persons died while in police custody, mentions some of the dead by name and discusses the circumstances of their deaths.
The report does not, however, contain a complete list of the types of torture and maltreatment utilized by the Turkish police. According to the Turkish Human Rights Association (HRA), forms of torture and maltreatment include not only those mentioned in the report, but also attempted rape, rape, truncheons forced into the vagina or anus, sleep deprivation, denial of food and/or water, being dragged on the
375
Turkey
ground, being placed in a tire and beaten, sleeping on a wet floor, having someone spit into one's mouth, denial of permission to use a toilet and hair-pulling or -burning.
Moreover, the report fails to emphasize that torture was not confined to adults. In 1991, there were credible reports of the torture of children, including some as young as 11 and 12. For example, three girls, ages 12 and 13, told the Diyarbakir branch of the HRA on May 15 that after having become lost in the mountainous region of Savur, they were taken to the Mardin Gendarmerie Headquarters where they were accused of having been on their way to join terrorists. One of the girls reported that she had been blindfolded, beaten with wooden sticks and truncheons and threatened with rape.
As the report accurately states, judicial authorities fi'equently fail to initiate investigations into incidents of alleged torture, the prosecution of alleged torturers is sporadic, the number of cases being prosecuted has declined and conviction is rare. According to former Minister of the Interior, Abdulkadir Akus, only 30 of the 382 security officers tried in the past 10 years on charges of inflicting torture were convicted. The report also correctly states that convicted police officers have historically received light sentences.
The report, however, fails to mention that the new Anti-Terror Law makes prosecution of alleged torturers even more difficult. By so doing, it places in question the government's willingness to bring torturers to justice, an obligation imposed upon Turkey by the United Nations Convention Against Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, a treaty which Turkey has ratified.
The Anti-Terror Law provides that unless the victim dies in custody, members of the Turkish government's security service may not be prosecuted for torture without prior authorization from the provincial administrative councils. According to Amnesty International, members of the administrative councils generally have no legal training and are often suspected of being under the influence of the local security forces. The law further provides that alleged torturers are to be tried before State
376
Turkey
Security Courts, the very courts whose prosecutors supervise the interrogations from which the torture allegations arise.
Since the law was passed, individuals who have been tortured have failed to lodge formal complaints, discouraged by the law's procedural requirements, and a number of courts have refused to continue the prosecution of alleged torturers. Citing to the Anti-Terror Law, these courts have transferred the cases to the administrative councils for review. A court in Ankara, for example, decided to suspend the trial of five government officials believed to have tortured Siddil Bilgin to death in 1985. Although one of the accused was said to have confessed to the crime, the court refused to proceed without authorization from the provincial administrative council.
The report also fails to discuss with sufficient detail other questionable provisions of the Anti-Terror Law, the manner in which they have been enforced or implemented, and the fact that they may violate the international human rights conventions to which Turkey is a party. For example, although the report notes that the law defines terrorism broadly, ambiguously and in such a manner that invites abuse of power by security forces, it fails to note the types of activities for which some individuals are being prosecuted under the law.
The law prohibits acts defined as "terrorist" acts. A terrorist act is "any kind of action conducted by one or several persons belonging to an organization with the aim of changing the characteristics of the Republic as specified in the Constitution, the political, legal, social, secular and economic system." Thus, anyone advocating non-violent economic or social change can be charged with and prosecuted for engaging in terrorism. Indeed, international human rights monitors, including Helsinki Watch, have received reports of people charged for hanging political posters, holding meetings of relatives of prisoners and publishing articles or books concerning the Kurdish issue.
Although the report discusses that section of the law that forbids "written and oral propaganda . . . aimed at damaging the indivisible unity of the State of Turkey," it fails to note that this section can be and
377
Turkey
has been used to detain people for exercising their right to freedom of expression, even when not advocating or participating in violence. For example, Ismail Besikci, whose arrest in connection with the publication of his book, State Terror in the Middle East, is mentioned in the report, was charged under this provision of the Anti-Terror Law. The prosecution of individuals such as Mr. Besikci is in contravention of Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which safeguards freedom of expression and to which Turkey is a party.
Lastly, the report fails to discuss those sections of the law pertaining to the detention of individuals convicted under the law or awaiting trial for having violated the law. The Anti-Terror Law provides that such individuals are to be detained in one- or three-person cells in specially built prison facilities and prohibited from having open visits or contact with other prisoners. The dangers of isolation to prisoners' physical and mental well-being have been recognized by penal experts and the European Commission of Human Rights. Moreover, detention under such circumstances may amount to cruel and inhuman treatment, in violation of the UN Convention Against Torture.
The first of these special penal institutions was constructed at Eskisehir. As the report accurately notes, this facility was closed after inmates reported that they had been tortured and their reports were verified by independent medical examiners. Prior to its closure, one of the prisoners held at Eskisehir wrote to Amnesty International that:
The other dangerous thing about this place is that none of the other prisoners would have any idea if you were strangled in the corner of your cell. We should not be surprised if people were strangled and then said to have "conmiitted suicide." In short, we are buried alive here.
As the report correctly notes, individuals suspected of any crime of a collective or conspiratorial nature may be detained, incommunicado, by the police for up to 30 days in the 10 southeastern provinces where a state of emergency is in force, and for up to 15 days in the remainder
378
Turkey
of the country. It fails to state, however, that many individuals were detained longer than the maximum period, some so that the injuries that they had received from being tortured would disappear.
Erol Ozpolat, for example, was detained in Ankara during February and March for at least 29 days, 14 days longer than permitted by Turkish law. Allegedly in an effort to prove his irmocence, he had turned himself in to the police, who suspected his involvement in a political murder. When the Chief Prosecutor at Ankara State Security Court indicated his intention to detain Mr. Ozpolat longer than the maximum period prescribed by law, lawyers to the Bench of Ankara State Security Court protested to the court. Although the court ultimately concluded that the Chief Prosecutor's decision was improper, it stated that it could not order Mr. Ozpolat's release because protests against prosecutors could only be heard by the Ministry of Justice. Although protests were made to the Ministry of Justice, it failed to act.
The report correctly states that detainees were not permitted access to counsel while in police custody, despite Prime Ministry circulars stating that such access should be allowed. It incorrectly claims, however, that Turkish law does not give detainees the right to have an attorney present during interrogation. In theory, Articles 136 and 144 of the Turkish Criminal Procedure Code provide for such access. Article 136 states that "[a]t any and every stage of the proceeding the accused shall have the right to seek the advice of, and be represented by one or more counsel." Article 144 provides that "a person under detention may at any time meet, confer with and correspond with his attorney." In practice, however, such access is often denied. In addition, the international covenants to which Turkey is a party, and which Turkey recognizes as binding, guarantee detainees "prompt" access to lawyers and judges.
Moreover, the report blames the Turkish government's failure to provide detainees in police custody with access to a lawyer on individual prosecutors, but neglects to mention that the Ministries of Justice and Interior appear to have made little effort to enforce the Prime Ministry circulars and do not appear committed to ending incommunicado
379
Turkey
detention. This attitude was made startlingly clear in an article appearing in the Turkish newspaper, Cumhuriyet, on June 28. The Justice Minister, §akir §eker, was asked whether certain lawyers and journalists who were being detained by the police should be permitted access to their lawyers. He responded by saying:
[Ejven if you are the Justice Minister, you cannot apply pressure on this issue. That would just create other problems. Such a question depends on the judgment of the public servant. If [the Chief Prosecutor] wanted, he could have given permission. Was it better to give permission or to withhold it? It depends on the judgment of the public servant. We cannot intervene on this question. In my opinion it should have been given. But if it was not given, there is nothing we can do about it.
The report contains an accurate description of the Turkish criminal justice system and notes the number of cases currently before state security courts and martial law courts. It correctly states that "[tjhere remains limited independent reporting on southeastern Turkey" and notes that foreign journalists were either detained or harassed by Turkish authorities in connection with their reporting from southeastern Turkey. In addition, it mentions the government's continued confiscation of leftist periodicals, including Yeni Ulke (New Land), Emegin Bayragi (Flag of Labor) and 2000'e Dogru (Towards 2000). While the report explains the circumstances under which two of the three foreign journalists mentioned in the report were detained, it fails to mention the circumstances under which the British journalist Robert Fisk was detained and expelled from Turkey. According to Article 19 and International Pen, he was expelled after reporting from the Iraq-Turkey border that Turkish soldiers had looted supplies intended for Kurds.
The report neglects to set forth the full extent to which lawyers, domestic human rights monitors and domestic journalists, particularly those having some involvement with southeastern Turkey or Kurdish issues, came under attack during 1991. We noted in last year's critique
380
Turkey
the failure of the report to discuss government attacks on lawyers. Unfortunately, this year's report repeats this shortcoming by failing to mention that a number of lawyers were detained in 1991 while attempting to practice their profession.
On January 4, Husnu Ondul, a lawyer and Secretary of the Ankara Branch of the HRA, and Esin Fatma Kulac, another lawyer, were detained at the Political Police Center in Ankara. They were held in connection with statements they had made while protesting an investigation the Chief Prosecutor of the Ankara State Security Court had initiated against those who had participated in a general strike on January 3.
Similarly, on June 13, lawyers Murat Demir and Bedii Yarayici were arrested at their offices in Ankara. Turkish newspapers reported that they were to be charged under the Anti-Terror Law with acting as couriers on behalf of clients allegedly involved in the activities of the illegal organization, Dev Sol (Revolutionary Left). They were held incommunicado for six days, during which time they were interrogated, tortured and told to stop their activities on behalf of Halldn Hukuk BUrosu, the People's Legal Aid Bureau, which had taken up the cases of many members of Dev Sol.
While the report notes some incidents in which Turkish human rights activists were harassed, it neglects to discuss the dramatic increase in the harassment of such activists in southeastern Turkey. According to the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Summary or Arbitrary Executions, several members of human rights organizations and individual human rights activists in the towns of Van and Siirt reported that they had received death threats from agents of the political police.
On April 30, Metin Yildirim, a member of the HRA, left home and never returned. He was allegedly taken to the Political Branch of the Istanbul Police Headquarters and held incommunicado. Vedat Aydin, one of the individuals the report states was killed under suspicious circumstances, was a founder of the Diyarbakir branch of the HRA. On June 18, an explosive device destroyed the car of lawyer and HRA
381
Turkey
member, Mustafa Ozer. On June 25, the Diyarbakir office of the HRA was bombed. On July 2, a car bomb exploded in Batman, injuring Siddik Tan, a board member of the Batman HRA, his 10-year old son and a friend. The car bomb was reported to be a military explosive and was allegedly placed in the car by members of the political police. On August 14, Tevfik Ozer, a member of the Human Rights Association and the Chairperson of the People's Labor Party, was detained in the street and taken to the Political Branch of the Siirt Police Headquarters. The police claimed to have found a leaflet distributed by the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), an armed Kurdish separatist organization, in a drawer in his office. When a 13-year old boy who worked in the office insisted that a policeman had placed the leaflet there, he was taken to the Police Headquarters, threatened, beaten and sent home. A number of bystanders stated that Mr. Ozer was also beaten prior to being detained.
The report does not mention that several journalists were either beaten or detained and tortured while pursuing their professional activities. In September, the Turkish Press Council reported that during the first eight months of 1991, 44 journalists had been physically assaulted, in most cases by state employees, including police officers. Several journalists, for example, were attacked by police on July 10, following the funeral of a Vedat Aydin. Four others were beaten by police in the Basmane district of Izmir on August 15, after photographing the police harassing people about to participate in an unauthorized demonstration.
Most of those journalists who were tortured while in police custody appeared to have been covering events in southeastern Turkey or wrote for newspapers and periodicals that reported events from a Kurdish perspective. In March, for example, eight journalists working for the weekly political review, Yuzyil (Century), were arrested in Ankara and charged with membership in the PKK. The magazine's editor believes that his staff may have been arrested because the magazine published an article describing a meeting between a Turkish secret police agent acting on behalf of President Ozal, and Mr. Talabani, head of the Iraqi Kurds. While detained, they were blindfolded and interrogated about sources for articles they had written about the Kurdish
382
Turkey
conflict in the southeast of Turkey. Some were tortured. Similarly, in July and August, several journalists affiliated with Yeni Ulke were arrested and detained and some were beaten. One journalist was allegedly told by the police to stop reporting.
In its section on freedom of speech and press, the report correctly notes the formal demise of Law 2932, which prohibited the use of the Kurdish language. That demise has not been total, however. There are still prohibitions in force against education being conducted in schools in the Kurdish language, against broadcasting in Kurdish and against demonstrations being held in the Kurdish language. These ongoing restrictions significantly limit the freedom of expression of the Kurdish population.
In its section on the freedom of peaceful assembly and association, the report makes no mention of the fact that in 1991, dozens of meetings, demonstrations and marches were banned and many associations were closed, including Ozgur-Der (the Association of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms), the Construction Workers' Solidarity Association and certain branches of the People's Houses. In addition, eight members of the Nurses' Association were tried for a lunch boycott organized to protest a ban on public officers organizing a union.
Moreover, the report fails to state that there were several reports of the use of live ammunition by government security forces as a means of crowd control and that this use of force resulted in the death of at least 10 demonstrators and/or bystanders. On March 4, for example, security forces shot and killed 13-year-old Ahmet Gulec during a demonstration in the village of Kiwex in the province of Mardin. The demonstrators were protesting a March 3 attack on the village by Turkish soldiers, during which some villagers were forced to strip, two villagers were killed and at least 24 people were detained.
Lastly, the report understates the human rights violations committed by the government in its search for PKK terrorists in southeastern Turkey, emphasizing instead abuses committed by the PKK.
383
Turkey
The report correctly notes that villagers in southeastern Turkey complained of expulsions, beatings, torture and arbitrary killings by security forces searching for PKK guerrillas. In reprisal for armed clashes, the Turkish special commandoes attacked the local civilian population and public buildings, such as the school in the town of Cizre, by firing at night from armed vehicles.
The report fails, however, to note that there were several reports of mass detentions throughout the southeast, and particularly in and around Nusaybin, a town near the Syrian boarder. Large numbers of people were detained in an effort to uncover supporters of the armed bands operating in those areas. Some were tortured. In May and June, for example, between 150 and 200 people from that area, including children, women and elderly people, were said to have been detained in connection with their suspected support for Kurdish guerrillas. In September, approximately 100 people from the same area were detained, following an attack on a local police station, and in November, another 100 people from villages near Nusaybin were detained, reportedly in connection with political activities preceding elections.
In addition, the report does not mention that government security forces reportedly used civilians as human shields against attacks by armed opposition groups. In April and May, eight elderly male villagers from the village of Payamli, near the town of Siirt, were forced to spend nights in a trench situated to the east of the village gendarmerie. The villagers were not permitted to sleep, eat, drink or pray, and it was reported that they were being used as a shield against possible attacks by PKK forces.
And, although the report contends that there were no extrajudicial killings attributable to the government in 1991, international human rights monitors report that there was "an alarming increase" in the number of such incidents in southeastern Turkey. Helsinki Watch, Amnesty International and the United Nations Special Rapporteur, for example, received more than a dozen reports of extrajudicial killings. Many of the victims, including Vedat Aydin, whose death is mentioned in the report, were active members of the People's Labor Party, a legally
384
Turkey
authorized political party concerned with issues relating to Turkey's Kurdish minority. Others were Kurds from villages which had refused to participate in the corps of government-appointed village guards, a system of some 20,000 armed civilians paid by the authorities to counter the activities of PKK guerrillas and to deny them access to logistical support from the villages in the area. There is widespread belief in the area that the killings were carried out by the kontrgerilla, an undercover force allegedly engaged in recent times in secret operations against Kurdish separatist organizations, but whose existence is denied by the government.
Agit Akibe, a village leader from Cukurlu in southeast Turkey, and Ibrahim Demir, one of his relatives, are two of those who appear to have been executed by security forces. On December 13, they were found dead, blindfolded and with their wrists bound, in a small cave near their village. Both were Kurds. The previous day they had submitted a petition to a local governor requesting that the approximately 100 soldiers, who had occupied houses and the school in Cukurlu for several months, be ordered to leave. Shortly thereafter, five villagers witnessed a lieutenant attached to the army unit in the village summon the two men for questioning. When the two men did not return, the villagers searched the area and the following day, found their bodies. Autopsies showed that Akibe had been shot once in the head and Demir had been beaten to death.
In conclusion, while the State Department report has touched on the important aspects of the human rights situation in Turkey and has done so without misstating the truth or glaring omission, it fails to convey fully the pervasiveness of human rights violations by the state, particularly in southeastern Turkey.
385
