 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty Parliament, the Grand Na-
 tional Assembly, which elects the President. Suleyman Demirel was elected Presi-
 dent in 1993; Tansu Ciller, leader of the center-right True Path Party, became the
 first female Prime Minister the same year. Parliamentary elections in late Decem-
 ber gave no single party a majority. The existing coalition Government continued
 in caretaker status, while efforts continued to form a new government.
 For over a decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist
 Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), whose stated goal is the creation of a separate
 state of Kurdistan in southeastern Turkey. A state of emergency, declared in 1987,
 continues in 10 southeastern provinces where the Government faces substantial ter-
 rorist violence from the PKK. A regional governor retains authority over those 10
 provinces, as well as 3 adjacent ones, for security matters. The state of emergency
 allows the civilian governor to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including
 restrictions on the press and removal from the area of persons whose activities are
 deemed hostile to public order. The state of emergency decree was most recently re-
 newed in October 1995.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) are charged with maintaining public order in
 the cities, a responsibility carried out by the Jandarma (gendarmerie) in the coun-
 tryside. The regular armed forces, particularly the army, continued their lead role
 in combating the PKK in the state of emerency region in the southeast, thereby
 taking on an internal security function. Civilian authorities remain publicly commit-
 ted to the establishment of a state of law and respect for human rights, but torture,
 excessive use of force, and other serious human rights abuses by the security forces
 persisted throughout 1995.
 Turkey has a primarily market-based economy driven by an active private sector.
 Agriculture and industry are both important to the overall economy. The agricul-
 tural sector employs nearly half the country's labor force, but contributes only 15
 percent of the gross national product and total exports. The leading industrial sec-
 tors-textiles, iron and steel-also provide the leading exports. Reforms imple-
 mented over the past 15 years have opened the economy to global competition and
 eliminated most aspects of state control. One result has been impressive economic
 growth, which has translated into an improved standard of living. In 1995 the econ-
 omy recovered from the previous year's economic crisis, although the Government
 hadlittle success in cmmbating persistent inflation and budget deficits. While a long-
 stalled privatization program picked up steam, state enterprises continue to account
 for almost 40 percent of manufacturing sector output. The conflict in the southeast
 continued to be a substantial drain on the economy.
 
 
 1061
 The human rights situation improved in a number of areas, but very serious prob-
 lems remain. The situation in the southeast was of particular concern. Government
 security forces and the PKK continued to forcibly evacuate and sometimes burn vil-
 lages, though at a significantly lower level than in 1994. Various sources estimate
 that as many as 2 million people have left their homes in the southeast over the
 past 7 years; village evacuations have been one significant contributing factor and
 economic reasons were another. Government programs to deal with and compensate
 the many internally displaced have been very inadequate. In Tunceli province, po-
 lice "special teams" harassed and mistreated civilians. Public outcry by Members of
 Parliament (M.P.'s) caused the special teams to be transferred and led to fewer
 abuses. There appears to have been a substantial increase in the number of PKK
 terrorists who were captured or surrendered; in the past, very few were taken alive.
 The number of deaths in detention, safe house raids, "mystery killings," and dis-
 appearances was down considerably from 1994. Some other forms of extrajudicial
 killings rose, including those associated with crowd control situations. Torture also
 continued to be a very serious problem. Police and security forces often employed
 torture during periods of incommunicado detention and interrogation. Prison condi-
 tions remained poor.
 Limits on freedom of expression remained another serious problem, although Par-
 liament's October revision of Article 8 of the 1991 Anti-Terror Law (which has been
 used frequently to limit freedom of expression) and the subsequent court-ordered re-
 lease of 143 detainees were significant positive steps. The Government continued to
 use the 1991 Anti-Terror Law, with its broad and ambiguous definition of terrorism,
 to detain both alleged terrorists and a broad range o people on the charge that
 their acts words, or ideas constituted dissemination of separatist propaganda. Pros-
 ecutors aso used Article 312 of the Criminal Code (incitement to racial or ethnic
 enmity) with increasing frequency. There were a number of significant acquittals in
 freedom of expression cases, including novelist Yasar Kemal and American journal-
 ist Aliza Marcus. Television programs expanded the limits on debate on human
 rights and other issues of freedom of speech and the press.
 On October 26, the Appeals Court announced its decision in the case of seven
 former pro-Kurdish Democracy Party (DEP) Members of Parliament (M.P's) and
 one independent who had appealed their convictions for disseminating separatist
 propaganda and for supporting or being a member of an armed band. Two of the
 original eight received suspended sentences and were fined and released in 1994.
 The 1995 decision affirmed the convictions of four of the M.P.'s for being members
 of an armed band but overturned the convictions of two and ordered that they be
 retried under the revised Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law. The four whose convic-
 tions were affirmed are appealing to the European Human Rights Commission: the
 Government has publicly affirmed that it will respect that body's decision. In its
 written ruling, the Appeals Court stated that it was not a crime to take the par-
 liamentary oath in Kurdish, to wear accessories in the Kurdish colors, or to claim
 Turkish as a foreign language in Parliament.
 Officials of various government agencies continued to harass, intimidate, indict,
 and imprison human rights monitors, journalists, and lawyers for ideas which they
 expressed in public forums. Serious prosecutions of police or security officers for
 extrajudicial killings and torture continued to be rare, although the number of con-
 victions in torture cases increased modestly. The climate of impunity that the rel-
 atively small number of convictions creates probably remains the single largest ob-
 stacle to reducing unlawful killing, torture, and other human rights abuses.
 In October Parliament amended Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law by introducing
 an implied intent standard, reducing minimum and maximum sentences, and allow-
 ing first offenses to be converted to fines. In July Parliament passed a package of
 16 constitutional amendments which substantially broadened political participation
 by unions, academicians, and students. In March the Prime Minister issued a sec-
 ond circular stating the unacceptability of torture (the first was in January 1994);
 the State Minister for Human Rights intervened personally in several torture cases
 to ensure that they were brought to trial. The State Minister's academic advisory
 committee produced a report on appropriate interrogation methods employed in var-
 ious Western countries, and the leader of the committee stated that some of the re-
 port's recommendations are being implemented. Human rights education in primary
 schools was made mandatory; it is optional in high schools. The Government ex-
 panded human rights training for the police and military.
 In July the National Security Director announced the creation of contact teams
 to act as liaison between families and their relatives who are detained. Offices have
 been opened in Ankara and Istanbul, and their telephone numbers were publicized.
 The offices serve those who are detained for State Security Court crimes.
 Spousal abuse remains a serious problem.
 
 
 1062
 
 PKK terrorists murdered noncombatants, targeting village officials and commit-
 ting random murders in their effort to intimidate the populace.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political and extrajudicial killings
 credibly attributed to government authorities and terrorist groups continued but at
 substantially lower rates overall than in previous years. The number of deaths in
 detention and mystery killings was down significantly in 1995. The Human Rights
 Foundation of Turkey (HRE), a Turkish nongovernmental organization, reported
 that 6 persons died under suspicious circumstances while in official custody in the
 first 9 months of 1995, some as a result of torture; the number for the same period
 in 1994 was 18. Of the 1995 deaths, officials claimed that at least two committed
 suicide, a claim they have made frequently in past cases of deaths in custody. In
 one such case, government officials stated that Sayettin Tepe, a correspondent for
 pro-PKK Yeni Politika hanged himself from the cell door grill with his underwear
 while in detention at the Bitlis security directorate on August 25. According to Inte-
 rior Ministry information, Tepe was a PKK member. Tepe's family asked that the
 body be exhumed and a second autopsy performed; the second autopsy has not yet
 been performed. In the 1994 death in detention of Can Demirag, the prosecutor did
 not open a case although the Istanbul prosecutor had opened an investigation in
 1994.
 By law, authorities are obliged to investigate all deaths in custody. However,
 there were few serious prosecutions of security force members. Following the death
 of university student Smian Demirtas in Elazig, the police claimed that Demirtas,
 who was summoned to the police station on July 21 to deal with matters related
 to his upcoming military service, committed suicide in custody by banging his head
 against the wall. Demirtas's family claimed that he had been tortured to death and
 filed a complaint at the chief prosecutor's office. Autopsy results showed that
 Demirtas died from trauma due to a heavy blow to the head. The public prosecutor
 filed suit against eight policemen for causing his death by torture. The case of police
 officer Abdullah Bozkurt, charged with the murder of Vedat Han Gulsenoglu is con-
 tinuing-, Bozkurt has been reassigned from Istanbul to Van while his murder case
 is being prosecuted.
 A number of mystery killings, in which the assailant's identity was unknown, also
 occurred, but the total was substantially lower than in previous years. Human
 rights organizations maintain that security forces were complicit in a number of
 these mystery killings. According to the HRF, in the first 9 months of 1995, 98 civil-
 ians were assassinated by unknown attackers, mostly in the east and southeast of
 the country; in 1994, the number for the first 10 months was 316. Many were lead-
 ers or prominent members of the Kurdish community, local politicians, or members
 of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy Party (HADEP). Four trials continued
 against 89 members of Hizbullah, a Turkish terrorist group not related to Islamic
 Iizbullah. The 89 members are charged with a total of 113 murders.
 A parliamentary committee, which commenced its investigation in 1993, com-
 pleted a report on mystery killings in May, but the report was not made public. Ex-
 cerpts which appeared in the press stated that "illegal formations" within the State
 bear some responsibility for mystery killings; they must be "cleansed," the report
 said, and brought to justice.
 There was an increase in the number of deaths attributable to government au-
 thorities due to excessive use of force, including during crowd control situations. The
 HRF says that security forces were responsible for 55 extrajudicial killings in the
 first 9 months of 1995. The HRF states that 21 people were killed in rioting in Is-
 tanbul (see Section 2.c.). The HRF also credibly reports that government forces used
 excessive force during some raids on alleged terrorist safe houses rather than trying
 to arrest suspects, which resulted in 17 deaths. In 1994 the number for the first
 10 months was 33.
 In April, citing three deaths in a safe house raid in Ankara's Batikent district,
 the State Minister for Human Rights stated that the police had committed
 extrajudicial killings. A number of trials continued of police who participated in safe
 house raids in which suspects died. In two cases--one of which had been ongoing
 for 6 years-the police were acquitted. In a separate case, 13 Adana policemen were
 acquitted of similar charges. Prosecutors brought at least three other such cases in-
 eluding one against five policemen who participated in a September 1994 raid on
 a cafeteria in Istanbul's Besiktas district in which three persons were killed.
 Proceedings continued in other ongoing cases. The trial continues concerning the
 death in detention in 1993 of Vakkas Dost; policeman Nurettin Ozturk, the accused
 
 
 1063
 murderer, is still at large. The trial in the 1992 case of Yucel Ozen is continuing,
 as is the trial of the 11 police officers in the 1992 Basalak case. The trial of five
 village guards for the 1994 murder of Diyarbakir tradesman Serif Avsar continues.
 No case has been opened in the 1993 fatal shooting of Mehmet Sincar a Democracy
 Party (DEP) M.P. from Mardin, in the city center of Batman- the HRF considers
 it a mystery killing. In a July security force operation against lizbullah 11 persons
 were arrested; the September murder of 4 HADEP members is among the crimes
 with which they are charged. The HRF views the case of former Ankara Provincial
 Chairman of (DEP predecessor) HEP, Faik Candan, found dead in December 1994,
 as a mystery killing. The authorities did not open a case.
 There were no assassinations of journalists; however, journalist Salyettin Tepe
 died in detention on August 25. According to the Government, the murders of four
 journalists have been 'soved:" Kemal Kihc (killed in 1993, solved in 1994) Ibrahim
 Tuncay (killed in 1992, defendant currently on trial); Namik Taranci (killed in 1992
 Hizbullah defendants currently on trial), and; Halit Gungen (killed in 1992, solved
 in 1995). The murders of most well-known journalists, including Ugur Mumcu in
 1993, remain unsolved.
 Unidentified terrorists committed extrajudicial killings primarily in rural south-
 east Anatolia. For example, in May they petrated a bomb attack at a bus stop
 in Batman which killed 11, including 4 children. They also launched several deadly
 attacks in urban areas, including a bombing in a cafeteria in Izmir on September
 17 which killed 5 and injured 25. Political killings perpetrated by the PKK included
 those of state officials (Jandrma, local mayors, imams, and schoolteachers), state-
 paid paramilitary village guards and their family members, young villagers who
 refuse to be recruited, and PKK guerrillas-turned-informants. In the years 1987-
 1994, 142 teachers were murdered: the PKK killed 91, and unknown assailants an-
 other 46. In 1995 the PKK killed three teachers.
 b. D4sappearance.-The HRF reports three disappearances, which ended in death.
 However, accurate statistics on disappearances are hard to confirm; figures for the
 year varied widely. The HRF number is substantially down from 1994, when the
 total for the same period was 28. Those disappearances reported in 1994 and earlier
 years remained unsolved. Some persons disappeared after witnesses reported that
 security forces or law enforcement officials had taken them into custody. No one has
 been formally charged in any disappearance cases.
 On March 21, -asan Ocak disappeared in the aftermath of rioting in Istanbul's
 Gaziosmanpasa neighborhood (see Section 2.c.). Officials claimed that he was not in
 custody, although several released suspects claimed to have seen him. His body was
 found in the unidentified persons' cemetery in Istanbul on May 16. His death ap-
 peared to be caused by strangulation. The investigation continued at year's end.
 In April a group of relatives of persons who disappeared began a series of dem-
 onstrations in Istanbul. In June the Human Rights Association (BRA) started a
 campaign on disappearances, which included demonstrations and sit-down protests.
 Families of some of the disappeared persons allege that they are themselves sub-
 jected to torture, humiliation, and intimidation when they attempt to determine
 their missing relatives' whereabouts. To combat such assertions, the National Secu-
 rity Director General in July directed that "ontat groups" be established to com-
 municate with detainees' families. According to the nterior Ministry, in the first 8
 months of 1995, 75 reports of missing persons were filed in Diyarbakir province, 46
 of whom were subsequently located alive. In Istanbul province, 322 disappearances
 were registered during the same period; 137 people were located alive. Diyarbakir
 is a city of over 1 million inhabitants; Istanbul, over 10 million.
 The Government, human rights organizations, and the media report that the PKK
 routinely kidnaps young men or threatens their families as part of its recruiting.
 PKK terrorists continued their abductions of local villagers, teachers, journalists,
 and officials in the southeast. On March 31, the PKK kidnaped two photojournalists;
 it released them on April 26.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, Turkey's accession to the U.N. and Euro-
 pean Conventions Against Torture, and public pledges by successive governments to
 end torture, the practice continued. The HRF's torture rehabilitation centers in An-
 kara, Izmir, Istanbul, and a newly opened center in Adana reported that they re-
 ceived a total of 713 applications for treatment during the year. Human rights attor-
 neys and physicians who treat victims of torture say that most persons detained for
 or suspected of political crimes usually suffer some torture during periods of incom-
 municado detention in police stations and Jandarma headquarters before they are
 brought before a court. Government officials admit that torture occurs but deny that
 it is systematic. They claim that it is closely tied to the State's fight against terror-
 ism. Many cases, however, occur in western Turkey, outside the zone of conflict.
 
 
 1064
 The HRF and private attorneys reported that there was neither better treatment
 of those charged under the Anti-Terror Law nor an overall decrease in the incidence
 of torture in 1995. The HRF stated that the number of applications to its torture
 rehabilitation centers was up in 1995. That could have meant that their services
 were more widely known, not necessarily that the incidence of torture was up. In
 1995 women again charged that sexual abuses occurred while under official deten-
 tion by security officials.
 The implementation of the 1992 Criminal Trials Procedure Law (CMUK) facili-
 tated more immediate attorney access to those arrested for common crimes (al-
 though some detainees accused of common crimes are tortured); however, the
 CMUK's provisions of immediate attorney access do not apply to those detained
 under the Anti-Terror Law or for other 'security' crimes. The CMUK's allowable,
 maximum prearraignment detention periods exceed Council of Europe maximums.
 Human rights observers report that because the arresting officer is also respon-
 sible for interrogating the suspect, the officer may resort to torture to obtain a con-
 fession that would justify the arrest.
 Commonly employed methods of torture reported by the HRF's torture treatment
 centers include: high-pressure cold water hoses, electric shocks, beating on the soles
 of the feet, beating of the genitalia, hanging by the arms, blindfolding, sleep depri-
 vation, deprivation of clothing, systematic beatings and vaginal and anal rape with
 truncheons and, in some instances, gun barrels. hey also report treatment that
 falls short of torture such as cursing, slapping, and threats. In March the State
 Minister for Human Rights listed a series of torture methods employed in police and
 Jandarma stations. These included suspension on a "Palestinian hanger (hanging
 by the arms), tying detainees to a magnetic telephone which transmits electric
 shocks, blindfolding, sexual abuse, submergence in cold water, use of truncheons,
 electric shocks, hanging sandbags on detainees' necks, stripping them naked in front
 of their relatives, forcing them to stand on one foot, releasing drops of water on
 their heads, sleep deprivation, withholding food, forcing detainees to clean corridors
 and toilets, keeping them in salty water, and forcing them to stand in cold water
 below the waist.
 In January in Ankara, a 12-year-old girl, detained for 5 days for stealing bread,
 was tortured by beating and electric shock at the Ankara security directorate theft
 desk. She later applied to the HRF for treatment. In the 1994 Yelda Ozcan case,
 Istanbul's Beyoglu district public prosecutor opened a case which continued at year's
 end. In April in Kurucayir hamlet an eyewitness alleged that 20 villagers were se-
 verely beaten by Jandarma troops. The same witness alleged that seven other vil-
 lagers were taken into a house and tortured (see Section 1.g.).
 The Government maintains that medical examinations occur once during deten-
 tion and a second time before either arraignment or release. However, former de-
 tainees asserted that some medical examinations took place too long after the event
 to reveal any definitive findings. According to the HRF, the medical examination
 practice varies widely. In some cases proper examinations are conducted; in others,
 doctors sign papers handed to them. Some examinations are cursory, some are done
 in the presence of police officials, and some doctors are at times pressured to submit
 false or misleading medical certificates that deny evidence of torture.
 The State Minister for Human Rights in September called for an independent
 medical examiner's office and better forensic equipment and training. Implementa-
 tion of these recommendations was delayed by political developments late in the
 year. In July the Istanbul Medical Chamber Board suspended Taner Apaydin from
 the practice of medicine for 6 months for falsifying medical reports in nine torture
 cases.
 Credible sources in the human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate only about one-half of the formal complaints involving tor-
 ture and prosecute only a fraction of those. The Anti-Terror Law provides that offi-
 cials accused of torture or other mistreatment may continue to work while under
 investigation and, if convicted, may only be suspended. Special provincial adminis-
 trative boards rather than regular courts decide whether to prosecute such cases.
 Suspects' legal fees are paid by their employing agencies. Under the state of emer-
 gency, any lawsuit directed at government authorities must be approved by the re-
 gional governor. Approval is rare. These conditions contribute to the paucity of con-
 victions for torture.
 Under the Administrative Adjudication Law, an administratIve investigation into
 alleged torture cases is conducted to determine if there is enough evidence to bring
 a law enforcement officer to trial. Under the CMUK, prosecutors are empowered to
 initiate investigations of police officers or Jandarma suspected of torturing or mis-
 treating suspects. In cases where township security directors or Jandarma com-
 manders are accused of torture, the prosecutor must obtain permission to initiate
 
 
 1065
 an investigation from the Ministry of Justice, because these officials are deemed to
 have a status equal to that of judges.
 According to the Government, in the first 7 months of 1995 547 complaints of tor-
 ture or mistreatment were filed. Of those, 337 cases reached the stage of admini-
 trative investigation; 210 cases were opened. There were 15 convictions and 28 ac-
 quittals. The number of convictions is up modestly from 1994.
 In instances in which law enforcement officers are convicted of torre, sentences
 tend to be light. In May the Appeals Court reduced a 5-year prison sentence im-
 posed by the Bolvadn civil court on Hasan Belek, a deputy chief of police, to the
 minimum sentence of 1 year per person tortured, or 2 years total. The Appeals
 Court stated that Belek had obtained "no personal satisfaction" from the vilence;
 he had proceeded "in the interest of furthering his investigation." In May an Ankara
 court dismissed chaes against two policemen accused of beating MP. Salman
 Kaya durn   a 1994   ay Day demonstration for lack of "compelling and persuasive
 evidence." In February, upon the intervention of the State Minester for Human
 Rights, seven policemen went on trial for allegedly torturing a suspect detained for
 car theft. The prosecutor demanded prison terms of up to 5 years for each of the
 defendants. The trial of six security officers accused of torturing Bali Erdgan
 began in May 1994 and continues. The case brought by Nazli Top, a nurse (pregnant
 at the time) who alleged she was tortured and raped with a truncheon in 1992,
 ended in acquittal in 1994.
 In the first 9 months of 1995, 23 complaints claiming torture or mistreatment
 were filed with the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission. In each case, the
 Commission wrote to the offices of the public prosecutor, the governor, and the secu-
 rity directorate general. Of the 23 cases, prosecutors declared 11 inactionable be-
 cause there was insufficient evidence, and in another six, they determined that
 there had been no mistreatment. In the remaining 6, prosecutors opened cases: four
 continue; one police offier was acqupitted; and one was convicted of mistreatment,
 sentenced to 2 months and 15 days imprisonment and had his civil service status
 suspended (the punishment was onverted to a fine .
 Pohe continue to force women in custody and others to undergo virginity testing
 even though the State Minister for Women's Affairs condemned the practice in 1992.
 The tests are imposed particularly on women who 194e a criminal complaint alleging
 a sexual crime. Although legally only a court or a prosecutor may order them, police
 continue to impose the tests on female detainees. Women may refuse the examina-
 tions but are rarely informed of that right. In July Leman Celikalan alleged that
 she was sexually abused by anti-terror police while in custody. An investigation is
 under way.
 In March the Prime Minister sent a circular to law enforcement offices on the
 unacceptability of torture. Successive State Minstrs for Human Rights have fo-
 cused on the issue of torture and the need to end it. One intervened directly in sv-
 eral cases in western Turkey to ensure that the alleged perpetrators were brought
 to trial; another had his academic advisory commisson prepare a report, drawing
 on the laws of several Western countries, which detailed acceptable interrogation
 methods. The Government has accepted numerous visits by the Council of Europe's
 Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) and is in regular dialog with the
 CP'r.
 Torture in prisons has decreased in the last few years, but prison conditions re-
 main poor. Groups of inmates carried out hunger strikes to protest poor onditions
 and their treatment by guards. Prisons are overcrowded, andfamiies often supple-
 ment the poor quality food. A strike by 300 inmates of Buca prison near Izmir ended
 on February 6 following an agreement reached between the inmates and prison au-
 thorities. rin  are run on the ward system. Prisoners, often those of the same
 ideological bent, are incarcerated together and may punish their own. An example
 of this ws fthe death i  rinMa r   , Istanbul's  a am asa prison of Irev Sol
 (Devrimci Sol, a Marxist terrorist gup) prisoner Latife Ereren, who was throttled
 by other Dev Sol militants for collaborating with the police. In July a search of
 Istanbul's maximum securit Bayrmpasa prison revealed 28 mobile phones, 8 guns,
 55 knives, and 50 grams of hashish. On September 21, a violent clash between in-
 mates and security officials n in teir's Buca prison cost the lives of three inmates.
 Several monitoring groups both domestic and international, carried out prison visits
 in 1995. A major prisonsabiitation project scheded to be completed n 1994 was
 delayed because of internal political oppoition.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-To take a person into custody, a prosecu-
 tor must issue a detention order, except in limited circumstances such as when a
 person is caught in the act of committing a crime. The detention period for those
 charged with common individual crimes is 24 hours. Those detained for common col-
 lective crimes may be held for 4 days. The detention period may be extended for
 
 
 1066
 an additional 4 days. Under the CMUK, detainees are entitled to immediate access
 to an attorney and may meet and confer with the attorney at any time. In practice,
 this access continued for detainees charged with common crimes. In July the bar
 association temporarily stopped providing duty attorneys to deal with CMUK cases
 because they were not receiving their promised reimbursement from the Govern-
 ment. The problem was later resolved.
 Persons detained for individual crimes which fall under the Anti-Terror Law must
 be brought before a judge within 48 hours, while those charged with crimes of a
 collective political, or conspiratorial nature may be detained for up to 15 days in
 most of the country and up to 30 days in the 10 southeastern provinces under the
 state of emergency. Those detained and tried for the expression of views, generally
 for disseminating separatist propaganda, are charged promptly.
 There is no guaranteed access to an attorney under the law for persons whose
 cases fall under the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts; these include those
 charged with smuggling and with crimes under the Anti-Terror Law. This lack of
 access is a major factor in the widespread use of torture by police and security
 forces.
 The decision concerning access to counsel in such cases is left to the independent
 prosecutor, who generally denies access on the grounds that it would prejudice an
 ongoing investigation. The Justice and Interior Ministries generally have not inter-
 vened in prosecutors' decisions or police actions denying access to counsel. Although
 the Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request speedy arraignment and
 trial, judges have ordered a significant number detained indefimitey, sometimes for
 years. Many cases involve persons accused of violent crimes, but it is not uncommon
 for those accused of nonviolent political crimes to be kept in custody until the con-
 clusion of their trials.
 By law, a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after ar-
 rest, which is observed in practice. Once formally charged by the prosecutor, a de-
 tainee is arraigned by a judge and allowed to retain a lawyer. After arraignment,
 the judge may release the accused upon receipt of an approriate guarantee, such
 as bail, or order him detained if the court determines  at e is likely to flee the
 jurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 Authorities detained large numbers of persons on several occasions, including 242
 at the opening of the trial of 4 HADEP members in Ankara in June. All but 16 were
 released within 72 hours; the 16 have been charged and await trial. In most such
 cases, the majority of detainees are subsequently released without charges being
 filed. Many report being tortured during such detentions.
 There is no external exile. Turkey's internal exile law was repealed in 1987, but
 in 1990 the Government granted the southeast regional governor the authority to
 "remove from the region,  or a period not to exceed the duration of the state of
 emergency (now in its ninth year), citizens under his administration whose activities
 "give an impression that they are prone to disturb general security and public
 order." There were no known instances of the use of this broad authority during the
 year. Human rights monitors and residents of towns in the southeast report that
 officials continued to rely on "administrative transfers" to remove government em-
 ployees thought liable to "create trouble." -
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution requires that judges be inde-
 pendent of the executive in the discharge of their duties and provides for the secu-
 rity of their tenure. The High Council of Judges and Prosecutors, which is appointed
 by the President and includes the Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors
 for the higher courts and is responsible for oversight of those in the lower courts.
 The Constitution also prohibits state authorities from issuing orders or rec-
 o   _mmendatins concerning the exercise of judicial power. In practice, the courts gen-
 erally act independently of the executive. The judicial system is composed of general
 law courts, State Security Courts and military courts. There is also a Constitutional
 Court. Most cases are prosecuted in the general law courts, which include the civil,
 administrative, and criminal courts. Appeals are heard either by the High Court of
 Appeals or the Council of State. Provincial administrative boards established under
 the Anti-Terror Law decide whether cases in which state officials are accused of
 misconduct should be heard in criminal court. Military courts, with their own ap-
 peals system, hear cases regarding infractions of military law by members of the
 armed forces. In 1995 the Mnlitay court tried several cases of civilians charged with
 speech that purportedly discouraged military service (see Section 2.a.).
 State Security Courts sit in eight cities. They are composed of panels of five mem-
 bers-two civilian judges, one military judge, and two prosecutors-and try defend-
 ants accused of crimes such as terrorismK,dru g smuggling, membership in illegal or-
 ganizations, and espousing or disseminating ideas prohibited by law as "damaging
 the indivisible unity of the state." There are 18 such State Security Court panels.
 
 
 1067
 Their verdicts may be appealed only to a specialized department of the High Court
 of Appeals dealing with crimes against state security.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and par-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decrees with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law or in time of war.
 Defendants normally have the right to a public trial and, under the Constitution,
 can be proven guilty only in a court of law. By law, the bar association must provide
 free counsel to indigents who make such a request to the court. Costs are borne by
 the association. There is no jury system; all cases are decided by a judge or a panel
 of judges. Trials may last for months or years, with one or two hearings scheduled
 each month.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independent prosecutor's files after
 arraignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving viola-
 tions of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the President or
 'defaming Turkish citizenship," defense attorneys may be denied access to files
 which the State asserts deal with national intelligence or security matters.
 In 1995 State Security Courts predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror
 Law and Section 312 of the Criminal Code, which prohibits "incitement to racial en-
 mity." The State claims that these courts were established to try efficiently those
 suspected of certain crimes. Those accused of crimes falling under the jurisdiction
 of these courts may be detained twice as long before arraignment as other defend-
 ants. The heavy caseload often means that cases drag on for years. These courts
 may hold closed hearings and may admit testimony obtained during police interro-
 gation in the absence of counsel. The trial of 12 Diyarbakir lawyers charged with
 acting as couriers for the PKK continues at the Diyarbakir State Security Court.
 The trial of nine Erzurum lawyers charged with similar crimes continues as well.
 None of the attorneys is under arrest.
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against either mi-
 norities or women, with the following caveats. As legal proceedings are conducted
 solely in Turkish, and the quality of interpreters varies, some Kurdish-speaking de-
 fendants may be seriously disadvantaged. And although women receive equal trat-
 ment in a court of law, some discriminatory laws remain on the books (although
 most have been rendered inoperative by a Constitutional Court decision).
 Turkey recognizes the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights and
 the European   omision on Human Rights. Turkish citizens may file applications
 alleging violations of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
 and Fundamental Freedoms with the Commission. Fifty-four cases have been de-
 clared admissible before the Commission.
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political prisoners, but some human
 rights  eup alleged that many of those arrested could correctly be categorized as
 such. The Government claims that most alleged political prisoners are in fact secu-
 rity detainees, suspected of being members of, or assisting, the PKK or other terror-
 ist organizations. According to government statistics, during the first 9 months of
 1995, 5,893 persons were under arrest charged with offenses under the Anti-Terror
 Law, and 2,861 had been convicted.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. Government officials may enter a private resi-
 dence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance of a judicial
 warrant. These provisions are generally respected in practice outside the state of
 emergency region.
 A judge must decide whether to issue a search warrant for a residence. If delay
 may cause harm, prosecutors and municipal officers authorized to carry out prosecu-
 tors' instructions may conduct a search. Searches of private premises may not be
 carried out at night, unless the delay will be damaging or the search will result in
 the capture of a prisoner at large. Exceptions include persons under special observa-
 tion by the Security Directorate General, places anyone can enter at night, places
 where criminals gather, places where materials obtained through the commission of
 crimes are kept, gambling establishments, and brothels.
 In the 10 provinces under emergency rule, the regional governor can and does em-
 power security authorities to search without a warrant residences or the premises
 of political parties, businesses, associations, or other organizations. According to the
 bar association, it is not constitutional for security authorities in these provinces to
 search, hold, or seize without warrant persons or documents. Roadblocks are com-
 monplace in the southeast; security officials regularly search vehicles and travelers.
 Security forces have compelled the evacuation of villages in the southeast to pre-
 vent villagers from giving aid and comfort to the PKK (see Section 1.g.). The Gov-
 ernment admits to village and hamlet evacuations but claims that they occur as the
 
 
 1068
 consequence of pressures by and fear of the PKK and because security operations
 against the PKKin the region make continued occupancy unsafe.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since 1984 the separatist PKK has waged an increasingly violent terrorist
 insurgency that has claimed over 17,000 lives. The PKK's campaign of violence in
 southeast Turkey is directed against both security forces and civilians, almost all
 of whom are Kurds, whom the PKK accuses of cooperating with the State. The TNP,
 Jandarma, and armed forces in turn, have waged an intense campaign to suppress
 terrorism, targeting active KK units as wel as persons they believe support or
 sympathize with the PKK. In the process, they have committed many human rights
 abuses. According to then-emergency region governor Unal Erkan, between July
 1987 and October 1, 1995, a total of 17,739 persons lost their lives. This includes
 10,632 PIK, 3,259 security force members, and 3,848 civilians. Parliament extended
 until July the "Repentance Law," pursuant to which members of terrorist organiza-
 tions who turn state's evidence could have their sentences decreased or annulled.
 Civilians and M.'s for Tunceli province in July charged police special teams with
 harassing and mistreating civilians there. The Nationu Security Director instituted
 an investigation into the charges and ordered a number of the special team mem-
 bers reassigned to other posts. Although no charges appear to have been brought
 against special team members for abuses, the public attention to this issue seems
 to have resulted in fewer abuses by the remaining special teams.
 Government security forces forcibly evacuatea and sometimes burned villages.
 The Government's stated purpose was to protect civilians or prevent PKK guerrillas
 from obtaining logistical supAort from the inhabitants. Some villagers told reliable
 sources that security forces had evacuated them for refusing to participate in the
 paramilitary village guard system. According to the Interior Minister, as of March,
 2,297 villages had been evacuated or burnt down. In July the emergency region gov-
 ernor stated that 987 villages and 1,676 hamlets (settlement units of 3 or 4 houses)
 had been depopulated "for various reasons," including residents evacuated by secu-
 rity forces for security reasons; residents who left of their own accord for security
 or economic reasons; and residents who left because of PKK pressure. The PKK
 burned some villages to seek revenge on paramilitary village guards.
 As many as 2 million persons have been displaced. Government programs to deal
 with and compensate the many internal migrants have been very inadequate. Many
 migrants are living in overcrowded quarters with relatives in the larger cities in the
 southeast. Apparently as a result of serious overall budgetary problems, much 1994
 aid promised by the Government was not disbursed, and there was little provision
 for assistance in the 1995 budget.
 In July the State Minister ior Human Rights announced a government emergency
 aid program to be applied in 22 provinces in the east and southeast and more eco-
 nomic support to the region. To date, few villages have been resettled. According to
 statistics provided by the Foreign Ministry, a total of $5.7 million (TL 287 billion)
 of various forms of aid (housing, food, clothing, health, and education) has been pro-
 vided to 32,260 citizens in the southeast.
 There appears to have been a substantial increase in the number of PKK terror-
 ists taken alive or who have turned themselves in; in the past, very few were taken
 alive.
 There are credible allegations that serious abuses during the course of operations
 against the PKK continue. A former infantry soldier has alleged that he witnessed
 Jandarma troops severely bent 20 villagers in Kurucayir hamlet on April 19. Seven
 other villagers were later beaten more severely, according to this witness (see Sec-
 tion 1.c.). The witness states that the incident occurred in the presence of the gen-
 eral officer commanding all forces in the southeast. The Government confirnms that
 a military operation against the PKK did take place in that general area on April
 14 but disputes same of the eyewitness's statement.
 The Government organizes, arms, and pays for a civil defense force in the south-
 east known as the village guards. Participation in this paramilitary militia by local
 villagers is theoretically voluntary, but villagers are caught between the two sides.
 If the villagers agree to serve, the PKK may target them and their village. If the
 villagers refuse to participate, government security forces may retaliate against
 them and their village. The village guards have a reputation for being the least dis-
 ciplined of the Government's security forces and have been accused of repeated
 human rights abuses.
 According to a report released by the Turkish Medical Doctors' Association, in
 some instances, physicians have been prosecuted in State Security Courts for giving
 medical care to alleged PKK terrorists, a practice that could deter other physicians
 from extending such aid. Dr. Ilken Diken, convicted of failing to report that he had
 aided a terrorist as well as of aiding terrorists in 1994, remains in prison.
 
 
 1069
 Government state of emergency decree 430, codified in 1990 and most recently re-
 newed in November 1995, imposes stringent security measures in the southeast.
 The reional governor may censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose inter-
 nal exile (see Section 1.d.). The decree also provides for doubling the sentences of
 those convicted of cooperating with separatists. Informants and convicted persons
 who cooperate with the State are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences. Only
 limited judicial review of the regional governor's administrative decisions is per-
 mitted.
 Although schools have remained open in most urban centers, rapid population mi-
 gration due in pa  to village evacuations and fear of terrorism has led to severe
 overcrowding and chronic teacher shortges, particularly in urban centers in the
 southeast. Government officials claim a significant effort is being made both to re-
 open schools which were closed during the 1994-95 school year and to build new
 schools in regions faced with acute school overcrowding. For example, the
 Diysrbakir governor reports that more than one-third of the 600 schools closed in
 1994 in Diyarhakir province have reopened. In addition, 12 new schools in
 Diyarbakir opened in September. For the 1994-95 school year, according to the Edu-
 cation Minister, 119 schools were closed in eastern and southeastern Turkey, while
 98 opened.
 On March 20, some 35,000 Turkish troops moved into northern Iraq to destroy
 the infrastructure, disrupt the supply lines, and capture the weapons of the PKK
 bases there (see Iraq report for details).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Changes to Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law, the article that prohibits
 dissemination of separatist propaganda, caused the courts to review hundreds of
 cases. By year's end, courts had ordered 143 prisoners released, either because their
 sentences were shortened under the revised law or because they had no intent to
 promote separatism. However, throughout the year the Government continued to re-
 strict constitutional freedoms providing for freedom of speech and the press.
 The press is generally free to criticize government leaders or policies and, except
 for certain issues concerning the southeast, it exercises this freedom. The Criminal
 Code, however, provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the Par-
 liament, and the Army." Judges generally examine evidence rigorously and dismiss
 many charges brought under these laws. However, an Ankara civil court ordered
 Motherland Part Deputy Chairman Ekrem Pakdemirli to pay approximately
 $100,000 (TL 5 billion) in damages to President Demirel in a libel suit for insulting
 the President during a press conference.
 Numerous provisions in various laws restrict freedom of expression to one degree
 or another; those most frequently employed include Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law
 and Article 312 of the Criminal Code. The Press Law permits prosecutors to halt
 distribution of a newspaper or magazine without a court order and requires that
 each publication's "responsible editors" bear legal responsibility for the publication's
 content. Many editors have faced repeated criminal proceedings.
 On November 8, the Ankara Public Prosecution Office brought criminal charges
 under Article 159/3 of the Criminal Code for the article "We Protect Human Rights
 with an Imperfect Constitution and Laws," which appears in a book published by
 the HRF entitled "A Present to Emil Galip Sandalci. This Criminal Code article
 states that "those who publicly insult laws of the Turkish Republic and the decisions
 of the Grand National Assembly are sentenced to 15 days to 6 months in Drison."
 Tur ut Inal, author of the article, was charged, along with the entire HRF? board
 of directors; the first hearing is scheduled for January 1996.
 In February the Istanbul State Security Court charged prominent Turkish novel-
 ist Yasar Kemal in connection with his article, published in the German news maga-
 zine Der Spiegel, which was later reprinted in Turkey in a book entitled "Freedom
 of Expression. Kemal was charged both under Article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and
 with inciting to racial or ethnic enmity under Article 312 of the Criminal Code. The
 trial began in May; the court acquitted Kemal in December, finding that he had no
 intention of promoting separatism or racial enmity. To make a political point, 1,000
 writers and intellectuals, 99 of whom are on trial at the Istanbul State Security
 Court, claimed responsibility for the book in which the article appeared. Their trial
 continued at the end of the year. In July the Istanbul State Security Court indicted
 Reuter reporter and U.S. citizen Aliza Marcus under Article 312 of the Criminal
 Code in connection with a November 1994 Reuter article on village evacuations in
 Tunceli province. The Court acquitted Marcus in November.
 Court proceedings were also instituted against a number of editors and publish-
 ers. The Anti-Terror Law, as revised, now contains an implied intent standard. Pre-
 
 
 1070
 viously, defendants could be charged and convicted "regardless of the method, inten-
 tion, and ideas behind" what they wrote. The revised Article 8 languae provides
 that "written and oral propaganda.., aiming at damaging the indivisible unity of
 the State . . . (is) forbid en." As such, it continues to restrict freedom of speech.
 Both the old and revised versions have been used against writers, journalists, pub-
 lishers, politicians, musicians, and students. Increasingly, prosecutors applied Arti-
 cle 312 of the Criminal Code, which forbids "incitement to racial or ethnic enmity."
 Ismail Besikci served 10 years in prison between 1971 and 1987 for his publications
 on the Kurdish question in Turkey. He now has been in prison since November
 1993, and there are numerous Article 8 cases outstanding against him which the
 courts are reviewing under the revised Article 8 language.
 The High Court of Appeals heard the appeal of seven pro-Kurdish former DEP
 M.P.'s and one independent M.P., convicted in 1994 on charges ranging from dis-
 seminating separatist propaganda to supporting or being a member of an armed
 band or gang. in October the court affirmed the 15-year sentences of four of the de-
 fendants for being members of a terrorist group. It overturned the sentences of
 Ahmet Turk and Sedat Yurtdas, who are to be retried on Article 8 charges. It or-
 dered the trial court to adjust the fines of the two who had been released in 1994
 for time already served in detention. The four whose sentences were affirmed will
 appeal to the European Commission of Human Rights; the Government has pledged
 to abide by its decision.
 Independent deputy Hasan Mezarci was tried for insulting Ataturk. In February
 the Bandirma Criminal Court dropped the charges. In October Ibrahim Askoy, hon-
 orary chairman of the Democracy and Transformation Party, was arrested on an
 earlier conviction for disseminating separatist propaganda upon his return to Tur-
 key. After the changes to Article 8, the court ordered his sentence reduced from 20
 to 10 months. Two other Article 8 sentences, totaling 4 years, remain outstanding
 against Askoy.
 In January trade union chairman Munir Ceylan, convicted of disseminating sepa-
 ratist propaganda, finished 15 months of a 20-month sentence and was released. In
 May Dr. Fikret Baskaya ended a similar term and was released. Professor Hauk
 Gorger was released from prison in October afer paying the fine that accompanied
 his sentence. In the case of the former mayor of Diyarbakir, Mehidi Zana, the State
 Security Court in November reduced to 2 years his Article 8 sentence which had
 been based on testimony Zana had given to the human rights subcommittee of the
 European Parliament; it released him for time served. In May trade union chairman
 Atilay Aycin started serving a 20-month sentence in connection with a speech he
 delivered during a December 1992 HRA-organized meeting in Istanbul. The court
 ordered him re eased in November based on the changes fo Article 8. One faculty
 member was convicted under the Anti-Terror Law and spent a short time in prison.
 Military courts tried several cases against journalists and antiwar activists whose
 activities were alleged to discourage compulsory military service. In August these
 courts convicted Arif Hikmet lyidogan, Mehmet Sefa Fersal, and Gokhan
 Demirkiran, members of the War Opponents' Association, under Article 155 of the
 Criminal Code and sentenced them to between 2 and 6 months in prison. In April
 the military court of appeals overturned the trial court decision of a 5-month sen-
 tence against well-known journalist Mehmet Ali Birand and two others for a tele-
 vision program on military service during which military personnel spoke; the trial
 court renewed the conviction in July. The case is again on appeal. In June the mili-
 tary trial court convicted actress and musician Bilgesu Erenus and sentenced her
 to 2 months' imprisonment for saying "Mothers, do not send your sons to the army,"
 at a 1993 meeting. The military appeals court affi-med the sentence in November
 and ordered Erenus to serve 24 days.
 Throughout the year, State Security Courtprosecutors ordered the confiscation of
 numerous issues of leftist, pro-Kurdish, and pro-PKK periodicals, although most
 continue to publish. Many editions of pro-Kurdish periodicals were seized before
 they could be distributed nationally to newsstands. Pro-PKK newspaper Ozgur Ulke
 andits successor Yeni Politika were both closed by court order, Ozur Ulke in Feb-
 mary, Yeni Politika in Augist. A successor, Demokrasi, began publishing in Decem-
 ber. According to credible press reports, over the past year 1,443 publications (56
 books, 784 journals, 602 newspapers, and 1 bulletin) were confiscated on court
 order.
 Legislative reforms in 1991 partially removed the ban on the use of the Kurdish
 language. Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects contin-
 ued to be widely available, although suppression continued. Courts closed the Kurd-
 ish-language weekly, Welat, which reopened under the name Welate Me. Potential
 customers are afraid to purchase Kurdish-language materials because possession of
 such items may be interpreted as evidence of PKK sympathies. Kurdish-language
 
 
 1071
 broadcasts are still illegal. Pro-PKK "Med TV" now broadcasts from England daily
 and can be received by satellite dish in the southeast.
 Turkish press coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be unreliable,
 underreporting in some instances and grossly sensationalizing in others. Govern-
 ment decree 430 requires self-censorship of all news reporting from or about the
 southeast, and, upon the request of the regional governor, gives the Interior Min-
 istry the authority to ban distribution of any news viewed as misrepresenting events
 in the region. In the event such a government warning is not obeyed, the decree
 provides for a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days for
 subsequent offenses.
 In August Ankara university professor Dogu Ergil published a thorough study on
 the problems in the southeast entitled "The Eastern Question" which the Ankara
 State Security Court prosecutor's office concluded on December 6 was not actionable.
 During the year, numerous politicians and academicians spoke out in favor of great-
 er freedom of expression.
 A few journalists have challenged government control over media reports from the
 southeast. In late summer Fatih Altayli, a journalist who works for Hurriyet and
 for Show TV, visited Tunceli province and investigated allegations against security
 forces and one special police unit in particular. He wrote about his impressions and
 allegations in the daily newspaper and broadcast them on his talk show program,
 following which the National Security Director agreed to appear live on his program
 to respond to the allegations.
 The media are generally both free and freewheeling. While the overall readership
 of the daily press is not large for a country of 60 million, the newspaper business
 is intensely competitive and often sensationalist. Radio and television have experi-
 enced explosive growth in the 4 years since privately owned broadcasting has been
 allowed, although all of the new stations are not yet fully legal. The electronic
 media reach nearly every adult, and their influence is correspondingly great.
 In April 1994, Parliament passed regulatory legislation making it illegal for
 broadcasters to threaten the country's unity or national security and limiting the
 private broadcast of television programs in languages other than Turkish. As of Au-
 gust, there were some 150 registered television stations, 18 of which broadcast na-
 tionwide, and 68 registered radio stations, 33 of which broadcast nationwide. Other
 television and radio stations broadcast without an official license. The increasing
 availability of satellite dishes and cable allows access to foreign broadcasts, includ-
 ing several Turkish-language private channels. There is no prohibition on the re-
 ceiptof foreign publications nor jamming of radio broadcasts.
 Until July the Constitution and the law governing political parties had proscribed
 student and faculty involvement in political activities, but constitutional amend-
 ments passed by Parliament on July 23 now allow students ages 18 years or older
 and professors to participate in political activities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but authorities may deny permission if they believe the gath-
 ering is likely to disrupt public order. Prior notification of gatherings is required,
 and authorities may restrict meetings to designated sites.  -
 Police crowd control appears to have improved, despite the Gaziosmanpasa riots
 (see Section 5). However, in June a demonstration by garbage workers protesting
 their dismissal from jobs at Istanbul's Sisli municipality turned violent when  ice
 attempted to prevent the workers' protest march. During the 30-minute clash, 17
 workers and 11 police officers were wounded. There were accusations of excessive
 use of force.
 Adana province has seen a marked improvement in police handling of protest
 gatherings and demonstrations. In most instances, police nave shown restraint and
 professionalism in such situations. One significant exception occurred on August 11,
 when a protest in Adana turned violent after police prevented protesters from
 marching to a government building. While demonstrators chanted antigovernment
 slogans, polie attempted to disperse the goup by force, beating and kicking many
 of the protesters. Dozens were injured andsent to hospitals, and more than 50 dem-
 onstrators were arrested. All were subsequently released without being charged.
 Until July associations and labor unions were prohibited by law from having ties
 to political parties or engaging in political activities (see Section 6.a.). With Par-
 liament's passage of the constitutional amendments package, associations and labor
 unions may now engage in political activities. They did so in the December elections.
 Police raided a number of associations and organizations and harassed some of
 their members (see Section 4). Associations must submit their charters for govern-
 ment approval, a lengthy and cumbersome process.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and private dissemination
 
 
 1072
 of religious ideas. The Government generally observed these provisions in practice.
 About 99 percent of the population is Muslim. Under the law, religious services may
 take place only in designated places of worship. In late 1994, a Protestant group-
 although not a recognized minority-was granted permission to open a house of wor-
 ship in Adana.
 Although Turkey is a secular state, religious instruction in state schools is com-
 pulsory for Muslims. Upon written verification of their non-Muslim background,
 Lausanne Treaty minorities (Greek, Armenian, and Jewish) are exempted by law
 from Muslim religious instruction, although students who wish to attend may do so
 with parental consent. Syriac Christians are not officially exempt because they are
 not a Lausanne Treaty minority.
 Turkey's Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam) is estimated to
 number at least 12 million. There are, however, no government-salaried Alawi reli-
 gious leaders, in contrast to Sunni religious leaders, and no Religious Affairs Direc-
 torate funds go to the Alawi community. Some Alawis allege informal discrimination
 in the form of failure to include any Alawi doctrines or beliefs in religious instruc-
 tion classes. Alawis are disgruntled by what they regard as the Sunni bias in the
 Religious Affairs Directorate and the Directorate's tendency to view the Alawis as
 a cultural group rather than religious group. In September representatives of the
 Haci Bektas Veli cultural association, an Alawi cultural organization, termed obliga-
 tory religious courses in schools antidemocratic and antisecular and proposed that
 religion courses be elective.
 many prosecutors regard proselytizing and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamic extremists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they
 deem such activities to have political overtones. Since there is no law prohibiting
 proselytizing, police sometimes arrest Islamic extremists and evangelical Christians
 for disturbing the peace. Courts usually dismiss such charges, then order such per-
 sons deported. Generally they are able to reenter the countr easily.
 Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. The number of Christians
 in the south has been declining as the younger generation leaves for Europe and
 North America. The status of three minorities-Armenians, Jews, and Greeks-was
 recognized under the Lausanne Treaty. Other religions may not acquire additional
 property for churches. The Catholic Church in Ankara, for example, is confined to
 diplomatic property. The State must ap prove the operation of churches, monasteries,
 scnagogues, schools, and charitable rligious foundations, such as hospitals and or-
 Turkish authorities carefully monitor the activities of Eastern Orthodox and Ar-
 menian churches and their afiated operations. The Ecumenical Patriarchate in Is-
 tanbul has consistently expressed interest in reopening the seminary on the island
 of Halki in the Sea of Marmara. The seminary has be en closed since the 1970's
 when the State nationalized all private institutions of higher learning, and the Gov-
 ernment has used a variety of arguments to keep it closed. Armenian church offi-
 cials complain of petty harassment from local officials, such as delays or refusals
 in receiving building permits.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Under the law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (because
 of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff local religious councils) revert
 to government possession. ome non-Muslim minorities, particularly the Eastern
 Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, the shrinking Armenian Orthodox and Jewish com-
 munities, are faced with the danger of losing some of their houses of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emiqration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey and the
 freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted only by the national economic situation, civic obligations (military
 service, for example), or criminal investigation or prosecution. Each citizen traveling
 abroad (except those regularly working abroad and those traveling for the Govern-
 ment on official business) must pay a $100 departure tax. In June Parliament
 passed a law that allows Turks living abroad and naturalized in their country of
 residence to retain their civil rights inTurkey.
 Travel in the southeast often is restricted for security reasons. Roadblocks, set up
 by both Turkish security forces and the PKK, can seriously impede travel in the re-
 gion. On April 28, security forces declared a military zone for 6 months in north-
 eastern Kars province to prevent PKK infitration.
 When Turkey ratified the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Statug of Refu-
 gees, it accepted the option of accepting the Convention's obligations only with re-
 spect to refugees from Europe. It has not subsequently lifted the geographic limita-
 tion of its treaty obligation. As a result, Turkey does not recognize non-European
 asylum seekers as refugees.
 
 
 1073
 The Government requires non-European asylum seekers to register with authori-
 ties within 5 days of entering the country. The Government screens these appli-
 cants, determines those it considers bona fide, and then refers them to the U.N.
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for resettlement. Between January and
 mid-October, the Government deported to their home countries 33 Iranians and 26
 Iraqis whom the UNHCR determined met international refugee criteria, but whom
 the Government did not consider bona fide asylum seekers. It deported an addi-
 tional 12 Iranians and a number of Iraqis who wished to apply for temporary asy-
 lum without giving them the opportunity to do so.
 Estimates of the number of Bosn in Turkey range between 10,000 and 20,000.
 The majority continue to live outside organized camps. As "guests" they have no re-
 striction on the period they are allowed to remain in Turkey. They are not allowed
 to work or attend school; however, many do work and some children do attend
 school.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 According to the Constitution, citizens have the right and ability to change their
 government peacefully. Turkey has a multiparty parliamentary system, in which
 elections are held at least every 5 years on the basis of mandatory universal suf-
 frage for all citizens aged 21 and over. In July the voting age was lowered to 18.
 As of October, at least 25 political parties were operating in Turkey, 10 of which
 were represented in Parliament. The Grand National Assembly (Parliament) elects
 the President as head of state every 7 years, or when the incumbent becomes inca-
 pacitated or dies.
 The Government neither coerces nor forbids membership in any political organiza-
 tion, although the Constitutional Court may close down political parties for uncon-
 stitutional activities. One very small part was closed in 1995.
 Until July constitutional provisions forbade students, university faculty members
 and trade unionists from active participation in party politics. The constitutiona
 amendment package Parliament passed on July 23 lifted those restrictions and
 broadened the siope for political participation by such persons.
 Several political parties complained that the 7-day period provided to register for
 the December elections was inadequate and that bureaucratic obstacles and long
 registration lines discouraged or prevented many from registering. There was par-
 ticular concern that the 1 to 2 million persons displaced since the last census of
 1990 were not provided with adequate time or assistance for registration and that
 their views were not, therefore, reflected in the election results. There were some
 complaints of voting irregularities in rural areas of the southeast. Even if substan-
 tiated, these irregularities do not appear to have been sufficient to alter the out-
 come.
 There are no restrictions in law against women or minorities voting or participat-
 ing in politics. The Constitution calls for equal political rights for men and women.
 However, only 8 women representing 3 parties were elected to the 450-member Par-
 liament in 1991, and 13 were elected to an expanded 550-seat Parliament in the
 December elections. In addition to Prime Minister Ciller, there was one female cabi-
 net minister. Some political parties now recruit female delegates for their party con-
 ferences and electoral lists. Women's committees are active within politicalp   or-
 ganizations. Formation of formal youth and women's wings, formerly prohiited by
 the Constitution, was legalized with the passage of the constitutional amendments
 package.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The nongovernmental Human Rights Association, officially approved in 1987, has
 branches in 50 provincial capitals. As of October, authorities had closed all branches
 in the southeast except one. The BRA claims a membership of about 20,000. In 1990
 the HRA established its companion Human Rights Foundation which, in addition
 to operating torture rehabilitation centers in Ankara, Izmir, and Istanbul and a
 newly opened center in Adana, serves as a clearinghouse for human rights informa-
 tion. Other indigenous nongovernmental organizations include the Istanbul-based
 Helsinki Citizens Assembly, the Ankara-based Turkish Democracy Foundation, and
 human rights centers at a number of universities.
 Government agents have harassed human rights monitors, as well as lawyers and
 doctors involved in documenting human rights violations. Some of these monitors
 have reported receiving death threats from unknown parties. A number of human
 rights monitors have been aggressively prosecuted. In November the Ankara pros-
 ecutor's office brought criminal charges against the HRF for its publication of a book
 
 
 1074
 entitled "A Gift to Emil Galip Sandalci" (see Section 2.a.). In December 1994, HRF
 president Yavuz Onen and Fevzi Argun, head of the HRF's documentation center,
 were tried for using allegedly separatist language in the booklet "File of Torture.'
 They were acquitted in January along with four defendants from the HRA who had
 been indicted for their report entitled "A Cross-Section of Burned-Down Villages."
 In February a trial opened at the Diyarbakir State Security Court against four
 members of the board of the Diyarbakir branch of the HRA who were accused of
 aiding the PKK; the case focuses mainly on the publication of the booklet "Emer-
 gency Situation-1992." The trial continues; in April the defendants were released
 from detention. The case of three other HRA members was later joined to that case.
 The HRA representative in Hakkari, Abdulkerim Demirer, i-3 on trial for being a
 member of a terrorist organization.
 Some government officials, including some prosecutors and police, punitively
 apply various laws to restrict the HRA's activities. For example, officials ordered
 various branches of the BRA closed for periods of weeks or months generally on
 charges that they had violated the Associations Law through publication of a press
 statement or of allegedly separatist material (see Section 2.b.). Several BRA officials
 in southeastern Turkey said that they are routinely kept under surveillance by sccu-
 rity personnel. The Adana HRA branch, which provincial authorities closed in Sep-
 tember 1994, reopened in February after the public prosecutor dropped charges
 against the organization. On July 24, police raided the HRA branch in Malatya,
 which was preparing to launch a public campaign protesting past disappearances
 of detainees in police custody. Police seized documents and shut down the office. It
 remained closed at year's end.
 Since 1991 Parliament has had a Human Rights Commission. The Commission
 is authorized to oversee compliance with the human rights provisions of domestic
 law and international agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, investigate al-
 leged abuses, and prepare reports. Underfunded and lacking the power to subpoena
 witnesses or documents, the Commission has been ineffective. An August 1994 ini-
 tiative to establish a human rights advisory department connected to the Prime
 Ministry never materialized.
 While representatives of diplomatic missions who wish to monitor the state of
 human rights are free to speak with private citizens, security police may place such
 visitors in the southeast and the east under surveillance, and the presence of secu-
 rity officials may intimidate those interviewed. In 1995 high-level visitors obtained
 most of the appointments they requested.
 In June government officials declared Amnesty International researcher Helmut
 Oberdiek persona non grata and deported him. They baced the order on security in-
 structions dated August 10 and December 14, 1994, which stated that Oberdiek was
 not permitted to enter Turkey. Officials did not harm Oberdiek, but they made cop-
 ies of his notes. Also in June, Human Rights Watch/Helsinki (HRW) announced that
 it was suspending one particular mission to Turkey because of a statement by the
 Interior Minister, in which he purported to speak for Human Rights Watch/Hel-
 sinki. HRW completed a separate research project in June/July on human rights
 abuses involving foreign supplied arms without interference from authorities.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all citizens as
 equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. The Gov-
 ernment officially recognizes only those religious minorities mentioned in the Treaty
 of Lausanne (1923), which guarantees the rights of Eastern Orthodox, Armenian
 Apostolic, and Jewish adherents. Despite constitutional provisions, discrimination
 remains a problem in several areas.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is a serious and widespread problem. However, it is still
 considered an extremely private matter, involving societal notions of family honor.
 Few women go to the police, who in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic
 disputes and frequently advise women to return to their husbands. Turks of either
 sex may file civi or criminal charges but rarely do so. A combination of laws and
 ingrained societal notions make it difficult to prosecute sexual assault or rape cases.
 By law, penalties may be reduced if a woman was not a virgin prior to a rape. Pen-
 alties may also be reduced if a judge deems the woman to have acted provocatively.
 According to a study made public in May by the Prime Ministry's Family Re-
 search Institute, the two most frequent forms of violence against women in the
 home are beating and cursing. The study claims that 84 percent of women inter-
 viewed reported having been cursed and 78.9 percent beaten. In addition, 29.3 per-
 cent reported threats; 17.5 percent economic pressure; and 9.1 percent sexual vio-
 
 
 1075
 lence. According to women's responses, physical violence was used in 29.6 percent
 of families; according to the men, in 34 percent.
 There are several shelters for battered women and at least two consultation cen-
 ters Istanbul's Purple Roof Foundation and Ankara's Altindag center city shelter.
 In January the Altindag municipality attempted to close down the Altindag con-
 sultation center and shelter to regain the building; the Purple Roof Foundation was
 forced to move for the same reason.
 The Civil Code, which prohibits granting gender-based privileges or rights, retains
 some discriminatory provisions concerning marital rights and obligations. Because
 the husband is the legal head of household, the wife automatically acquires the hus-
 band's surname with marriage; the husband is authorized to choose the domicile
 and represents the conjulgal unit. As parents, husband and wife exercise their rights
 jointly, but when they disagree, the husband's view prevails. Women's groups have
 lobbied to change this provision. Divorce law requires that the divorcing spouses di-
 vide their property according to property registered in each spouse's name. Because
 n imost cases property is registered in the husband's name, this can create difficul-
 ties for women who wish to divorce. Under inheritance laws, a widow generally re-
 ceives one-fourth of the estate.
 The illiteracy rate for women is approximately 29 percent, some 10 percent higher
 than that of the population as a whole. Particularly in urban areas, women continue
 to improve their position, including in the professions, business, and the civil serv-
 ice, although they continue to face discrimination to varying degrees. Numerous
 women have become lawyers, doctors, and engineers since the 1960's. Women com-
 prise about 36 percent of the work force; approximately 80 percent of working
 women are employed in agriculture. They generally receive equal pay for equal work
 in the professions, business, and civil service jobs, although a large percentage of
 women employed in agriculture and in the trade, restaurant, and hotel sectors work
 as unpaid family help. Women may take the examination required to become a
 subgovernor. Several ave been apinted subovernors; one governor is a woman.
 Independent women a groups and women s rights associations exist, but the con-
 cept of lobbying for women's rights has not gained currency.
 Children.-aThe Government is committed to furthering childrens welfare and
 works to expand opportunities in education and health, including further reduction
 of the infant mortality rate. The State Minister for Women's and Family Issues
 oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. Traditional
 family values in rural Turkey place a greater emphasis on advanced education for
 sons than for daughters. Far fewer girls than boys continue their education aftr
 primary school.
 There are some instances of child beating and abuse, as illustrated by the case
 of a young child whose abuse and death the newspaper Cumhuriyet documented in
 March. A report released in May by the Prime Ministry's Family search Institute
 stated that, in families where violence was used against the wife, there was approxi-
 mately a 46 percent chance that the children would be beaten, too.
 Children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in the southeast. School
 closings in the southeast and the migration of many families, forced or voluntary,
 have uprooted children to cities which are hard pressed to find the resources to ex-
 tend basic, mandatory services, such as schooling. Many cities in the southeast are
 operating schools on double shifts, with as many as 100 students per classroom. The
 Government is establishing[ regional boarding schools to help combat this problem,
 but these are insufficient. In practice, in rural Anatolia andthe southeast, the lit-
 eracy rate for girls is very low, and many do not complete primary school. The lit-
 eracy rate for boys, most of whom complete primai', school, is higher. Some continue
 on to middle and high school, for which they generally must travel or live away from
 home.
 In January Turkey ratified the UN. Convention on the Rights of the Child; Par-
 liament had not yet passed implementing legislation by year's end.
 People With Disabilities.-Legislation dealing with the disabled is piecemeal, and
 there is little legislation regarding accessibility for the disabled. Certain categories
 of employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent of their employee
 pool, although there is no penalty for failure to comply.
 Religious Minorities.-There were several instances of religiously motivated vio-
 lence byalleged nationalists, including the beating in February of eight students at
 Istanbuls Marmara University for eating during the Muslim fasting month of
 Ramadan. In July the head of the bar association in Gumushane was murdered by
 a ma    n anr aut      o female lawyers wearing headtcarves in court.
 In March in Istanbul, two instances of religiously motivated rioting occurred in
 two heavily Alawi neighborhoods of Istanbul. The combined death toil of the
 Gaziosmanpasa riots was around 30. Although the rioting appeared to be sectarian,
 
 
 1076
 
 it was not aimed at Sunni institutions. Rather, it appeared to reflect Alawis' desire
 for the State to do more to defend secularism in Turkey and counter the threat they
 perceive from resurgent Sunni extremism.
 The Jewish community is well integrated into Turkish society, although it fears
 the possibility of rising Islamic extremism. The only problem the Jewish community
 reported in 1995 was a car bombing in Ankara in April, which targeted the head
 of Ankara's tiny Jewish community. He escaped with minor injuries.
 During the last few years, there have been instances of graffiti, stones tossed over
 the walls, and press attacks on the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Patriarch. The
 Armenian Patriarchate has reported similar attacks against Armenian churches in
 Istanbul, and Church officials complain of growing encroachment by certain Muslim
 extremist groups on lands belonging to the Armenian community, especially on the
 Princes' Islands in the Sea of Marmara. The police have responded with intensified
 security measures.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Constitution, in line with the Treaty of
 Lausanne, does not recognize the Kurds in Turkey as a national, racial, or ethnic
 minority. Many human rights abuses have been targeted at Kurds who publicly or
 politically assert their Kurdish ethnic identity. Kurds who are long-term residents
 in industrialized cities in western Turkey have been, for the most part, assimilated
 into the political, economic, and social life of the nation. Kurds who are cuj" ently
 migrating westward (including those displaced by the conflict in the southeast)
 bring with them their culture and village identity; many simply are not prepared
 for urban life.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communications in Kurdish
 legalized some spoken and printed communications in Kurdish. Under the law on
 political parties, however, all discussion that takes place at political meetings must
 be in Turkish. Kurdish may be spoken only in "nonpolitical communication. Mate-
 rials dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic identity continue to be sub-
 ject to confiscation and prosecution under the "indivisible unity of the State" provi-
 sions of the Anti-Terror Law.
 The High Court of Appeals, in rendering its decision on the former DEP Members
 of Parliament ruled that taking the Parliamentary oath in Kurdish, wearing Kurd-
 ish colors to the oath-taking ceremony, and stating that Turkish was a foreign lan-
 guage for them (all actions taken by the former M.P.'s) were not crimes (see Section
 2.a.). The courts have given permission for a cultural foundation to be established
 in Istanbul and to use the word "Kurdish" in its name.
 The Ministry of Education tightly controls the curriculums in foreign-language
 schools. Greek educators complain that the Turkish Ministry of Education is ex-
 tremely slow to approve Greek-language textbooks, including those in such non-
 controversial subjects as mathematics and the natural sciences. They claim that,
 rather than allowing the use of texts from Greece, the Ministry wants them to use
 Greek translations of Turkish texts. Many Greek students report difficulty in con-
 tinuing their education in Turkey and go to Greece, often never to return.
 The Romani population is extremely small, and there were no reported incidents
 of public or government harassment directed against Roma.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Most workers have the right to associate freely and
 form representative unions. Exceptions are police and military personnel. Until July
 the law did not explicitly give civil servants, including schoolteachers, the right to
 form legally recognized unions. This situation changed with Parliament's passage of
 a package of constitutional amendments on July 23. (Even prior to passage, civil
 servants unions existed and worked for legal recognition, collective bargaining, and
 the right to strike through demonstrations and 1-day work stoppages.) Within the
 package of amendments broadening democratic participation in Turkey, there is lan-
 guage which, in effect, recognizes civil servants unions. Parliament added language
 to Article 53 of the Constitution stipulating that unions formed by civil servants
 could bring cases to court on behalf of their members, could carry out collective
 talks with the Government to secure their objectives, and could sign an understand-
 ing with the Government if agreement is reached. The language does not mention
 strikes. The amendment also suggests that Parliament will pass follow-on laws to
 regulate these procedures. However, as noted below, branches of one civil servants'
 union were closed in 1995.
 The Constitution stipulates that no one shall be compelled to become or remain
 a member or withdraw from a labor union. The law states that unions and confed-
 erations may be founded without prior authorization based on a petition to the gov-
 ernor of the province where the union's headquarters are to be located. Although
 unions are independent of the Government and political parties, they must have
 
 
 1077
 government permission to hold meetings or rallies and must allow police to attend
 conventions and record the proceedings. The Constitution requires candidates for
 union office to have worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union.
 Slightly over 12 percent of the total civilian labor force (aged 15 and above) is union-
 ized. There are three confederations of labor unions in Turkey the Turkish Confed-
 eration of Workers Unions (Turk-Is), the Confederation of Turkish Real Trade
 Unions (Hak-Is), and the Confederation of Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK).
 There are also some independent unions.
 Unions and their officers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly
 affecting members' economic and social interests. With passage of the constitutional
 amendments package in July, Parliament lifted restrictions on unions engaging in
 political activity by completely repealing article 52 of the Constitution (see Section
 2.b.). However, even before this change, in practice unions were able to convey clear-
 ly in election and referendum campaigns their support for, or opposition to, given
 political parties and government policies. Prosecutors may request labor courts to
 order a trade union or confederation to suspend its activities or to go into liquida-
 tion for serious infractions, based on alleged violation of specific legal norms. The
 Government, however, may not summarily dissolve a union.
 The right to strike, while provided for in the Constitution, is partially restricted.
 For example, workers engaged in the protection of life and property and those in
 the mining and petroleum industries, sanitation services, nationa defense, and edu-
 cation do not have the right to strike.
 Collective bargaining is required before a strike. The law specifies the series of
 steps a union must te before it may strike or before an empioyer may engage in
 a lockout. Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. A party that fails to com-
 ply with these steps forfeits its rights. The employer may respond to a strike with
 a lockout but is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using administrative per-
 sonnel to perform jobs normally done by strikers. Article 42 ofaw 2822, governing
 collective  araining, strikes, and lockouts, prohibits the employer from terminating
 workers who encourage or participate in a legal strike. Unions are forbidden to en-
 gage in secondary (solidarity), political or general strikes or in slowdowns. In sec-
 tors in which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through binding arbitra-
 tion.
 The Government has the statutory power under Law 2822 to suspend strikes for
 60 days for reasons of national security or public health and safety. Unions may pe-
 tition the Council of State to lift such a suspension. If this appeal fails, and the par-
 ties and mediators still fail to resolve the dispute, it is subject to compulsory arbi-
 tration at the end of the 60-day period. The International Labor Organization's
 (ILO) Committee of Experts and the Committee on the Application of Standards re-
 gard the Government's application of the law as too broad and called on the Govern-
 ment to limit the application of the Law and recourse to compulsory arbitration to
 essential services in the strict sense of the term. The Government asserts that the
 Law does not contradict the Committees' principles.
 Some 64 strikes, involving 26,361 workers, took place in the first 6 months of
 1995. The Government suspended one strike in 1995. On February 23, the Govern-
 ment suspended the planned strike by the Airline Workers Union against Turkish
 Airlines, the publicly owned national carrier, on grounds that a strike would ad-
 versely affect national security.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 interatonal labor bodies, as long as these organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) approved DISK as an afiliate in December 1992. Turk-Is is a long-
 standing member. Ha-I applied for ICFTU affiiation in 1993; the application re-
 mains pending.
 In some instances labor union members have been the subject of government lim-
 its on freedom of speech and assembly (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.). In June in An-
 kara, during demonstrations by civil servants for the right to form legally recog-
 nized unions with collective bargaining and strike rights, four civil servants' union
 presidents were briefly detained for questioning, then released. The public prosecu-
 tor subsequently filed charges against 37 leaders of a civil servants' trade union who
 had organized the demonstrations. However, in September an Ankara criminal court
 dismissed these charges. The court found that the organizers had not intended to
 violate the law on demonstrations and assemblies. There were no incidents between
 police and demonstrators during the demonstrations, which lasted for several days.
 Some branches of a civil servants' communications union were closed by court
 order on the grounds that it was an illegal organization. Branches were closed in
 July and August after an appeals court upheld the ruling of an Istanbul court that
 civil servants unions' are ilegal. The court's actions occurred when Parliament
 
 
 1078
 amended the Constitution to recognize civil servants' unions. Observers believe that
 further legislation is needed to clarify the situation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-AUI industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at a given work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10-percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 unions, particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that represents
 nearly 80 percent of organized labor.
 The ILO has called on Turkey to rescind this 10-percent rule. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however, and the
 Government has only recently pursued a change. Last year the government rep-
 resentative informed the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards that the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Security has proposed to remove the 10-percent numer-
 ical restriction, and that its proposal had ben communicated to the social partners.
 The ILO Committee of Experts and the Committee on the Application of Standards
 urged the Government again to remove the 10 percent rule. The ILO took note of
 the Government's statement that it continued to study removal of this requirement
 despite objections from employer and worker organizations.
 The law on trade unions stipulates that an employer may not dismiss a labor
 union representative without rightful cause. The union member may appeal such a
 dismissal to the courts, and if the ruling is in the union member's favor, the em-
 ployer must reinstate him and pay all back benefits and salary. These laws are ap-
 plied in practice.
 Union organizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the duty-free export
 processing zones at Antalya, Istanbul, Izmir, and Mersin. Workers in those zones,
 however, are not allowed to strike during the first 10 years of operation. Until then,
 settlements not otherwise reached are determined by binding arbitration.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and statutes pro-
 hibit compulsory labor. The laws are enforced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution and labor laws
 forbid employment of children younger than age 15 years, with the exception that
 those ages 13 and 14 may engage in light, part-time work if enrolled in school or
 vocational training. The Constitution also prohibits children from engaging in phys-
 ically demanding jobs such as underground mining and from working at night. The
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces these laws only in the organized industrial
 sector.
 In practice, many children work because families frequently need the supple-
 mentary income. An informal system provides work for young boys at low wages,
 for example, in auto repair shops. Girls are rarely seen working in public, but many
 are kept out of school to work in handicrafts, especially in rural areas.
 The Government has recognized the problem of child labor and has been working
 with the ILO to define its dimensions and to determine solutions. The Ministry of
 Labor, the Ankara municipality, the Turk-Is labor confederation, and the Turkish
 Employers Association are among the institutions participating in the ILO's Inter-
 national Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), a new project to solve
 the problems of working children. The Ministry of Labor and the ILOm have jointly
 produced a study showing that almost one-ha (44 percent) of the children working
 in Turkey are below age 15 are paid less than the minimum wage, and have no
 insurance whatsoever. The LaborMiister said in a September speech that there
 are 3.5 million working young people between the ages of 12 and 19, and that 51
 percent of them are uninsured.
 In a 1994 study on child labor in rural Turkey, also undertaken under the IPEC
 program, a Middle East Technical University professor reported that children in the
 rural work force are largely unpaid family workers engaged in agriculture and relat-
 ed activities. Since many chil  n work because their families need additional in-
 come, the study concluded that solving the problem of rural child labor required a
 simultaneous improvement in adult employment opportunities to raise standards of
 living in rural households while expanding educational opportunities (both general
 academic and vocational training) for rural children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body.In recent years it has done so annually. In August,
 after some disagreements among the board members about wage levels and the tim-
 ing of implementation, the nominal minimum wage was increased by approximately
 103 percent over the year before. The monthly gross minimum wage rates which be-
 
 
 1079
 came effective on September 1 are approximately $176 (TL 8,460,000) for workers
 older than age 16 and about $148 (TL 7,087,050) for workers under age 16.
 It would be difficult for a single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on
 the minimum wage without support from other sources. Most workers earn consid-
 erably more. Workers covered by the labor law, who constitute about one-third of
 the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or a daily food allowance; transpor-
 tation to and from work; a fuel allowance; and other fringe benefits which, according
 to the Turkish employers' association, make basic wages alone account for only
 about 37 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law sets a 45-hour workweek, although most unions have bargained for
 fewer hours. The law prescribes a weekly rest day and limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. The Labor Inspectorate
 of the Ministry of Labor effectively enforces wage and hour provisions in the union-
 ized industrial, service, and government sectors, which cover about 12 percent of
 workers.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. Law
 1475 allows for the shutdown of an operation if a five-man committee, which in-
 cludes safety inspectors, employee, and employer representatives, determines that
 the operation endangers workers' lives. In practice, financial constraints, limited
 safety awareness, carelessness, and fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to
 occupational safety and health by workers and employers alike. However, after a
 mine accident in a private company in which 39 miners died, 2 managers were re-
 portedly arrested and charged with causing the accident through negligence.
