 TURKEY
 1984 marked the return to parliamentary rule in Turkey. The
 present Government, led by Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, derives
 its authority from the November 1983 parliamentary elections,
 the first such elections since the 1982 Constitution was
 ratified in a nationwide referendum. Turkey's President,
 Kenan Evren, derives his authority from the same 1982
 constitutional referendum, which also installed him as
 President. In addition, as leader of the September 12, 1980
 military takeover and as the former Chief of the Turkish
 General Staff, President Evren has continuing close ties to
 the Turkish armed forces which have responsibility for
 administering martial law.
 Turkey had an uneven, although significantly improved, human
 rights record in 1984. On the positive side, the most
 important development was the restoration of elected
 parliamentary government. Authority to lift martial law was
 transferred to the Parliament, which did so in 33 provinces.
 Also, free and representative municipal elections were held;
 two government commissions were created to investigate and
 improve prison conditions; all defendants in the Revolutionary
 Trade Unions Confederation (DISK) trial were released;
 collective bargaining and the right to strike were resumed
 with certain restrictions; and an effort by the Chief
 Prosecutor of the Republic to shut down a political party was
 rejected by the Constitutional Court. The free and lively
 partisan spirit within Parliament, coupled with an elected
 government's normal concern about being held accountable for
 failures or-misdeeds, have made the Government willing openly
 to confront and seek solutions for human rights problems. As
 a result, human rights problems and their eradication were the
 focus of considerable public and political interest in Turkey
 during 1984.
 Developments in 1984 which caused concern about human rights
 included: the trial of 56 signatories of a petition on human
 rights and democracy in Turkey; the opening of a second Peace
 Association trial, as well as the denial of bail to many of
 the defendants of the original Peace Association trial; slow
 progress in overcoming poor prison conditions and dealing with
 continued reports of torture; a series of large-scale hunger
 strikes by inmates; and the continuation of martial law in 34
 provinces, including the most populous.
 Turkey's economic sgstem combines capitalism and etatism. The
 current Prime Minister is a strong advocate of free market
 policies. With the resumption of collective bargaining, the
 legalization of strikes, and the release of all the DISK
 defendants on bail, the labor situation improved in 1984.
 However, both the International Labor Organization (ILO) and
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU)
 have noted in 1984 that some restrictions on labor activities
 remain in effect.
 
 
 1104
 TURKEY
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no accusations of government-instigated political
 killings in Turkey in 1984. The only reports of killings by
 the Government in 1984 concerned armed confrontations between
 security forces and terrorists.
 Beginning in August and continuing through October, a number
 of Turkish soldiers were ambushed and killed while on duty in
 primarily Kurdish areas of the southeast. Turkish Government
 officials, speaking publicly, have attributed these attacks to
 .separatist terrorists' and allege that they are supported by
 others living across the border in Iran, Iraq, and Syria. In
 addition, there have been scattered reports of street
 demonstrations in areas where Kurds predominate, supporting
 Kurdish organizations. As a result, the Turkish Government
 has announced publicly a special military operation aimed at
 apprehending the attackers and preventing any further
 incidents.
 Through November 1, 1984, according to government officials,
 102 people have been killed in Turkey by terrorists, and 26
 terrorists have been killed by government security forces. In
 addition, press reports indicate that hundreds of suspects
 have been detained in connection with the problem in the
 southeast.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by either the
 Government or opposition forces in Turkey in 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 The Turkish Constitution prescribes that "no one shall be
 subjected to torture or ill treatment incompatible with human
 dignity.' Despite this, torture remained an important human
 rights problem for Turkey in 1984, continuing to occur in
 circumstances of both civilian and military detention.
 Complaints of torture or ill-treatment, involving even high
 government officials within the Ministry of Customs and
 Finance as victims, continued to be made. Contributing
 factors to this situation are the serious overcrowding of
 Turkish prisons; the severe shortage of trained prison
 personnel; the radical ideological beliefs of some prisoners;
 and an apparent assumption on the part of many individual
 interrogators that physical abuse and/or outright torture, as
 an ultimate means to make uncooperative suspects talk, is a
 valid interrogation tactic. While it is difficult to estimate
 how many people may have been tortured, claims of torture
 were in the hundreds during the year.
 In protest against alleged torture and poor prison conditions,
 prisoners in several Turkish jails engaged in hunger strikes
 in 1984. Prison authorities hospitalized and intravenously
 force-fed the most seriously ill strikers, but despite this a
 number died. The authorities have argued that these strikes
 were politically motivated attempts to embarrass the
 
 
 1105
 TURKEY
 Government rather than genuine reflections of chronic abuses
 in the prisons.
 Numerous high-ranking government officials, including the
 President and the Prime Minister, spoke out strongly against
 torture in 1984, as did parliamentarians and other political
 party members. The Turkish General Staff (TGS) and the
 Ministers of Justice and the Interior condemned torture and
 publicly warned their subordinates that torturers will be
 severely punished. As the Turkish press gave increased
 coverage to those condemnations, the subjects of torture and
 its eradication were important topics of public discussion in
 1984.
 In response to protests in several military prisons alleging
 poor prison conditions and torture, the TGS formed a committee
 of inquiry in March 1984 to investigate prison conditions and
 to recommend improvements. This committee, which concerned
 itself with military prisons and detention centers only, made
 public its findings on April 2, 1984. While admitting that
 security personnel 'might sometimes, as is the case all over
 the world, individually act in a manner which is contrary to
 law and regulations," the committee concluded that torture on
 a widespread or systematic scale does not exist in Turkey's
 military prisons. The committee added that individual
 security officers who torture or mistreat prisoners 'have
 always been prosecuted and those found guilty have been
 punished.'
 A special parliamentary committee has been charged by the
 Speaker of the Turkish Parliament with the task of inspecting
 both civilian and military prisons to follow up and broaden
 the work of the TGS Committee of Inquiry. The parliamentary
 committee has not yet filed its report.
 According to official figures, as of July 24, 1984, the
 Government had investigated a total of 897 complaints of
 torture since September 12, 1980. With 153 cases still under
 investigation, the Government said that 584 cases were
 groundless. Of the remaining 160 cases, 114 have been
 completed, while 46 nave been referred to competent courts.
 Government statistics also show that 110 security officials
 have been sentenced to various terms of imprisonment for
 torture or ill treatment of detainees.
 On June 29, 1984, the former Warden of Izmit Prison, Saim
 Servo, received a life sentence, the harshest ever, in
 connection with the 1980 death of an inmate because of
 torture. In addition to that conviction, 5 prison guards also
 received prison sentences ranging from 20 months to 17 years
 for their participation in the death of the inmate. In the
 most recent case, eight military policemen, including one
 officer, were convicted in November 1984 of a torture killing
 of a suspect in their custody and sentenced to 5 years 4
 months in prison.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.
 The Constitution requires that a person taken into custody
 must be charged within 48 hours and that family and
 "interested parties" be notified in the case of an arrest.
 During a "state of emergency" or martial law a person may be
 detained without charge for 45 days and may also be held
 incommunicado during this period.
 
 
 1106
 TURKEY
 Martial law authorities need no warrant to conduct searches or
 to arrest persons. Preventive or investigatory detention is
 permitted in cases where the authorities decide that there is
 a risk that a suspect will flee or destroy evidence, if left
 at large. In June 1984, there were 333 people under
 investigative detention in connection with martial law
 charges. In areas not under martial law, the Turkish Criminal
 Code provides that police wishing to enter a private dwelling
 must have a warrant signed by the public prosecutor.
 Turkish judicial authorities, including martial law
 authorities, can impose sentences of internal exile. In 1984,
 internal exile sentences were imposed by Turkish courts at
 prominent trials, including the National Salvation Party trial
 and the Peace Association trial. However, these cases are
 currently being retried or appealed.
 While Turkish law has no specific provision for habeas corpus,
 the Constitution includes the right to be arraigned, tried, or
 released within a reasonable time, and provides for the
 notification of the next of kin. Under martial law, periods
 of detention, after being charged and pending trial, are
 largely at the discretion of local martial law commanders.
 Some defendants are released on bail pending the conclusion of
 their trials. In 1984, bail was extended to all the DISK
 trial defendants, with the exception of several facing trial
 or convicted in other unrelated cases. In November, six of
 tnose convicted in the first Peace Association trial were
 released on their own recognizance pending the outcome of
 their appeal. Other defendants in that trial, however, remain
 incarcerated.
 On May 7, 1984, the Turkish Parliament promulgated a law
 providing for the compensation of individuals who have been
 arrested or detained unlawfully.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides a number of basic protections for
 the individual during the judicial process. Among these are
 the right of a defendant to choose his own lawyer and the
 right, in most cases, to an open trial. Family members and
 lawyers of defendants may attend trials, and usually members
 of the public and press are also free to attend. In the case
 of some trials, particularly those held in military prisons or
 on military compounds, prior notification is required and
 permission is usually given. In 1984, U.S. diplomats were
 given permission to attend all trials for which they had
 applied.
 In 1984, new legislation was adopted governing the Turkish
 legal profession, including a provision which provides for
 temporary disbarment by bar associations of attorneys charged
 with infractions against the state. Since passage of the
 legislation, bar associations have not, in fact, disbarred
 anyone.
 Under the Constitution, the civilian judiciary is
 independent. The High Board of Judges and Public Prosecutors,
 appointed by the President, selects judges and prosecutors for
 the higher courts and oversees those of the lower courts.
 Under martial law, all persons accused of terrorism or other
 security offenses are tried in military courts. Martial Law
 
 
 1107
 TURKEY
 Court judges normally have law degrees and observe the same
 professional standards as civilian judges. They may not be
 transferred at the discretion of military commanders.
 Trials themselves are usually conducted under rules of
 procedure based on the Constitution and the Martial Law
 Regulations. Civilian and military courts generally conduct
 trials under the same rules of procedure. Convictions in
 either system may be appealed to civilian and military appeals
 courts, respectively. In some types of cases, particularly
 capital cases, appeals are automatic to the Supreme Court or
 to the High Court of Military Appeals, after which they must
 be approved by the Parliament and, finally, the President.
 Certain trials, like the trial of leaders of the leftist
 Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions (DISK) have
 continued for years with no end in sight, even though the
 defendants are now free on bail. It is not unusual for mass
 trials to last 2 or 3 years, often with many defendants in
 custody for part or all of the duration of the trial.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners held in
 Turkey's jails during 1984 vary greatly with the source and
 the source's definition of 'a political prisoner," The Prime
 Minister claimed in May and October 1984 that there were no
 political prisoners in Turkey--only terrorists and common
 criminals. Non-governmental estimates, however, range as high
 as 12,600 and even higher (Helsinki Watch Report).
 Although Turkey is overwhelmingly Muslim, its court system is
 modeled on Western European (mainly Swiss and Italian)
 judicial systems. Thus, there are no Islamic or Shari'a
 courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Entry by government officials into a private residence or
 other private property, and interception or monitoring of
 private correspondence or other forms of communication such as
 telephone calls or telegrams, are permitted only upon issuance
 of a judicial warrant. Under the Constitution, however, the
 Government has the authority during a 'crisis' (natural
 disaster, dangerous epidemic disease, a serious economic
 crisis, or a serious threat to internal security) to declare a
 state of emergency. In such circumstances, it has the power
 to suspend those basic rights which it deems to be impediments
 to the resolution of the crisis.
 Martial law, which was declared in some areas of Turkey in
 December 1978 and which was extended to the country as a whole
 on September 12, 1980, suspended citizens' protection from
 arbitrary invasion of their homes and communications.
 Parliament in 1984 lifted martial law in 33 provinces. In the
 34 provinces remaining under martial law, the authorities,
 under the terms of the Martial Law Act, have the power
 "without need for a warrant, application, or request... to
 search residences, or buildings of all societies,
 associations, political parties, unions, clubs, business
 locations or offices belonging to or occupied by judicial as
 well as private bodies." They also have the right to search,
 hold, or seize without warrant persons, letters, telegrams,
 
 
 1108
 TURKEY
 and documents. While this authority is used, there is no
 evidence that its use is widespread or abused, nor are there
 allegations of widespread use of electronic surveillance.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution guarantees the right to express and
 disseminate thought in any medium, martial law continued to
 limit the exercise of free speech and freedom of the press in
 1984.
 In 1984, 56 of some 1,300 prominent individuals who signed a
 petition on democracy and human rights were put on trial,
 ostensibly for violating a martial law ban on political
 proclamations. Many observers believe, however, that these
 individuals are being tried for expressing views critical of
 the military and the present political system. The trial is
 open to outside observers, including foreigners, and the
 defendants have not been incarcerated.
 In another case relating to exercise of free speech, the
 Istanbul Martial Law Court acquitted all 19 defendants in the
 Turkish Writers Union trial. They had been charged with
 violating laws which forbid advocacy of a Communist system of
 government.
 The former National Security Council promulgated a law in
 December 1983 banning all criticism of the decrees,
 communiques, and actions of that body and its members,
 including the President of Turkey. The same law also
 proscribes all statements praising or condemning central
 committee leaders of banned political parties.
 The press in Turkey is privately owned and reflects a variety
 of political positions. Turkish radio and television,
 however, are government monopolies, the programming of which
 has occasioned criticism by opposition political parties.
 Censorship of the press has been conducted by martial law
 authorities. As of November 1, 1984, only one newspaper, the
 conservative daily Tercuman, had been closed during 1984 (it
 was closed for 10 days). However, in late November, the
 Istanbul martial law authorities initiated an investigation of
 the paper's editor in chief, Nazli Ilicak, on the basis of an
 article by Ilicak criticizing certain National Security
 Council actions taken in 1983. In addition, the press
 exercises a considerable degree of self-censorship due to the
 powers of the martial law authorities to close down any
 newspaper at any time without stating the reason. Given the
 precarious financial status of most newspapers, few can afford
 frequent or lengthy shutdowns. Also during 1984, several
 specific stories were banned from publication by martial law
 authorities.
 On March 23, several journalists were arrested and detained
 briefly in Ankara as they attempted to cover a silent sidewalk
 demonstration against alleged human rights abuses in Turkey,
 staged by seven West German citizens, including three
 parliamentarians from the Green party. A visiting Spanish
 journalist at the scene was quickly expelled from the country
 when he failed to produce a valid press card.
 
 
 1109
 TURKEY
 In 1984, the press has had considerable freedom to discuss
 current political and economic issues, including the right
 extensively to criticize the new Government and the existing
 political parties. The Ozal Administration has attempted to
 expand the area of discussion free from censorship. In his
 press conferences, Prime Minister Ozal has responded openly to
 questions concerning prisons and alleged human rights abuses.
 On occasion, he also publicly discussed matters which had been
 censored by martial law authorities.
 Another power allowed the authorities under the Martial Law
 Act which has, from time to time, been used, is the right to
 prevent entry into Turkey or sale in Turkey of any
 publications or films, which the authorities deem harmful.
 Martial law authorities have, on a number of occasions banned
 the distribution, sale, or showing in the country of foreign
 magazines, newspapers, or films containing material which they
 have deemed to be hostile or harmful to Turkey. During 1984,
 this has included a number of Islamic fundamentalist religious
 publications, generally Shiite in character, and books about
 Kurds.
 Another issue is the right of indigenous minority groups in
 the country to use their own languages. The Constitution
 states that the official language of the country is Turkish.
 Although one article bans discrimination on the basis of
 language, others prohibit the public use of "languages
 prohibited by law.' However, which languages are prohibited
 has never been legislated. There are four main groups in
 Turkey whose native language and/or culture is not Turkish:
 Kurds, Arabs, Armenians, and Greeks. The Government has
 stated that the intent of these articles is to foster Turkish
 as the language of all citizens for all uses, as part of its
 effort to inculcate in all Turkish citizens a sense of
 identity with the Turkish state and nation as opposed to
 identification with any particular group within the nation.
 One exception is that the use of Greek and Armenian in schools
 and religious education was guaranteed by the Treaty of
 Lausanne, and the Turkish Government honors that guarantee.
 Severe restrictions on the use of Kurdish, a language not
 protected by any treaty, have continued in 1984 to cause
 disaffection in predominantly Kurdish areas of the country.
 Language in relation to religion is discussed in Section 2.c.
 Turkish institutions of higher education are all operated by
 the state. Partly as a result of political violence emanating
 from campuses in the late 1970's, the Government has moved
 since 1980 to bring the universities under tight, centralized
 control through a Higher Education Council and to eliminate
 the politicization of the universities. The Constitution and
 the Political Parties Law ban faculty members and students
 from becoming members of political parties or from involvement
 in political activities. Parties are also forbidden to form
 youth branches, and student or faculty political associations
 of any type are banned.
 Critics charge, however, that the new system is itself averse
 to academic freedom. The martial law authorities and the
 Higher Education Council have taken a number of highly
 controversial steps. At least 192 university faculty members
 have been dismissed from their positions since November 1982.
 Although no dismissals occurred in 1984, disgruntlement
 concerning the earlier dismissals remains high in academic
 circles. Dismissals effectively bar faculty members from
 
 
 1110
 TURKEY
 university jobs within Turkey, from other government
 employment, and from research funds. The Council has claimed
 that the dismissed faculty members were not sufficiently
 qualified for their positions. It is charged however, that
 these dismissals had less to do with teaching qualifications
 than with political beliefs or political activism.
 In addition to continuing discontent over these dismissals,
 many faculty members from the universities in Istanbul,
 Ankara, and Izmir have objected to the Council's policy of
 staffing new universities in remote areas by virtually
 mandatory transfers. Some have expressed concern that
 transfers are in many cases politically motivated.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In areas still under martial law, prior permission must be
 obtained from martial law commanders for all marches and
 rallies. In addition to political party rallies during the
 March 1984 election campaign, there were a few rallies
 permitted by martial law authorities. There were also a few
 unsanctioned anti-regime demonstrations.
 The law on associations bans all associations from having any
 ties to political parties and from any type of political
 activity themselves, including endorsing parties or candidates
 or making political contributions.
 During the latter half of 1983, the Turkish Trade Union
 Confederation (TURK-IS), Turkey's major labor confederation,
 and its affiliated unions, the Islamic-oriented Confederation
 of Just Workers Unions (HAK-IS) and its affiliates, and a
 number of independent unions completed modification of their
 bylaws and election of officers in accordance with the
 provisions of the Trade Union Act of May 1983. Unions whose
 activities were under suspension at that time--the leftist
 Revolutionary Trade Unions Confederation (DISK) and the
 rightist Confederation of Nationalist Workers Unions (MISK)--
 were not permitted to complete reorganization pending the
 outcome of legal action against them. However, in May 1984,
 martial law authorities ruled that MISK and its affiliated
 unions could resume union activities. In addition, for the
 first time since the military takeover, TURK-IS conducted
 *open air rallies' in Izmir and Istanbul to protest the
 restrictive provisions of the new labor laws.
 In accordance with the temporary provisions of the 1983 trade
 union and collective bargaining laws, the rights to bargain
 collectively and to strike were formally reinstituted when the
 new Parliament convened in December 1983. By November 1984,
 numerous collective agreements covering an estimated 250,000
 workers had been concluded in direct negotiations between
 employers and unions. Moreover, the first strikes since the
 resumption of collective bargaining began on October 2, 1984,
 when the shipbuilding workers union struck two small shipyards
 in Istanbul. These were followed by a strike against a
 government-owned company, the electronics firm TESTAS, on
 November 23, 1984.
 Tne trial of DISK leaders, which begun on December 24, 1981,
 is still continuing. In 1984 the DISK trial was combined with
 those of DISK-affiliated unions and related organizations,
 increasing the number of defendants from the original 52 to
 over 1,500. The defendants are charged with "trying to change
 
 
 1111
 TURKEY
 the form of the government' and with 'interfering with the
 work of the Parliament.' By late September 1984, all of the
 defendants had been released on bail. The activities of DISK
 and its affiliates are suspended pending the outcome of the
 trial. Meanwhile, the affairs of the organizations are
 administered by court-appointed trustees.
 Both the International Labor Organization (ILO) and the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) have
 shown keen interest in trade union developments in Turkey
 since the 1980 military takeover. The third ILO direct
 contacts mission to visit Turkey in 3 years arrived in
 September 1984 and met with high-level government and military
 officials, top officials of TURK-IS, members of the DISK
 executive board, and a variety of other Turkish Government,
 labor and management officials. Although noting the release
 of the DISK defendants and the return to collective
 bargaining, the ILO reiterated its criticism of the DISK
 trial, the continued suspension of DISK's activities, the fact
 that five of the defendants released in the DISK trial are
 still being held on other charges, and the restrictive
 provisions of the trade union and collective bargaining laws.
 The ILO also recommended lifting of martial law in those
 provinces where it is still in force. (Since issuance of the
 ILO report, martial law authorities have lifted the
 requirement that permission be obtained before engaging in a
 strike or lockout or laying off workers.)
 The ICFTU has also followed trade union developments in Turkey
 closely since the military takeover in 1980. Several ICFTU
 missions visited Turkey over the last 4 years, the most recent
 in October 1984. Although DISK is not a member of the ICFTU,
 the ICFTU has been critical of the DISK trial and has provided
 financial support to the DISK defendants and their families.
 The ICFTU has also been critical of the restrictive provisions
 of the new trade union and collective bargaining laws, and has
 called on the Government to revise the laws along the lines
 proposed by the ICFTU's affiliate in Turkey, TURK-IS.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The majority of Turks are Sunni Muslim (largely of the Hanafi
 school among ethnic Turks, and of the Shafii school among
 ethnic Kurds). There is also an eclectic minority "Alevi"
 group, made up of adherents to orthodox and heterodox variants
 of Shi'ism.
 All Turkish constitutions since 1937, including the 1982
 Constitution now in effect, have proclaimed secularism to be
 one of the basic characteristics of the state. Within the
 political and, in particular, the military elite, the
 principle of secular government is seen as an essential
 attribute of a modern democratic system. Stringent
 constitutional and legal restrictions on religious activism in
 politics hinder the efforts of a small minority of Islamic
 fundamentalists who quietly advocate a greater role for Islam
 in Turkish political life, if not the establishment of a state
 based on the Shari'a.
 The Constitution stipulates that 'everyone has the right to
 freedom of conscience, religious belief, and conviction.'
 This right is circumscribed to a certain extent by the above
 cited constitutional and legal restrictions which are intended
 to protect the principle of secularism. For example, during
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 71
 
 
 1112
 TURKEY
 the early years of the republic, certain Sufi brotherhoods
 were suppressed, including the Dervish orders. These
 restrictions have been loosened since that time to the degree
 that the Dervishes are permitted to perform their religious
 ceremonies publicly on special occasions.
 The Turkish Criminal Code proscribes the advocacy of a
 theocratic state or proselytizing by any person or group. In
 1983 and 1984, groups of Turkish Jehovah's Witnesses were
 prosecuted for proselytizing. Twenty-three were convicted on
 December 12, 1984 and received sentences up to 6 years 8
 months.
 The present Political Parties Law prohibits, as did its
 predecessor, establishment of any political party that
 advocates theocracy or the foundation of law and government,
 even partially, on religious principles. Several former
 administrators of the now-dissolved National Salvation Party,
 convicted in 1983 of *turning a legally established party into
 a front working for the establishment of a regime based on
 theocratic principles,' are at present free on bail pending a
 retrial ordered by the Military Court of Appeals.
 Islamic religious instruction, following a state-prepared
 curriculum, is compulsory for all students except those who
 declare themselves non-Muslim. The courses of about 2 hours
 per week are taught by lay teachers. Extracurricular Koran
 courses using government-approved texts are permitted. The
 Government regulates the participation of Turkish Muslims in
 the annual pilgrimage to Mecca (the hajj).
 Turkey has Armenian Gregorian, Greek Orthodox, Greek Catholic,
 Jewish, Syrian Christian, Roman Catholic, and Protestant
 religious minorities, most of which are primarily concentrated
 in Istanbul. These groups operate churches, synagogues,
 monasteries, and charitable religious foundations, such as
 hospitals and orphanages. Guarantees of minority rights,
 beyond those contained in the Turkish Constitution, are
 included in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), which, among other
 provisions, provides that Greek, Armenian, and Jewish
 communities may maintain separate schools for their children.
 Non-Muslim minority groups sometimes report cases of
 bureaucratic harassment by low-level officials. Religious
 community leaders and higher state authorities generally
 attempt to resolve any minority concerns through dialogue, a
 process repeatedly endorsed by the present Government.
 Nevertheless, there have been recurrent complaints from
 non-Muslim minority groups regarding governmental procedures
 and legal decisions affecting community schools, the formation
 of parish councils, and the registration and repair of church
 property. Legal disputes over ownership of property endowed
 to religious charitable organizations is also frequently cited
 as a major concern. In 1984 some non-Muslim minority groups
 also complained that a new law enacted that year which allowed
 Muslim religious foundations to increase property rents
 significantly has so far been interpreted not to apply to
 properties held by non-Muslim groups. While some church
 authorities have indicated that the present Government is more
 flexible on some of these issues than past governments, others
 complain that the Government is not sufficiently responsive.
 Of continuing concern to the Greek community is the
 
 
 1113
 TURKEY
 longstanding problem of obtaining permission to reopen its
 theological seminary, closed by Turkish authorities in 1971.
 The daily use of languages other than Turkish by the
 non-Muslim religious minorities is declining. The use of
 non-Turkish languages such as-Greek, Armenian, Hebrew, Syriac,
 and Arabic in religious services is allowed. The use of
 Syriac, however, is not protected by the Treaty of Lausanne,
 and in 1984 five court cases were brought against a Syrian
 Christian publisher of religious materials. One case was
 dismissed in martial law court based on the testimony of an
 outside expert called in by the court, who determined that the
 publication (a calendar with biblical quotes) did not violate
 Turkish law. Four cases in civil court are still outstanding.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Although there is, in general, freedom of movement within
 Turkey, martial law authorities in the 34 provinces still
 under martial law have the power to restrict movement. Some
 border areas of the country are off limits to foreigners
 unless they have been given specific permission to visit them.
 Under existing regulations, martial law authorities may "expel
 persons whose presence in the martial law area is determined
 as prejudicial,* or restrict and prohibit their residence in
 or entry into certain areas under martial law. Martial law
 commanders have the power, subject to prescribed judicial
 procedures, to impose "internal exile" for up to 5 years on
 individuals whom they believe to be taking actions harmful to
 the 'general security and public order.*
 Turks are free to travel abroad. Under the Constitution,
 freedom of travel and residence abroad can be restricted
 because of criminal investigation or prosecution, to insure
 compliance with civic obligations, such as military service,
 and if required by the national economic situation (a
 reference to foreign exchange controls). The national
 economic situation having improved, the Government revoked in
 1984 the ban on tourist travel abroad more than once every 2
 years.
 Turkish law guarantees citizens protection against
 deportation, extradition, or denial of reentry. The
 Constitution guarantees the rights of Turks and their families
 living abroad to return home. However, under the provisions
 of Turkish citizenship law, the Government has the power under
 certain circumstances to deprive Turks of their citizenship,
 including those who have acted against the political or
 economic interests of the state. Approximately 400 persons
 were thus deprived of their citizenship in 1984.
 The Turkish authorities maintain a refugee resettlement center
 outside Istanbul. They have resettled about 4,500 Afghan
 refugees in recent years and have provided a temporary haven
 for Eastern European refugees. Many Iranians fleeing Iran
 have entered Turkey and remained there until they were able to
 arrange entry into other countries. According to Amnesty
 International's 1984 report and other sources, however,
 Turkish authorities in 1983 and 1984 apparently turned back or
 forcibly repatriated small numbers of Iranians who wished to
 take refuge in Turkey. The precise reasons why some Iranians
 
 
 1114
 TURKEY
 were returned to Iran while most of them were allowed to enter
 and transit Turkey are not clear.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Government permitted those parties which were banned from
 the November 1983 parliamentary elections to participate in
 the March 1984 local races, thus doubling the number of
 competing parties to six. Prime Minister Ozal's Motherland
 Party, which describes itself as an independent,
 non-ideological party, repeated its parliamentary election
 victory by taking 54 of 67 mayorships of provincial capitals
 and winning over 300 of 564 district capital mayoral races,
 thereby reaffirming its position as the dominant force in the
 multiparty system. Its absolute majority in the Parliament
 and strong nationwide local organization gave it considerable
 power.
 Despite the continuing ban on the pre-takeover political
 parties and on many former politicians, the decision to allow
 three additional parties of the left and right to run
 candidates in March 1984 is a positive development in Turkey's
 transition to full democratic government.
 Martial law authorities brought several law suits against the
 conservative Correct Way Party and its leader, Yildirim Avci,
 in 1984. In all of these cases, the party and Avci were found
 innocent, and the party continued to function throughout 1984.
 Permanent restrictions on political activity include barring
 of certain political and social groups from operating
 independently in political arenas and the banning of leading
 figures of the old political system from political
 activities. In the first category, no political party may be
 formed which advocates, or is organized according to
 principles which would result in, a theocratic basis for the
 state and the law; no party may advocate the superiority or
 dictatorship of a particular social class or group, or
 exclusivist" or "elitist* political philosophies; and no
 party may be formed around a particular ethnic or cultural
 group. Prohibited political groupings would include a
 Communist or other Marxist party based on class, a Fascist
 'elitist* party, a party based on an ethnic or minority group
 such as the Kurds, or an Islamic fundamentalist party. There
 is no prohibition on the participation of members of ethnic or
 religious minorities in political parties so long as the
 parties do not adopt prohibited principles. Persons regarded
 as Communists and Fascists are banned from party membership.
 Other groups permanently banned from joining, or actively
 participating in, political parties include members of the
 armed forces and certain categories of civil servants.
 The second category of 'permanent" restrictions bans leaders
 of the pre-September 1980 political parties from participating
 in politics or in organization and control of political
 parties for up to 10 years. These restrictions range from
 5-year bans on some former politicians from holding leadership
 positions in the new political parties (but without
 restrictions on the right to join a party and to run for
 office), up to complete bans on all political activities for
 10 years for former party leaders, including ex-Prime
 Ministers Ecevit and Demirel. These restrictions represent an
 attempt by the military to remove from the political process
 
 
 1115
 TURKEY
 for a time those elements which it blames for the anarchy and
 political stalemate that existed before the 1980 military
 takeover. Finally, the new elections law establishes a
 minimum percentage requirement for a party to win seats in
 Parliament, setting the threshold at 10 percent. The intent
 of this provision is to prevent recurrence of the situation
 that existed in the late 1970's when several small parties,
 notably extremist parties of the right, held the balance of
 power in Parliament and extracted concessions from the major
 parties as their price for support in coalition governments.
 Equal political rights for men and women are guaranteed by the
 Constitution. A dozen women hold leadership roles in two
 opposition parties, though the 22-member Cabinet is all male.
 Women are strongly encouraged to exercise their franchise; the
 fine imposed upon adults who do not vote applies equally to
 men and women. In December 1984, female educators and
 parliamentarians joined forces to conduct a government-
 approved conference on the role of women in Turkish society,
 in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of passage of women's
 rights legislation.
 Members of non-Muslim minorities face no legal limitations on
 political participation so long as they accept a Turkish
 national identity. These groups' small numbers, however,
 limit their ability to play a large formal role in politics.
 Kurds play a large role in Turkish political life, again on
 the condition of acceptance of Turkish nationality. Dozens of
 members of the Turkish Parliament are of Kurdish ethnic
 background.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government permitted visits by foreigners to discuss human
 rights in Turkey during 1984 and cooperated with those who had
 official status. However, when visitors had no governmental
 status or were from organizations that the Government deemed
 unfriendly, the Government was uncooperative and officials
 declined to meet with them. Nevertheless, these groups were
 free to meet with private organizations and individuals. A
 Council of Europe delegation which went to Turkey in April
 1984 was permitted to visit military prisons in Ankara and
 Diyarbakir, where they met with those prisoners they wished to
 see. Other groups which visited Turkey in 1984 included the
 ILO and the ICFTU. In July 1984 U.S. Assistant Secretary of
 State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs Elliott Abrams
 visited Turkey.
 There is no Amnesty International branch in Turkey, nor were
 any known domestic human rights organizations operating in
 Turkey during 1984. Some members of the elected Parliament,
 representing several parties, expressed serious concern with
 human rights subjects in 1984. Questions regarding human
 rights in general, and prison conditions and torture in
 particular, were raised in Parliament. Those discussions
 received wide press coverage and helped to focus public
 attention on human rights.
 The subject of human rights in Turkey was of central concern
 to the Council of Europe in 1984. Pursuant to its
 consideration of whether to accept the credentials of Turkish
 parliamentarians for the May Parliamentary Assembly--1984 was
 
 
 1116
 TURKEY
 the first year since 1980 that Turkey had elected
 parliamentarians who could go to the Council--the Council sent
 a delegation consisting of members of its legal and political
 subcommittees to Turkey in April-to review the human rights
 situation. Based on the delegation's favorable findings,
 Turkish parliamentarians were allowed to take their seats on
 the grounds that considerable progress had been made toward
 the restoration of democracy, the improvement of prison
 conditions, and the eradication of torture. The resolution
 also included a provision for a review of the situation in
 1985.
 In 1983, five nations, including France, The Netherlands,
 Denmark, Sweden and Norway, brought a formal complaint against
 Turkey for breaches of the European Convention on Human
 Rights. The complaint cited violations of articles concerning
 treatment of prisoners and civil rights for the period through
 July 1982. The complaint has not yet been resolved.
 In October, the European Parliament also debated Turkish human
 rights issues in deciding whether to reestablish its exchange
 delegation with Turkey. It decided that it would reestablish
 the delegation but passed two critical resolutions. The first
 condemned Turkey's use of the death penalty. The second
 called for the release of Mahmut Dikerdem, a defendant in the
 Peace Association trial, who is thought to be seriously ill.
 (In November 1984, Dikerdem was released on his own
 recognizance pending the outcome of his appeal.)
 Amnesty International's 1984 report (covering 1983) expressed
 continuing concern about imprisonment of prisoners of
 conscience, widespread and systematic use of torture and
 mistreatment of political prisoners, and the use of the death
 penalty. Amnesty was also concerned about the trials of Kurds
 for separatist activities in 1983 and the forcible return to
 Iran of Iranian political refugees. Freedom House rates
 Turkey "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Turkish economy has made substantial advances under the
 economic stabilization program begun in January 1980 in
 conjunction with the International Monetary Fund, the World
 Bank, and the Organization of Economic Cooperation and
 Development. Through a combination of tight monetary and
 fiscal policies, export incentives, and a realistic exchange
 rate, the stabilization program has promoted a more efficient,
 export-oriented economy, less dependent on a highly restricted
 local market. The Ozal Government elected in November 1983
 has continued the basic policies of the stabilization program
 and has introduced new measures, such as import
 liberalization, which will tend to make the Turkish economy
 even more responsive to market forces. Unemployment and
 inflation remain serious problems, however. In 1984,
 according to government sources, unemployment was about 16.5
 percent, while inflation rose to over 50 percent. Per capita
 gross national product in 1982 was estimated to be about
 $1,368. Turkey has substantial agricultural resources which
 fulfill most of its food requirements and continued to export
 some agricultural products. In 1977, caloric supply as a
 percentage of the total minimum requirement was 115.6. Under
 normal conditions, clean water is available to most of the
 population. Basic medical care is available to most of the
 population (with the possible exception of a few provinces in
 
 
 1117
 TURKEY
 the southeast) regardless of income. Life expectancy was 63.6
 years in 1984. Infant mortality was estimated to be 93.2 per
 1,000 live births in 1984. Primary schooling is compulsory,
 althougn not universally available. Higher education is free
 but, again, is not always available. University tuition is
 subsidized. According to the Government, the literacy rate is
 75 percent, with 66 percent of the illiterates being female.
 Turkey has long been in the forefront of Muslim nations in the
 promotion and protection of women's rights. Although some
 conservative elements in Parliament and in society at large
 have resisted advances in women's rights, the Parliament
 commemorated the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of
 women's rights legislation. President Evren has also been a
 consistent champion of equality for women. Women have full
 suffrage, occasionally attain high public office, and are
 represented--albeit not always in significant numbers--in all
 Turkish professions and institutions. Women have served or
 are currently employed at the rank of university rector and
 dean, ambassador, political party vice president, and army
 colonel. Turkish businesswomen play significant roles in many
 industries, a few sit on the boards of some of Turkey's
 largest private firms. Female lawyers and even judges are no
 rarity, while female doctors are dominant in such fields as
 obstetrics and gynecology.
 It is a longstanding cultural policy of the Turkish state,
 supported by most Turks, that all the citizens of Turkey are
 'Turks' and use the Turkish language. This policy derives in
 large part from attempts to partition Turkey after World War I
 with the aim of establishing independent ethnic states on the
 territory of what is now the Turkish Republic. The wariness
 of Turkish governments toward groups which emphasize ethnic
 identity has since been reinforced by the activities of
 separatist movements inspired from outside and within
 Turkey--movements that frequently included anarchy and
 terrorism as their modus operandi. As a consequence, Turkish
 governments have adopted a policy that individuals of
 non-Turkish ethnic backgrounds must assimilate with the
 mainstream of Turkish society and culture. In order to
 further this objective, the Turkish Government has forcefully
 discouraged manifestations.of ethnic differences, in some
 cases by law; for example, the use of languages other than
 Turkish for certain purposes is prohibited.
 The separatist terrorist activities in Kurdish areas,
 described in Section l.a., have posed the most serious
 challenge to the assimilation policy of successive Turkish
 governments. Complicating the issue is the fact that ethnic
 Kurds constitute the majority population within the provinces
 in which they are concentrated. These provinces also include
 Turkey's poorest and least developed areas. Successive
 governments have recognized this problem and launched major
 programs for rural electrification, power plants, and
 irrigation to generate employment and income for the region.
 
 
 1118
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF OOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        301.1    286.0    139.5
 LOANS ...................  100.0    85.0     63.5
 GRANTS ................. 201.1      201.0     76.0
 A.AID ....................... 300.0     285.0    138.5
 LOANS ................... 100.0     85.0     63.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 200.0    200.0     75.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        300.0    285.0    138.5
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......         0.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.1      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         0.1      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          0.1      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.0      1.0      1.0
 LOANS ................. 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 1.0            1.0      1.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         1.0      1.0      1.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        403.0    402.8    718.3
 LOANS ................... 343.0    290.0    585.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 60.0    112.8    133.3
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        57.0    110.0    130.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       343.0    290.0    585.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....         3.0      2.8      3.3
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL...        704.1    688.8    857.8
 LOANS ................... 443.0    375.0    648.5
 GRANTS............    .... 261.1    313.8    209.3
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984      1946-84
 TOTAL ........   713.9     676.8    944.3   6507.6
 IBRO             647.8    669.4     794.3   5230.1
 IFC               14.8       5.3    150.0    395.9
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0    178.1
 IDO                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                1.8      2.1      0.0     66.8
 OTHER-UN           0.5       0.0      0.0     11.7
 EEC               49.0       0.0      0.0    625.0
 
 
 1119
