TURKEY
The Report on human rights practices in Turkey during 1985 clearly echoes the changes that have taken place within Turkey in the past year. The fact that the Report is more open than ever before in discussing shortcomings in Turkey's human rights practices seems dictated, not by new information but by the fact that people in Turkey are now speaking out more and more openly about human rights abuses.
The change in tone is illustrated by the way in which the State Department describes the practice of torture in Turkey in the opening paragraphs of the Report. Two years ago, describing the situation in Turkey in 1983, the State Department spoke of "declining numbers of complaints of torture by prisoners and increasing numbers of convictions of police personnel for torture." This year, the Report is more forceful, speaking about "the persistence of credible reports of torture." This does not mean that the practice of torture has become worse since 1983 in Turkey; instead, it responds to the fact that the practice of torture is no longer being hidden or disregarded within Turkey itself.
Because there is so much activity related to human rights in Turkey these days, it is inevitable that information contained in a report of this kind (such as the number of provinces currently under martial law) will be quickly outdated. This is a problem faced by all groups writing about Turkey. Although we do not attempt to update the State Department Report here, we note that the thrust of the State Department's Report might be somewhat different if it were written today, given the advantage of a few months' hindsight.
Despite a welcome, forthright tone, the opening paragraphs of the Report are sometimes curiously distorted. In a clear reference to the Kurdish minority, the Report states at the beginning that the
102
Constitution "does not permit the separate ethnic development of those minorities not given special status by international treaty." It is strange that the Kurds are not mentioned by name here; it is as if the State Department is deferring to official Turkish sensibilities and practice by not mentioning the Kurds by name.
In discussing the use of torture the Report hastens to add that it is "usually at the hands of poorly educated police officials," thus exonerating the military, as well as high government officials who look the other way.
Given a situation in Turkey that is marked by contradictions and policy reversals, the State Department's statement that "human rights trends in Turkey continue to move in a positive direction" may seem overly tidy, even to those who hope that it will prove to be a fair assessment.
The statement that the subject of torture was "much more widely and publicly discussed in Turkey in 1985 than in 1984" seems geared to support the view of steady and gradual human rights improvement. In fact, it is both an understatement and an overstatement. In late 1985 the subject of torture exploded in the pages of the Turkish press, whereas in 1984 it was virtually unmentionable.
In discussing torture, the Report cites charges that have been made and also reports the Turkish government's response. It talks about the low level of police education (a staple qualification in the U.S. State Department's attitude toward torture in Turkey) but disregards the fact that the punishments given to torturers are as yet insufficient, that torture victims have inadequate recourse for complaints, and that the government and the military have been accused by the opposition of lacking a firm will to stop torture. The Report also refers to "widespread public acceptance of the notion that the police should enforce public order by whatever meails necessary," thus giving support to the potentially dangerous view that Turks somehow approve of torture and are "used to it."
A factual error appears in the discussion of the punishment of torturers on p.1108: 941 cases (not 624) have been referred to the
103
martial law authorities, of which 624 had their charges dismissed and 105 were found guilty. There is also some confusion on p. 1109 where the legal time limits on pre-arrest detention are discussed. Although the State Department figures differ somewhat from those of Helsinki Watch and from others given by Amnesty International, this is to be expected, given the profusion of conflicting statistics that Turkish authorities themselves have released.
In discussing the fact that trials in Turkey are often not concluded as speedily as the Constitution requires, the Report is again guilty of understatement. Most political trials in Turkey are unjustifiably long and drawn out; scores of detainees have been held in prison since 1980 or 1981 and still await the conclusion of their trials.
In discussing fair public trials the Report is too positive: lawyers have been kept out of the courts and even arrested, judges have been transferred, and military courts are, on the whole, stricter and more arbitrary than civilian courts.
While it is true that estimates of political prisoners "vary greatly," the figures that the State Department chooses to cite --3,600, including those incarcerated for crimes of violence —contrast with figures cited by Helsinki Watch -- some 17,000 prisoners and detainees held for politically motivated offenses -- which were provided to Helsinki Watch by official sources.
The section on freedom of speech and the press gives a fair overview of a complex and changeable situation. The section on peaceful assembly and association, however, mentions a mass meeting of the Social Democracy Party that was held in Istanbul but does not mention the fact that forty-five of the participants were detained and held for up to two months and that a few of them apparently face trial. The Report mentions the arrest of twenty-three Jehovah's Witnesses and describes their current status, but does not mention the fact that they were badly tortured during detention. In the section on freedom of movement, no mention is made that a number of Turkish citizens apparently have been deprived of their passports to travel.
104
The Report correctly notes the increased accessibility of Turkey to foreigners in 1985, listing a number of groups that visited Turkey from abroad and received the cooperation of Turkish officials. It does not mention that, to date, the International Committee of the Red Cross has not been permitted to visit Turkish prisons, nor have any independent human rights groups been permitted to do so.
105
