Turkey
Recent trends in human rights protection in Turkey have been retrograde. 2007
saw an intensification of speech-related prosecutions and convictions, controversial
rulings by the judiciary in defiance of international human rights law, harassment
of pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) officials and deputies, and a
rise in reports of police brutality. The state authorities’ intolerance of difference or
dissenting opinion has created an environment in which there have been
instances of violence against minority groups. In January 2007 Turkish-Armenian
journalist and human rights defender Hrant Dink was murdered. Armed clashes
between the military and the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) rose in the lead-up to
elections in July and intensified yet further in the second half of the year, with
heavy loss of life; some attacks—such as a suspected PKK bombing in Ankara in
May—have targeted civilians.
Prior to the general election, the Turkish military intervened directly in the political
arena by voicing opposition to the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP)
government and by decisively influencing a constitutional court decision to block
the presidential candidacy of the AKP’s Abdullah Gül. The AKP nevertheless won
47 percent of the vote in the early general election precipitated by the presidential
crisis, and subsequently secured the election of Abdullah Gül as president.
The AKP government embarked on plans for a new constitution to replace that put
in place under the military regime in 1982.
Human Rights Defenders
The criminalization of speech remains a key obstacle to the protection of human
rights in Turkey, contributing to an atmosphere of intolerance that assumed violent
proportions in 2007. On January 19 the journalist and human rights defender
Hrant Dink was shot dead outside his office. Dink came to public notoriety
because he was repeatedly prosecuted for speech-related crimes and, in 2006,
convicted for “publicly insulting Turkishness” under article 301 of the penal code.
The trial of 12 suspects indicted for Dink’s murder, among them the 17-year-old
gunman, began on July 2, but the authorities have to date failed to act on significant
evidence of negligence or possible collusion by the security forces.
Other public figures associated with human rights advocacy also received death
threats. Burdensome registration procedures and legal restrictions on associations
continued. The LGBT organization Lambdaistanbul, for example, was prosecuted
for having aims that were against “law and morality” and faced possible
closure.
Freedom of Expression and Assembly
After its electoral victory in July, the new AKP government failed to take immediate
steps to restart the stalled reform process by lifting restrictions on freedom of
expression such as article 301, and elements of the legal establishment opposed
to reform continued to prosecute and convict individuals for speech-related
offences, as well as for staging unauthorized demonstrations. Over 2007 hundreds
of individuals, among them journalists, writers, publishers, academics,
human rights defenders, and, above all, officials of Kurdish political parties and
associations, were prosecuted. Some were convicted.
In October 2007 Arat Dink, son of Hrant Dink and editor of the bilingual Turkish-
Armenian newspaper Agos (Furrow), and the newspaper’s owner Serkis
Sarkopyan were given one-year suspended sentences for “insulting Turkishness”
under article 301. They had reported a July 2006 Reuters interview with Hrant
Dink in which he had referred to the “Armenian genocide.” No other newspaper
that reported Hrant Dink’s words to Reuters has been prosecuted.
Officials of the pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP)—which stood independent
in the election and gained 22 seats—were repeatedly convicted for
speech-related offences during the year. Some were detained for several months
pending trial. The number of prosecutions was significantly higher than in previous
years, lending credence to suggestions that concerted efforts were being
made to block their political activity and restrict their freedom of assembly in an
election year. In November the closure of the DTP was pending before the
Constitutional Court. Officials of the Kurdish party HAK-PAR were also sentenced
for using the Kurdish language in their political party activities; a Constitutional
Court closure case is still pending against the party.
Torture, Ill-Treatment, and Killings by Security Forces
Ill-treatment appeared to be on the rise in 2007 and was regularly reported as
occurring during arrest, outside places of official detention, and in the context of
demonstrations, as well as in detention centers. This trend was further exacerbated
by the passing in June of a new police law granting wide-ranging powers of
stop and search. After the new law came into force, cases of police brutality were
also reported in the context of the routine identity checks permitted in the new
law. There were continuing reports of ill-treatment in prisons and, in January, conscientious
objector Halil Savda was ill-treated at the Tekirdağ military barracks.
Fatal shootings of civilians by members of the security forces remain a serious
concern. Although police typically state that the killing occurred because the individual
has failed to obey a warning to stop, in some cases these may amount to
extrajudicial executions. The fatal shooting of Bülent Karataş near Hozat, Tunceli,
in September 2007, bore the hallmarks of a summary execution. His companion,
Rıza Çiçek, who survived serious gunshot wounds, explained how he was shot by
military personnel while on a beekeeping trip. Another suspected summary execution
was that of the villager Ejder Demir, shot dead near Özalp, Van, in
September. Nigerian asylum seeker Festus Okey died of gunshot wounds incurred
while in police custody in Istanbul in August.
Attacks on Civilians
Suspected PKK bomb attacks targeting civilians have continued at intervals in
2007, including a suicide bombing in May in the shopping district of Ulus,
Ankara, which resulted in eight deaths, and two bombings in Izmir in October,
killing one man. In September a minibus was fired upon near a village in
Beytüşşebap, Şırnak province, killing five civilians and seven village guards. As of
this writing, the perpetrators had not been identified.
Impunity
Turkish courts are notoriously lenient towards members of the security forces who
are charged with abuse or misconduct, contributing to impunity and the persistence
of torture and the resort to lethal force. Many allegations of torture or killings in disputed circumstances never reach the courts and are not investigated.
Some controversial court rulings in the first half of 2007 stand out. In May the
Court of Cassation quashed the 39-year sentences of two gendarmerie intelligence
officers for the November 2005 bombing of a bookshop in the southeastern
town of 􀀀 emdinli that resulted in one death. This bombing was widely condemned
by human rights groups in Turkey as evidence of a resort to lawlessness
in the name of counterterrorism. Controversially the court ruled that the crime had
been committed in the course of a counterterrorism operation and that the defendants
should be retried in a military court. The decision is on appeal.
In April a court in Eskişehir acquitted four police officers for the killing of Ahmet
and Uğur Kaymaz, in November 2004 in the southeast town of Kızıltepe. The
court ignored substantial forensic evidence demonstrating that the father and son
may have been the victims of a summary execution. The case is on appeal.
There was no progress in the investigation into the widespread allegations of
police torture following arrests during violent protests in March 2006 in
Diyarbakır, or into the deaths of 10 demonstrators (eight shot dead) during the
protests.
Key International Actors
The European Union (EU) remained the most important international actor in fostering
respect for human rights in Turkey. However, the December 2006 EU summit
decision to partially freeze membership negotiations because of Turkey’s relations
with Cyprus contributed to the perception in Turkey that EU member states
were reneging on their commitment to Turkey’s candidacy. After the election in
France of President Nicolas Sarkozy in 2007, who has repeatedly stated his opposition
to Turkey joining the EU, in June France used its veto power to block two
minor chapters of the accession negotiations. In its annual progress report, published
in November, the European Commission commented on the failure to
advance reforms in 2007, continuing restrictions on free speech, the interference
of the military in political affairs, the need to strengthen the independence of the
judiciary, and the failure to further minority rights.
As of this writing, the European Court of Human Rights has issued 242 judgments
against Turkey in 2007 for torture, unfair trial, extrajudicial execution, and other
violations. In an October judgment that may have implications for the draft constitution,
the court found that the failure to grant an Alevi schoolgirl exemption from
constitutionally enshrined compulsory religious education classes focused on
Sunni Islam constituted a violation of the right to education (Hasan and Eylem
Zengin v. Turkey). In a controversial decision in January the court ruled that the
existence of the 10 percent electoral threshold, which has been argued to deprive
in particular pro-Kurdish parties of political representation in parliament, did not
violate the right of the people to freely express their opinion of the choice of the
legislature (article 3 of protocol 1 of the convention). Two judges dissented, pointing
to the fact that the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe had in
2004 urged Turkey to lower the threshold, and that the threshold was twice as
high as the European average (see Yumuk and Sadak v. Turkey). In November the
case was heard by the Grand Chamber of the European Court and judgment is
awaited.