 TURKEY
 The military government is presided over by head of state
 General Kenan Evren (who retains the position of Chief of the
 Turkish General Staff) and the heads of the armed forces (army,
 navy, air force and gendarmerie)--acting as the National
 Security Council (NSC). It has continued in firm control of
 Turkey since its takeover on September 12, 1980. The NSC and
 the consultative assembly share the legislative functions for-
 merly performed by the parliament while head of state Evren and
 a cabinet headed by Prime Minister Bulend Ulusu, a retired
 admiral, perform the executive functions provided for under the
 1961 constitution. The NSC has outlined the timetable by which
 there will be a return to civilian rule. According to this
 plan, the.constitution is to be submitted to a referendum by
 November 1982, and the target date for parliamentary elections
 is the autumn of 1983.
 In recent years Turkish political life has been disturbed by an
 increasingly serious number of problems, including a deteriora-
 ting economic situation, social dislocation caused by massive
 migration from the countryside, political polarization, a break
 by-some political elements with the secular basis of the
 .Kemalist regime, and terrorism. This last problem, together
 with the economy, impinged greatly-on the lives of -citizens.
 -Terrorism-throughout the 1970's, and especially through the
 first nine months of 1980, inflicted grave human rights viola-
 tions on Turkish citizens.. Large-scale terrorism was carried
 .on by a number of groups on the left and right. Large quanti-
 ties of arms-were provided to terrorists from abroad. In this
 context, the Turkish military leaders under General Kenan Evren
 took power from the civilian government on September 12, 1980.
 Since that time the military government has retained broad
 popular support in Turkey.
 On June 30, 1981,- the NSC promulgated the "Law on the Con-
 stituent Assembly." The law provides for an assembly consis-
 ting.of the five-member NSC and a separate "consultative assem-
 bly" of 160 members. The NSC selected 120 members from nomi-
 -neespresented by the provincial governors, and directly
 -appointed the remaining 40. One of the conditions for consul-
 tative assembly membership is "not to have been a member of a
 political party on September 11, 1980." Convened on October
 23, 1981, as a quasi-parliamentary body, the consultative
 assembly has other legislative functions besides its primary
 ones of helping to draft a new constitution and laws on politi-
 - cal parties and elections. The NSC has retained the right to
 modify the text of the draft constitution. The NSC acts as a
 second legislative body, accepting or amending on its own bills
 and proposals submitted by the consultative assembly.
 Until the new constitution is submitted to a referendum, the
 1961 constitution remains in effect, except for the legislative
 -and executive functions, which are exercised respectively by
 the NSC and General Evren, and other changes enacted or to be
 enacted by the NSC. Public reaction to the "Law on the Con-
 stituent Assembly" has been generally favorable.
 
 (878)
 
 
 879
 Since September 12, 1980, there has been a significant reduc-
 tion in the terrorist activity that was one of the primary fac-
 tors causing the military takeover. In his speech on the occa-
 sion of the first anniversary of the takeover, head of state
 General Evren stated that, in comparison with the 22,500
 politically-motivated armed clashes (resulting in 2,812 deaths)
 that had occurred in the year prior to the takeover, only 5,800
 such incidents (resulting in 282 deaths) had occurred in the
 past year. This represents an approximately 75 percent decline
 in incidents and a 90 percent decline in killings. Evren also
 stated that in that same period hundreds of thousands of
 weapons had been seized or turned over to the security forces.
 By ending terrorism as a major element in ordinary life in
 Turkey, the Evren government brought about a substantial
 improvement in one aspect of human rights conditions.
 A reinforced system of martial law remains in effect throughout
 Turkey. Martial law commanders continue to exercise widerang-
 ing powers over the press and other media, trade unions, and
 the right to assemble. Political freedom has been curtailedi
 former Prime Minister Ecevit has been arrested and convicted
 for illegal political activity. However, in response to the
 decline in terrorist incidents and the reduction of the backlog
 of cases, the NSC on September 7, 1981, reduced to a maximum of
 45 days the previous 90-day detention period for persons
 arrested by the security forces. (This refers to the period
 within which a person must be either released or charged for-
 mally.)
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from
 a. Torture
 The Turkish criminal code and the 1961 constitution forbid tor-
 ture and provide severe punishments for offenders. According
 to widely publicized Turkish government statistics on the first
 year of the anti-terrorist campaign, a total of 370 petitions
 alleging maltreatment and torture were sent to the martial law
 command. Of the 370 petitions, 110 were ruled "incorrect" and
 43 were substantiated. As a result, 106 cases against the
 alleged offenders have been sent to the courts. According to
 the government, seven officials have been sentenced and 11
 security officers have been dismissed.
 In the year since the takeover, the government has announced
 the deaths of at least seven persons as a result of mistreat-
 ment while in police custody. At least 12 officials, including
 a Gendarmerie captain and chief warden, have been arrested in
 connection with these deaths. The government has denied
 specific allegations that such prominent persons as former
 Istanbul Mayor Ahmet lavan and leftist labor federation (DISK)
 President Abdullah Basturk were subjected to mistreatment.
 Amnesty International, Freedom House, and Council of Europe
 officials have expressed concern at frequent reports of tor-
 ture. There is no evidence, however, to support or refute
 allegations that brutality and torture are widespread, system-
 atic, or tacitly condoned by the authorities. Such activities
 are publicly opposed by the government, which states that it
 continues to investigate all allegations of prisoner abuse.
 Allegations involving four of the announced deaths due to mis-
 treatment in custody were brought before the NSC itself and
 found to be valid. Officials found to be culpable were placed
 under arrest.
 
 
 880
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The 1961 constitution states:  "No punishment incompatible with
 human dignity shall be inflicted." There have been no reports
 of summary executions.
 Prisons in Turkey are often overcrowded and inadequate. There
 appears to be no different treatment accorded prisoners on the
 basis of the type of convictions handed down, or on the basis
 of social class, race, sex or religion. In July there was a
 hunger strike by leftist prisoners at Ankara's Mamak Military
 Prison, explained by some as a protest against maltreatment by
 the guards, overcrowding in cells where rightist prisoners were
 present, and restrictions on the prisoners' right to prepare
 their legal defense. There have been no other reports of such
 prison disturbances, perhaps because inadequate prison facili-
 ties are less a reflection of intentionally degrading treatment
 than of Turkey's economic situation and of its continuing
 anti-terrorism campaign, which has resulted in a greater number
 of arrests than the prisons can adequately handle.
 c. Disappearances
 There have been no reports of disappearances. Martial law pro-
 visions allow persons to be held up to 30 days, with a possi-
 bility of extension to 45 days, before they are released or
 formally charged. Turkish law does not provide for notifica-
 tion of next of kin until the detainee is formally charged.
 However, it has been common practice since the military take-
 over that the press as well as the next of kin are made aware
 of persons arrested under the martial law provisions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Under martial law a person may be detained without charge for
 30 days. That period may be extended to 45 days. According to
 the Turkish government, approximately 30,000 arrests were made
 during the year following the military takeover. Most arrests
 involved support for terrorist activity.
 There is no provision for habeas corpus in Turkish law but,
 according to Article 30 of the constitution, those wrongfully
 detained by the the authorities, "shall be indemnified by the
 state according to law." Preventive detention is allowed for
 "individuals against whom there exists a strong indication for
 indictment" in order to prevent "escape, destruction, or alter-
 ation of, evidence." Under martial law a person can be held in
 this manner for up to 45 days without charges being brought.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials in civil and military courts generally are conducted
 under the same procedural rules. Trials are open, and defen-
 dants are allowed to have lawyers of their own choosing. There
 are appeals procedures in both instances. Appeals from martial
 law court verdicts go to the military court of appeals, while
 civil courts review the findings of lower courts. In accor-
 dance with an amendment to the 1971 Martial Law Act, only sen-
 tences of three years or more, which have been handed down by a
 lower martial law court, may be appealed. This has led to pro-
 test in at least one case where it was widely felt that a
 two-and-a-half year sentence would have been reversed on
 
 
 881
 appeal, if an appeal had been possible. Since the military
 takeover, all accused terrorists are tried in martial law
 courts, including those accused of terrorism committed three
 months prior to the proclamation of martial law. While martial
 law court judges generally have a law degree and adhere to the
 same professional standards as do their civilian counterparts,
 their independence is circumscribed somewhat by the authority
 of the local martial law commander and by the fact that they
 can be transferred without notice. In July the Turkish Union
 of Bar Associations (TUBA) issued a report alleging curtailment
 of the right of legal counsel for persons under arrest. The
 government denied the charge.
 The 1961 constitution guaranteed the independence of the Judi-.
 ciary. On May 13, 1981, the government promulgated the "Law on
 the High Board of Judges and Public Prosecutors." In contrast
 to the previous high council of judges, which was largely
 selected by the judiciary itself, members of the new board are
 to be selected by the head of state. They, in turn, will elect
 members of the higher courts and overseas the selection and
 supervision of'lower court judges. The latter functions had
 been performed by the high council of judges and, in the eyes
 of critics of the new law, helped to ensure the independence of
 the judiciary under the 1961 constitution.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The system of martial law, which the military authorities
 extended from some 20 provinces to the entire country after the
 takeover, authorizes the search of private property without a
 warrant in the interest of national security. There have been
 no reports of widespread use or abuse of this authority..
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includings
 Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The existence of martial law has inhibited the exercise of free
 speech, press and assembly. The September 1980 amendments to
 the 1971 Martial Law Act authorize martial law commanders to
 control all publications and communications carried out orally,
 in writing, in pictures, recordings, letters, telegrams, and
 all other postal material. A September 1981 amendment to that
 act requires that permission be obtained from martial law com-
 manders for the publication within their jurisdiction of all
 new periodicals. National Security Council (NBC) decree
 number 52, issued last June, banned the writing of articles and
 editorials--whether favorable or unfavorable--on politicians
 and trade union and other leaders being investigated or tried.
 Unauthorized news accounts of security operations against ter-
 rorists are not permitted.
 Prior press censorship has not generally been imposed under the
 martial law regime, but the press has been required to exercise
 self-censorship. The government has confiscated certain issues
 of magazines and has suspended the publication of newspapers--
 including the leftist Istanbul daily, "Cumhuriyet", and the
 conservative daily, "Tercuman"--for varying periods. At least
 six editors and journalists have received prison sentences for
 articles they have written or permitted to be published.
 Others, including the editor and publisher of "Hurriyet"
 (Turkey's largest newspaper), have been arrested and subse-
 quently released. A number of books and pamphlets have been
 banned by the martial law authorities, and there have also been
 
 
 882
 a few instances of films not being shown because of orders
 issued by the martial law authorities.
 The government is working to "depoliticize" the education
 system whose institutions prior to the takeover had become bat-
 tlegrounds for contending ideologies of both the extreme right
 and left. The Martial Law Act permits the dismissal of public
 servants and workers, including teachers, whose activities are
 considered detrimental to law and order. No universities have
 been closed, but some students have been expelled for alleged
 involvement in radical political activities.
 On September 12, 1980, a temporary ban on the activities and
 meetings of all associations--including political parties and
 professional groups and social-service clubs, like Rotary--was
 imposed. On October 3, 1980, the government partially lifted
 this ban, permitting those associations "which work within
 their statutes and those which are for the good of the com-
 munity" to continue their activities upon application to, and
 approval by, the local martiaL law commanders. The Martial Law
 Act also requires that permission be obtained for rallies and
 marches.
 The September 20, 1980, amendments to the Martial Law Act
 empower martial law commanders to prohibit strikes or to impose
 a permit requirement for unions to strike. The amendments also
 give the commanders the power to prevent worker boycotts, slow-
 downs, or employer lockouts. TURK-IS, Turkey's largest labor
 federation, has for the most part been allowed to continue its
 activities. DISK, Turkey's leftist labor federation, and the
 rightist labor federation, MISK, have had their assets blocked
 and activities suspended since the takeover. Under NSC legis-
 lation, federations and unions whose activities have been sus-
 pended will have trustees appointed to handle their financial
 and other affairs, under the surveillance of martial law com-
 manders. Many DISK and MISK labor leaders were taken into cus-
 tody following the military takeover September 12, 1980. Some
 have been released. Of those being tried, military prosecutors
 asked for the death penalty for DISK President Abdullah Basturk
 and 51 other DISK leaders for seeking to overthrow the social
 and constitutional order, both of which are protected by
 long-established articles (141 and 146) of the Turkish Criminal
 Code. Prosecution requests for the death penalty are not
 uncommon in Turkey, but courts rarely grant them.
 Turkey is a secular state, although Islam commands to varying
 degrees the allegiance of the overwhelming majority of its
 population. The 1961 constitution specifically provideb that
 every individual has "freedom of religious faith." In the case
 of non-Muslim minorities--Armenians, Greek Orthodox, and
 Jews--that freedom is further guaranteed by the 1923 Treaty of
 Lausanne. Despite some problems with respect to taxation and
 slow administrative procedures, the minority communities in
 Istanbul seem to enjoy good relations with the Turkish popula-
 tion. There are indications that the situation of the minority
 communities, as indeed of all Turkish citizens, has improved
 since the takeover because of the better security situation.
 Cases of petty and official discrimination undoubtedly exist in
 Turkey, particularly with respect to access to certain military
 and civil service jobs. Some minorities complain that lower-
 level officials sometimes harass them in connection with their
 schools or community institutions. However, the available evi-
 dence does not appear to support allegations of persecution of
 non-Turkish minorities.
 
 
 883
 Equal rights for women was a fundamental element in the trans-
 formation of Turkish life sought by Ataturk. Women in Turkish
 society, although subject to a certain amount of social and
 economic discrimination, have the same political rights as
 men. Prior to the takeover, a few women held ministerial posi-
 tions or seats in the parliament. No woman is a member of
 Turkey's present cabinet. Since the adoption of the Turkish
 civil code in 1926, Turkish males may have only one wife at one
 time. Divorce is permitted, and women act as plaintiffs as
 often as men.
 While women have made great strides in Turkey, certain anoma-
 lies persist. According to one estimate 20 percent of adult
 Turkish males are classified as illiterate, while about half of
 all Turkish women fall into that category.
 b.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Turkey has accepted many refugees from Iran and Afghanistan and
 has provided them with temporary noniamigrant status in Turkey
 for renewable periods of three months.
 Turkey permits the voluntary repatriation of Turkish residents
 abroad, such as returning "guest workers" from West Germany and
 other Western European countries. There is freedom of internal
 movement, subject only to martial law restrictions. February
 1981 amendments to the passport law permit the denial of pass-
 ports to persons who have been accused of committing crimes
 against the "moral personality" or the secular foundations of
 the Turkish state, and those whose departure would be "detri-
 mental to the general security."
 Freedom of emigration is otherwise permitted, but owing to
 severe foreign exchange shortages, foreign travel for the pur-
 pose of tourism has been limited to one trip abroad every three
 years and one trip each year to the northern area of Cyprus.
 For the same reasons, study abroad has been curtailed under new
 Ministry of Education regulations, which restrict such study to
 those students presently studying abroad, those with relatives
 abroad, and those on state or official scholarship and exchange
 programs.
 In all of the above categories, there are no indications that
 women or other groups are subjected to different rules.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 This freedom has been suspended since September 12, 1980, pend-
 ing further steps to restore civilian rule.
 Citing the fact that, despite existing orders, certain politi-
 cal meetings and political party activities were occurring, the
 NSC decree number 52, issued in June 1981, banned "all politi-
 cal activities at every level," specifically debates on martial
 law command decisions and the holding of meetings, the issuing
 of statements, and the writing of articles by members of par-
 ties who were in parliament on September 11, 1980. However,
 some former members of parliament continued to write articles
 for the press. In October 1981, the NSC formally disbanded all
 political parties which had been established before the mili-
 tary takeover.
 Former Prime Ministers Suleyman Demirel (of the Justice Party -
 JP) and Bulent Ecevit (of the Republican Peoples Party - RPP)
 
 
 884
 have been charged with minor violations of the electoral laws,
 committed prior to September 12, 1980. Their activities have
 been circumscribed, and Ecevit was denied permission by the
 government to travel abroad, even to attend international con-
 ferences. In November 1981, Ecevit was sentenced to a four-
 month term for violating NSC decree 52 by criticizing the order
 disbanding all political parties. This sentence was reduced by
 a higher court to three months. Ecevit entered jail on
 December 3, 1981.
 The trial of Alpaslan Turkes, head of the rightist Nationalist
 Action Party (NAP), and 673 other officials and members of
 affiliated organizations began in August 1981. They are
 charged with trying to undermine the foundations of the Turkish
 state by promoting acts of violence, including the assassina-
 tion of prominent Turks. Necmettin Erbakan, head of the
 National Salvation Party (NSP), and 33 of his supporters have
 been charged with attempting to change the secular nature of
 the Turkish state. The trial of 447 alleged Kurdish ("APO")
 separatists, including two former RPP deputies and one former
 independent member of parliament, began in April. One of the
 charges was that they had assassinated 234 persons during a
 three-year period.
 Based on a provision of the 1964 law on Turkish citizenship
 that went into effect with the imposition of martial law, the
 government at the beginning of 1981 announced that certain cit-
 izens residing abroad who failed to return to Turkey to face
 legal charges would be deprived of their citizenship. In Sep-
 tember 1981 the government announced that a total of 241 per-
 sons had been so requested to return to Turkey, 36 of whom had
 complied. As of that time, at least three persons--Behice
 Boran, Chairman of the Turkish Labor Party; Gultekin Gazioglu,
 Teachers Union (TOB-DER) President; and Yahya Demirel, nephew
 of Suleyman Demirel--had been stripped of their Turkish citi-
 zenship.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The government has indicated that Council of Europe (COE)
 "fact-finding teams" are welcome to visit Turkey. Several have
 done so. The government has also permitted visits by interna-
 tional and other non-governmental groups interested in the
 developments since the military takeover. In addition to the
 COE, Turkey has received delegations from the Western European
 Union (WEU), the North Atlantic Assembly (NAA), the West German
 Bundestag, and the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU). Two representatives from Amnesty International
 (AI) visited Turkey last April and apparently did not encounter
 any governmental interference in making the calls they wanted.
 Al still has a national section in Turkey. The members of
 visiting delegations met with government officials and with RPP
 and JP leaders, including Ecevit and Demirel. They were not
 permitted to visit prisoners in jail awaiting trial. According
 to Ministry of Justice regulations, persons other than family
 members and attorneys are generally not allowed to visit per-
 sons in jail.
 In light of the Turkish military intervention in 1974 and the
 continued presence of Turkish armed forces in Northern Cyprus,
 Turkey plays a role in the human rights situation on the
 island. The report relating to Cyprus addresses this question.
 
 
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 The Turkish people in recent years have endured a runaway
 inflation, which has had a heavy impact on wage earners and
 salaried white collar workers, an inequitable tax system, and
 the terrorist violence and extortion which have threatened
 worker and manager alike.
 However, even under the worst economic conditions of the past
 few years, Turks have enjoyed the right to ownership of pro-
 perty and have had a standard of living generally adequate to
 meet basic needs of nutrition, health and education. Turkey
 generally has maintained its self-sufficiency in food. The
 population is adequately fed. According to 1977 data, the per-
 centage of nutrition requirements is 131. The percentage of
 population with access to safe water is 75.
 The government aims to achieve a better rural-urban balance by
 decentralizing industry and providing better social infra-
 structure in remote areas to stem the flood of young people to
 the big cities.
 GNP per capita (in 1979 US dollars) is *1,220. It may have
 fallen below that figure in 1980.
 In the area of health, the government enacted a law this year
 requiring physicians to serve for at least two years in the
 developing regions of the country, where there is a shortage of
 doctors. According to a 1981 figure, there is a national aver-
 age of one doctor for 1,646 persons in Turkey. The number of
 doctors (specialists and practitioners) increased 100 percent
 from 1967 to 1977, while the number of registered nurses more
 than tripled. Life expectancy at birth (1979) for the average
 Turk is 62. According to a 1967 figure, the infant mortality
 rate per 1,000 live births is 153.
 Primary schooling is compulsory. All levels of education,
 including the university, are free. However, there are
 entrance examinations for universities, since the number of
 applications greatly exceeds the present capacity of the 18
 institutions of higher learning. From 1965 to 1975 the per-
 centage of persons (six years and older) considered literate
 increased from 48 to 60. Current Turkish government estimates
 show a literacy rate of 65-70 percent. The government embarked
 on an extensive literacy campaign in March 1981. According to
 government figures, by August approximately 1.2 million persons
 had been enrolled in these courses.
 There is no known discrimination which would prevent Turks of
 whatever background from gaining the fruits of their labors.
 Under the law, women and men have equal rights. Women are
 found in the medical, legal, journalistic, engineering, dental,
 banking, architectural, and other professions. They have
 access to the universities. Nevertheless, women are subject to
 social and cultural restraints which keep them from full
 equality. Such restraints are more pronounced in rural areas.
 
 
 886
 U.S.OVEkSfAS -LOANS AND GRAtIS- U3LIGA'IIONS AND LOAN AUTMORIZAiUNs
 (Uo..o-ISCAL YEARS -MILLIONS UF DULLARS)
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1479     1960      148 1
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TUITAL..         6 b9.7   19b.1    201.0
 LUANb ...............      69.6      23.0     bb0
 (iKANT-S.........     .. .. ..      75.1    13t.0
 A.AIO .....................    69.6     198.0    200.0
 LOANS9...... ..........      .6    123.0     66.0
 GRANIS................       . 0.     75.0    134.0
 (SEL.SUPP.ASSIST. #..         5U.2    19b.0     200.0
 B. FOOD FUR PEACE.......         0.1       0.1      0.0
 LOANS.................   .   .0      0.0      0.O
 GRANTS.     ...........     0.1       0.1      0.0
 TILE 1-TUTAL ..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS.....           G .U     00       0. 0
 PAY. IN FOR. CUkR,,,,,          0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I1-OTAL ..........        0.        0.1      0.0
 E.RELILF.L .Dt V & WliP.        0.1       0.1      0.0
 VUL.RELIEF AGENLY.....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OIHER -CON. ASSIST...          0.0       C.      1.0
 LOANS ..................  .0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0       0.0      1.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0       1.0
 OTHEA ......... .... ...... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 i1.MlL. ASSIT.-IOAL., �        b0..     206.3    252.8
 LOANS..............    .... 175.0   202.9    Z50.0
 GRANTS.   .............      5.2$      5.4      2.8
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         5.0       .0       1.1
 8.CREUIT SALES-FM!S....       175.0    202.9    250.0
 C.IN7L MIL.EO.TN6....           0.3      1.4      1.7
 O.TRAN-EXCESS !TCK...          0.0       O.0      0.0
 E.OTHLk GRANTS ........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECUN. L NIL...        250.0     ,06.4    4.53.8
 LOANS...                    244 6   325.9     316.0
 ,GRANTb...............        5.4     80.5     137.8
 OTHEK US LOANS ..........          U.;      0.6      6.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS       -0.2                0.6      b.0
 ALL OTHER..............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCr FROM. INTERNATIONAL AtENCILS
 1979     1Qb0      1981     1946-81
 TOTAL........   .511.2    51'.1    872.3  -.167.7
 IBRu              452.5    460.0    722.0    3114.t
 IFC                48.5      !).6     13.5    225.8
 IDA                 0.0      0.0      0.0     177.4
 JOB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP                2.7      2.5       1.8     62.9
 OTHER-UN            1.2      0.0       0.0     11.2
 EEC                 6.3     46.0     135.0    576.0
 
 
