 TURKEY
 Turkey is a republic based on a multiparty parliamentary
 system and a strong presidency. Elections for public office
 are based on universal suffrage. Twelve parties competed
 freely in byelections held on September 28, 1986, in which the
 ruling Motherland Party won 6 of the 11 seats contested.
 General elections with full participation of all recognized
 political parties are scheduled for no later than November
 1988.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) are responsible for
 maintaining public order in the country, except in martial law
 areas. In those areas, military authorities oversee security
 through the gendarmerie, which also functions as the police in
 rural areas. At the end of 1986, 5 of 67 provinces, all in
 the southeast where government forces have faced an armed
 insurgency by Kurdish separatist since August 1984, remained
 under martial law. In addition, eight provinces (Istanbul
 plus seven provinces in the southeast) remain under a state of
 emergency, which empowers their governors to exercise some of
 the powers of martial law commanders.
 The end of martial law in November 1985 in Istanbul and Ankara
 removed a major restraint on freedom of the press, which is
 now free to publish almost anything.
 Turkey is moving from a closed economy dominated by the state
 sector to a free market, export-oriented economy. Although
 the rates of inflation and unemployment are still high, the
 economy under the Government's structural adjustment program
 has made substantial advances.
 The Constitution of 1982 and subsequent legislation place
 restrictions on the formation and activities of associations
 and unions, and on organic links between such organizations
 and political parties. There are no restrictions on the right
 of Turkish citizens to own property. The Constitution regards
 all citizens as Turks. Except for the special status granted
 to non-Muslim minorities by the Lausanne Treaty (1923), Turkey
 does not legally recognize the separate development of ethnic
 minorities.
 In general, the positive trend in the observance of human
 rights continued in 1986. The Government made considerable
 progress in reducing human rights abuses, although significant
 shortcomings are still evident.
 The judiciary has continued to demonstrate its independence.
 With two major exceptions, the mass trials of recent years
 were concluded, mostly with acquittals. Several trials
 initiated in 1986 against critics of the State were either
 dismissed or ended in acquittals.
 High government officials have denied that torture is a
 serious problem in Turkey. With the return of democratic
 government, however, and the lifting of restrictions on the
 press, allegations of police brutality have been increasingly
 publicized, and the Government has taken swift action to
 prosecute the perpetrators. In addition, members of
 Parliament and the press have raised questions concerning
 repressive activities by security forces combating the armed
 Kurdish separatist insurgency in southeast Turkey. A number
 of reports, some of them medically documented, noted the
 police use of torture, usually during initial periods of
 
 
 1039
 TURKEY
 incommunicado detention. A draft law aimed at eliminating
 these abuses by requiring the presence of a lawyer during
 interrogation was defeated in Parliament in 1986.
 In October the recently-appointed Minister of Justice
 condemned torture as a crime against humanity. Penalties for
 practicing torture remain low, with death by torture
 considered involuntary manslaughter (Turkish Criminal Code
 Article 243). A bill to raise the penalties for torture was
 defeated in Parliament in 1986. However, a revision of the
 Turkish Criminal Code, which dates from the founding of the
 Republic, is currently under way.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no accusations of politically motivated killings by
 government forces in 1986. In September 21 persons died in a
 terrorist attack on the Neve Shalom synagogue in Istanbul.
 Arab terrorists are believed responsible for the attack.
 Numerous clashes between separatist Kurdish guerrillas and
 government forces resulted in the deaths of about 17 Turkish
 military and security personnel and an unknown number of
 guerrillas and civilians in 1986.
 The Turkish General Staff (TGS) describes the insurgents as
 proponents of an independent Kurdish state, which would
 incorporate parts of present-day Turkey, Iran, and Iraq. Drug
 smugglers, Armenian terrorists, and Kurdish guerrillas
 operating from bases in Iraq, Iran, and Syria are all involved
 in the incidents, according to the TGS.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by either the
 Government or opposition groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution states that "no one shall be subjected to
 torture or ill-treatment incompatible with human dignity."
 However, the treatment of prisoners, especially during the
 initial pretrial period, remained an unresolved human rights
 issue. Politicians, the press, and outside monitoring groups
 alleged that prisoners were subject to torture and mistreatment
 in prisons and detention houses. Although many allegations
 concern treatment that could be defined as police brutality,
 i.e., they involved beatings by police officials aimed at
 intimidating a suspect or prisoner or resulted from personal
 animosity, in other cases the treatment clearly appears
 serious enough to have risen to the level of torture. Many
 allegations were documented by medical evidence. In a
 February 1986 interim report and in its October 1986 World
 Report, Amnesty International reiterated its charges that
 torture is "widespread and systematic" in Turkey.
 With the return of full political democracy and a free press
 to Turkey, allegations of torture received wide publicity.
 
 
 1040
 TURKEY
 The Government has responded with prompt action to suspend the
 alleged offenders and investigate the circumstances of each
 case. In an interview, the Minister of Justice said 1,459
 persons accused of torture were prosecuted in 1986. Of these,
 100 were convicted, and many cases are continuing. At the
 same time, the Government frequently stated that alleging
 torture had become a standard defense in all types of criminal
 cases.
 High government officials have criticized those who allege
 torture, charging that such allegations are political
 propaganda intended to destroy Turkey's international
 reputation. Although generally agreeing with these judgments,
 the newly appointed Justice Minister, in his first statement
 after assuming office, pointed out that torture certainly
 exists in Turkey, inasmuch as over 500 officials had been
 convicted of it. He went on to condemn torture and to express
 the Government's intention to eradicate it by prompt and
 severe punishment of offenders.
 Punishment for torture may change with the adoption of a new
 criminal code now being drafted. Currently, the Criminal
 Code, which dates from the 1920's, categorizes murder by
 torture as unintentional manslaughter, which is normally
 penalized by 8 years' imprisonment. Penalties for torture
 which does not result in death are less severe, ranging from 3
 to 5 years. In 1986 the Parliament defeated a bill, which was
 opposed by the Government, proposing the increase of this
 penalty to a range from 5 to 10 years.
 Many Turks link the mistreatment of prisoners to widespread
 public acceptance of the notion that the police should enforce
 public order by whatever means are necessary. Other
 contributory factors include the generally low educational
 level of police personnel and the lack of adequate training.
 The Government has publicly recognized the latter problem by
 taking steps to upgrade the police force, requiring secondary
 level education for new recruits, and organizing special
 courses to instruct policemen as to their responsibilities and
 the limits on their powers under the law.
 Prison conditions continued to be an issue of concern in
 Parliament and among nongovernmental bodies such as the Bar
 Association, members of which sent a petition to the
 Government in April requesting improvements. In February
 Adana prison experienced a 23-day hunger strike for better
 conditions. Government officials charge that this strike was
 politically motivated and directed from outside. There is
 general agreement, though, that conditions in prisons have
 improved as a result of the attention focused on this issue by
 the Parliamentary Prison Commission, the press, and other
 nongovernmental groups.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires a warrant from the public prosecutor
 for any detention, except in certain limited circumstances,
 e.g., when a person is caught redhanded. The arrest warrant
 itself is issued by a judge after a hearing. Persons taken
 into custody may be held incommunicado without charge by the
 police or public prosecutor for up to 24 hours, according to
 the Police Powers Act of 1985, which reduced the period from
 48 hours. If the police obtain a court order, however, the
 period may be extended to 15 days. Detention without charge
 is 15 days in cases of "offenses committed collectively."
 
 
 1041
 TURKEY
 In the 5 provinces under martial law and the 8 under
 state-of-emergency rule, an individual may be detained without
 charge for up to 30 days. Martial law authorities do not need
 warrants to detain suspects. Martial law commanders, subject
 to prescribed judicial procedures, may impose internal exile
 for up to 5 years on persons believed to be acting against
 "general security and public order." No such sentences were
 imposed in 1986.
 Once taken formally into custody to face charges, a detainee
 appears first before a public prosecutor, who informs him of
 the suspicions or charges which led to his detention. If the
 prosecutor decides to pursue the case, the detainee is
 arraigned before a judge and allowed to retain a lawyer. The
 judge decides whether to have the accused held in detention or
 to permit provisional release during the pretrial investigative
 period.
 In all cases the authorities may'hold a detainee incommunicado
 within the prescribed time limits until he is charged or
 released. According to the Police Powers Act, a detainee's
 next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time," except in
 cases where secrecy is deemed necessary, such as when others
 are believed to be involved in a given crime. A detainee may
 not have access to a lawyer until he is brought before a
 judge. Parliament in 1986 defeated a bill requiring that all
 arrested persons be given immediate access to a lawyer.
 Similar proposals put forward by the Turkish Bar Association
 and others are now being considered by the committee reviewing
 the criminal code.
 The system of justice includes a bail system in which the
 arraigning judge may release the accused on presentation of an
 appropriate guarantee, or order him held in preventive
 detention if the court determines that he may flee or destroy
 evidence. The Constitution includes the right of detainees to
 request speedy conclusion of arraignment and trial, and
 release "if the restriction placed upon them is not lawful."
 Turkish judicial authorities, under both civil and martial
 law, have the power to impose sentences of internal exile.
 Internal exile is provided for in the Execution of Sentences
 Act of 1986, but the number of convicts, if any, on whom this
 was actually imposed after sentencing is unknown. An Armenian
 priest sentenced to internal exile upon his release from
 prison in May 1986 is still residing in Istanbul, pending a
 high court decision on his appeal of the sentence.
 The Constitution prohibits forced labor, and it does not occur
 in practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In most cases, defendants have the right to an open trial,
 which may be attended by family members and lawyers. Members
 of the public and press are also usually free to attend. In
 some trials, particularly those held in military prisons or on
 military compounds, members of the public must seek permission
 to attend. The authorities usually grant such permission. In
 October the defense in a torture trial succeeded in having the
 judge changed after an argument arising from his ban on public
 attendance at the trial.
 The Constitution accords a defendant the right to retain the
 lawyer of his choice. However, in certain trials stemming
 
 
 1042
 TURKEY
 from the Kurdish insurgency in the southeast, defendants who
 cannot speak Turkish reportedly have difficulty in
 communicating with their lawyers, as they are forbidden from
 using any language except Turkish with visitors. There are
 also reports that lawyers in these trials have experienced
 some harassment.
 Although Turkey is predominantly Muslim, its court system and
 judicial procedures are modeled on the Italian (criminal) and
 Swiss (civil) law codes. There are no Shari'a (Islamic) or
 other religious courts.
 The Constitution declares that "judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties" and provides for their secure
 tenure. It also states that no authority may give orders or
 recommendations to judges concerning the exercise of judicial
 power. Public prosecutors are also independent, and, although
 they may be ordered to begin prosecutions, they decide
 thereafter whether to pursue them. For example, on September
 23, 1986, the prosecutor in former Prime Minister Bulent
 Ecevit's trial on charges of violating a ban on his political
 activity requested a verdict of acquittal, which was granted
 by the judge. The Supreme Council of Judges and Public
 Prosecutors, appointed by the President and including the
 Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the
 higher courts and oversees those of the lower courts.
 In provinces under martial law, all defendants accused of
 terrorism or other offenses against the security of the State
 are tried in military courts. Martial law judges normally
 have law degrees and observe the same standards as criminal
 judges. They may not be transferred at the discretion of
 military commanders. In provinces under a state of emergency,
 civilian courts try cases.
 Civilian and military courts generally conduct trials under
 the same rules of procedure, based on the Constitution or
 martial law regulations, respectively. A conviction or
 acquittal in either system may be appealed to the appropriate
 civilian or military appeals court. If an appeals court
 overturns a lower court's guilty verdict, the case is sent
 back to the lower court for reconsideration. If the lower
 court insists on its original verdict, the case is returned to
 the Joint Council of the Appeals Court for a binding verdict.
 In some cases, particularly capital cases, appeals are
 automatic to the Supreme Court or to the High Court of
 Military Appeals. If a death sentence is confirmed by the
 appeals court, it must be approved by the Council of
 Ministers, then by Parliament, and finally by the President.
 By October 1986, nearly 1,000 death sentences were awaiting
 the Council of Ministers' review, and 105 review by
 Parliament. Parliament has not approved any death sentences
 since 1984.
 A limited number of special trials, such as the trial of over
 1,400 leaders of the Confederation of Revolutionary Trade
 Unions (DISK) and those in the first Peace Association case,
 have continued for up to 5 years. In December the court
 reached a verdict in the DISK trial, which both the defendants
 and prosecution plan to appeal. The court found 264
 defendants guilty and sentenced them from 1 to 10 years in
 prison. Another 1,169 defendants were found innocent, 29
 cases were transferred to other courts, and 15 cases were
 dropped. The court also ordered DISK and all but two of its
 affiliated unions closed permanently. The DISK defendants
 
 
 1043
 TURKEY
 (except for a few serving sentences as a result of conviction
 on other charges) and all of the Peace Association defendants
 remain free on bail. Under the "Execution of Sentences Act"
 of 1986, which reduces sentences to be served to one-half the
 imposed time, most or all of these defendants, even if found
 guilty, will have already served out their sentences.
 Estimates of the number of political prisoners held in
 Turkey's jails vary greatly depending on the source and the
 source's definition of political prisoner. The Turkish press
 in 1985, the most recent year for which figures were
 available, listed about 3,600 persons convicted of crimes
 against the security of the State, crimes against security
 forces, or for belonging to armed organizations. Of this
 number, 1,700 were convicted of crimes of violence. Several
 thousand other people were incarcerated while under
 investigation or undergoing trial for similar offenses. An
 opposition spokesman recently claimed that in Turkey there
 were 10,000 prisoners convicted of "thought crimes."
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution guarantees the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Entry by government officials into a private residence and
 interception or monitoring of private correspondence are
 permitted only upon issuance of a judicial warrant.
 In the five provinces still under martial law, the authorities
 have the legal power "without need of a warrant, application
 or request... to search residences, or buildings of all
 societies, associations, political parties, unions, clubs,
 business locations, or offices belonging to or occupied by
 juridical as well as private bodies." They may also search,
 hold, or seize without warrant persons, letters, telegrams,
 and documents. There is no evidence that this power is widely
 used or abused.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The end of martial law in November 1985 in Istanbul and Ankara
 removed a major restraint on freedom of the press, which is
 now free to publish almost anything. The Criminal Code,
 however, continues to prohibit the advocacy of class or racial
 domination (communism) or the establishment of a theocratic
 state (Islamic fundamentalism) or of a separate state on
 ethnic lines (Kurdish separatism). Trials of persons
 expressing such views take place in one of eight state
 security courts which deal only with such cases.
 In addition, in response to the increasing publication of
 photographs of naked women in the sensationalist popular
 press, Parliament in March 1986 adopted the "Protection Of
 Minors From Harmful Publications Act." This act established a
 board which reviews publications against which a complaint is
 brought. The board cannot prevent publication but can demand
 that a publication be sold only in an opaque plastic bag. It
 can also censor movies and videotapes. This law, however, has
 been challenged, and the Constitutional Court has agreed to
 review its constitutionality.
 
 
 1044
 TURKEY
 The National Security Council, which ruled until the
 resumption of civilian rule in 1983, promulgated a law shortly
 before its dissolution banning all criticism of the decrees,
 communiques, and actions of that body and its members. The
 same law also proscribed all statements praising or condemning
 leaders of banned (pre-1980) political parties. However, all
 prosecutions under this law have thus far resulted in
 acquittals. In 1986 Ilhan Selcuk and Okay Gonensin, the
 editors of the leftist daily Cumhuriyet, were prosecuted and
 acquitted for criticizing the President and the military
 intervention of September 1980 in a column. The editors of
 the English-language Turkish Daily News faced a similar charge
 and were also acquitted. Social Democratic Populist Party
 Central Committee member Muzaffar Sarac was acquitted in
 October 1986 of charges stemming from a speech he gave in
 Ireland almost a year before. As "banned" political leaders
 play an increasingly open role in today's politics, the
 proscription against praising or condemning them has come to
 be totally ignored.
 Writers are still being prosecuted for writing allegedly
 pro-Communist propaganda or violating secularist principles.
 Professor Yalcin Kucuk is facing his fourth retrial on charges
 that his book, "Toward a New Republic," is Communist
 propaganda, and Ali Riza Demircan was prosecuted for his book
 "Sexual Life According to Islam;" neither was imprisoned.
 Trials of several others continue, and new cases are opened
 regularly.
 The newspaper Hurriyet reported that a publisher, Recep
 Marasli, was sentenced to 27 years' imprisonment on charges of
 separatist and Communist propaganda and belonging to an
 illegal Kurdish separatist organization. Amnesty
 International wrote to the Turkish Foreign Minister about this
 case. The Undersecretary of the Justice Ministry, responding
 that Amnesty International could not interfere in Turkey's
 internal affairs, noted a "difference in opinion" in the
 matter, in which "what we define as a crime in action is
 interpreted by Amnesty International as a thought crime."
 Amnesty International has expressed concern about several
 hundred prisoners whom it termed "prisoners of conscience"
 convicted of such offenses as "membership in illegal
 organizations" or "making Communist propaganda."
 The press in Turkey is privately owned and reflects a wide
 range of political views. Turkish Radio and Television (TRT)
 is a government monopoly. A significant change in its
 programing came about in 1986. In previous years, TRT devoted
 the largest portion of its news coverage to the activities of
 the President, Prime Minister, and other government
 officials. In 1986 TRT covered the activities of opposition
 politicians to a significant extent in its news programs and
 sometimes made them the lead story. Prior to the September
 28, 1986, byelections, all 12 political parties received full
 coverage. Even "banned" political leaders such as former
 Prime Ministers Suleyman Demirel and Bulent Ecevit were shown
 on television, though not in political capacities. There are
 widespread allegations--which TRT's director denied in a press
 interview--that certain artists and works are banned from
 radio and television due to either political or cultural
 considerations.
 
 
 1045
 TURKEY
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior permission from
 the authorities. Such requests are generally granted.
 According to current regulations, marching routes, rally
 areas, crowd dispersion routes, and poster hanging locations
 are to be fixed for each city every January.
 The Law on Associations, which reflected government concern
 over the involvement of some associations in the political
 violence preceding the military intervention of 1980,
 prohibits associations from having any ties to political
 parties or engaging in political activity. For example, seven
 members of the Medical Association who circulated a petition
 against the death penalty were tried on charges that their
 petition violated the ban on political activity by
 associations.
 Association activity is closely monitored by the Government.
 All associations are required to have an annual general
 meeting, which is attended by officials of the provincial
 governor's security staff. They must certify that all
 regulations have been complied with, or the association can be
 closed. Associations must submit their charters for the
 approval of government authorities before they are allowed to
 form. Turkey's Human Rights Association, formed in July, is
 still awaiting permission to operate as a legal association.
 The Constitution and Political Parties Law prohibit students
 and faculty members from becoming members of political parties
 or involved in political activities. Thus faculty or student
 political associations of any type are banned, and political
 parties are forbidden to form youth branches. Permission of a
 university's rector is required for any student to join any
 association.
 Some faculty members who were dismissed when martial law was
 in effect have petitioned for reinstatement. Some of those
 fired by the Higher Education Council, which controls the
 universities, won their suits, though none has yet been
 reinstated. Those fired by martial law authorities are banned
 from any public sector employment, and many are challenging
 the constitutionality of Martial Law No. 1402, which gave
 martial law authorities the power to fire them.
 Those unions and confederations set up under the provisions of
 the 1983 Labor Law have been allowed to organize workplaces
 freely and to engage in collective bargaining. Although only
 a small percentage of Turkey's total work force of some 16
 million is organized, over 60 percent of industrialized
 workers are union members covered by collective bargaining
 agreements. As a result, unions have a significant impact on
 the economy, especially on its work rules and wage structure.
 The 1983 Collective Bargaining, Strike, and Lock-out Law
 strictly regulates the bargaining process and makes strikes
 outside the collective bargaining process (general strikes,
 political strikes, and solidarity strikes) illegal. Unions
 are able to represent their members, engage in collective
 bargaining, and are responsive to their members' interests.
 A recent court decision ordered the permanent closing of DISK
 (Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions), whose
 activities were suspended under martial law following the 1980
 military takeover and whose leaders have been on trial since
 December 24, 1981. The verdict in the trial is being
 
 
 1046
 appealed. The DISK leaders were charged with "trying to
 change the form of government" and with "interfering with the
 work of the Parliament." Some defendants are charged with
 culpability in acts of violence. All defendants (except two
 convicted of other crimes) remain free on their own
 recognizance, but the organization and its funds remain under
 the control of court-appointed trustees. At least two unions
 affiliated with Turk-Is have called on the Government to allow
 DISK unions to resume their activities.
 Political activity by trade unions is banned by the
 Constitution, the Law on Associations, and the Trade Union
 Law. Thus unions can neither endorse candidates and parties
 nor make contributions to their campaigns. Trade union
 activity in defense of workers' social and economic interests,
 however, is not regarded as political activity. The unions
 have taken advantage of that distinction to mount strenuous
 public campaigns against various government policies and to
 lobby government and opposition parliamentarians in support of
 labor positions. These campaigns included an effort in
 January to persuade the Parliament to bring the laws
 restricting union activity into harmony with the relevant
 International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions.
 Byelection activities in September peaked in an election eve
 press conference in which the Turk-Is President called workers
 to vote against the governing party. In October he sharply
 criticized restrictions imposed on the activities of a major
 opposition party.
 Turkish government, union, and employer representatives
 participate fully in the activities of the ILO. The main
 confederation, Turk-Is, is an affiliate of the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), and most Turk-Is
 member unions are affiliated with their respective
 international trade secretariats.
 Both the ILO and the ICFTU have closely monitored the
 situation of organized labor in Turkey since the military
 intervention of September 12, 1980. ILO reports have noted
 the increased cooperation the organization has received from
 the Government as well as improvement on outstanding issues.
 However, the ongoing DISK trial remains a major concern, as do
 some restrictions on trade unions (for example, on political
 activities). The ICFTU has followed the DISK trial closely,
 although DISK is not an ICFTU affiliate, and has urged the
 Government to amend its labor laws and Constitution along the
 lines urged by Turkey's largest union confederation, the
 ICFTU-affiliated Turk-Is.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The majority of Turks are Sunni Muslims. There are also an
 eclectic minority "Alevi" group made up of adherents to
 different varieties of Shi'ism, various small Christian
 religious groups, and a small Jewish community.
 Turkish governments since the founding of the Republic have
 regarded the principle of secular government as an essential
 attribute of a modern, Western-style democratic system, and
 the Constitution proclaims secularism to be a basic
 characteristic of the State. Many observers have noted the
 increased visibility of Islamic religious observance and, piety
 in recent years. But stringent constitutional and legal
 restrictions hinder the efforts of a small minority of Muslim
 
 
 1047
 TURKEY
 fundamentalists who advocate the establishment of a state with
 a Shari'a legal system.
 The Constitution stipulates that "everyone has the right to
 freedom of conscience, religious belief, and conviction."
 Constitutional and legal restrictions aimed at protecting the
 principle of secularism and separation of church and state
 limit that right significantly. As a result of the Kurdish
 rebellion of 1925, led by a sheikh of the Nakshibendi mystical
 sect, all such religious orders were banned. They continue to
 exist, however, and the press frequently comments on their
 activities. Numerous Islamic religious teachers connected
 either openly or by repute with the Nakshibendi order in
 Istanbul have been prosecuted for advocating a theocratic
 state. In late 1986, one of them, Adnan Hoca, was under
 psychiatric observation by court order. He, too, was charged
 with advocating a theocratic state.
 The Political Parties Law prohibits the establishment of any
 political party advocating theocracy or the foundation of law
 and government, even partially, on religious principles.
 However, after the September 1985 acquittal on appeal of
 several leaders of the former National Salvation Party (NSP),
 which was considered a "religious" party, the party sued and
 won, in October 1986, the lifting of the constitutional
 10-year ban on its leaders' activities. The successor to the
 NSP, the Refah (Affluence) Party, is legal and campaigned in
 the September byelections with the open participation of
 former NSP leaders but won only 5.5 percent of the vote.
 The Criminal Code forbids proselytizing by any person or
 group. Twenty-three Turkish Jehovah's Witnesses were
 acquitted on appeal in June 1986. In its decision, the court
 defended the constitutional right to freedom of religion,
 stating that "every Turkish citizen has the right to freedom
 of religion and conscience, and is free to choose his faith
 and perform its acts of worship."
 In December 1985, Istanbul police sequestered Bibles and other
 publicat'ions in Turkish of the Turkish Bible Society. In
 March 1986, after the personal intervention of the Prime
 Minister, the Cabinet canceled its restrictions on importing
 and distributing biblical texts, and circulation of Bibles now
 proceeds unhindered.
 Under the Constitution, "instruction in religious culture and
 moral education," in accord with a state-prepared curriculum,
 is compulsory for all students. During the 1985-86 school
 year, Assyrian Christians in the southeast complained that
 their children were being forced to attend Islamic
 instruction. In 1986 Christians in Iskenderun made the same
 complaint, and in October the Education Ministry issued a
 statement confirming that non-Muslims would have to attend
 religious instruction classes but would be excused from the
 "practical" sections, which include memorization of Koranic
 verses and instructions in prayer. The courses--about 2 hours
 per week--are taught by lay teachers. Extracurricular Koran
 courses using government-approved texts are permitted. The
 Government has closed Koran courses run by fundamentalist
 sects teaching a more radical brand of Islam.
 Among other religious groups, small numbers of Armenian
 Orthodox and Armenian Catholic, Greek Orthodox and Greek
 Catholic, Bulgarian Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Syrian and
 Assyrian Christian, Protestants, and Jewish believers are
 
 
 1048
 TURKEY
 found in Turkey, primarily in Istanbul. These groups operate
 churches, monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable
 religious foundations such as hospitals and orphanages.
 Guarantees of minority rights, beyond those enshrined in the
 Constitution, are included in the Treaty of Lausanne, which
 provides that non-Muslim minority communities may have their
 children taught in their own language.
 In 1986 the Government took significant steps to resolve
 several issues of major concern to non-Muslim groups. There
 are many reports that the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate will
 soon obtain permission to rebuild its administration building,
 destroyed by fire in 1941; the Patriarchate has been seeking
 permission to rebuild for over 40 years. The resolution of
 the Bible Society case and the release in 1986 of an Armenian
 priest convicted of sedition in 1983 were other positive steps
 in government relations with non-Muslim minorities.
 Liturgical use by non-Muslims of languages other than Turkish,
 such as Greek, Armenian, Hebrew, and Arabic is allowed but
 continues to decline.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is general freedom of movement within Turkey, except in
 the five provinces under martial law where authorities have
 the seldom-used power to restrict movement. Martial law
 authorities may expel "persons whose presence in the martial
 law area is determined to be prejudicial," or restrict and
 prohibit their residence in, or entry into, certain areas
 under martial law. Some border areas are off-limits to
 foreigners without specific permission to visit them.
 Turks generally are free to travel abroad, and increasing
 numbers have done so since the relaxation of currency
 controls. According to the Constitution, however, a citizen's
 freedom to leave may be restricted on account of the national
 economic situation, civic obligations (generally military
 service), or criminal investigation or prosecution. Many
 Turks currently involved in mass trials are denied passports,
 and there is evidence that other citizens not under indictment
 are denied passports for political reasons. Turkish law
 provides that those-denied passports while under indictment
 may receive passports if the Justice Ministry and Prime
 Ministry approve their petitions citing emergency reasons for
 foreign travel. Recently, Turkey's leading humorist, Aziz
 Nesin, who is a defendant in the Peace Association Case, was
 granted a limited-use passport to travel to the United Kingdom
 to participate in a conference.
 Turkish law guarantees citizens protection against deportation,
 extradition, or denial of reentry. The Constitution guarantees
 the rights of Turks and their families living abroad to return
 home. Under provisions of the Turkish citizenship law,
 however, the Government may deprive of citizenship those Turks
 who have refused to return to Turkey to face criminal charges
 or who it determines have expatriated themselves.
 Turkey has permanently resettled about 4,500 Afghan refugees
 of Turkic ethnicity in recent years, and provides a temporary
 haven for East European refugees in two temporary settlement
 facilities. While the Government does not grant refugee
 status to Iranians, it asserts that it does not deport to Iran
 those who have entered Turkey illegally or have overstayed
 
 
 1049
 TURKEY
 their permitted time. In consequence, large numbers of
 Iranians are now living in Turkey, many of them in Istanbul
 and other large cities.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Turkey has a multiparty, presidential parliamentary system.
 The president is elected by Parliament for a single 7-year
 term. The current President, whose election was automatic
 with the approval of Turkey's new Constitution in the 1982
 referendum, is retired General Kenan Evren, former Chief of
 the Turkish General Staff and head of the National Security
 Council which governed Turkey during the period of military
 rule (1980-83).
 The unicameral Parliament has 400 seats elected on a
 proportional basis. The Election Law requires that a party
 win at least 10 percent of the total national vote in order to
 obtain seats in Parliament. The 10 percent threshold is
 intended to prevent political fragmentation and the recurrence
 of the parliamentary paralysis of the late 1970's.
 Parties advocating certain beliefs are restricted from
 operating in the political arena. These include parties
 advocating a theocratic state, the superiority or dictatorship
 of a particular social class or group, or "exclusive" or
 "elitist" political philosophies. No party may be formed
 around a particular ethnic or cultural group. Among the
 prohibited political groupings are Communist or other Marxist
 parties, which are based on class, and Fascist "elitist"
 parties. All of these are regarded as inimical to a
 Western-style democratic society and threatening to Turkey's
 fundamental integrity. People considered Fascists or
 Communists by the authorities are banned from membership in
 any party. Other groups permanently banned from joining or
 actively participating in political parties include active
 members of the armed forces and certain categories of civil
 servants--a prohibition based on the pre-1980 politicization
 of government and security structures.
 The Constitution guarantees equal political rights for men and
 women. Turkey was one of the first countries to grant women
 full and equal political rights. There are 12 women members
 of Parliament, and several women hold important positions in
 the party hierarchies, although the 23-member cabinet has no
 women members at present.
 Members of minorities, Muslim and non-Muslim, face no legal
 limitations on political participation as long as they accept
 a Turkish national identity. Kurds who accept such an
 identity play a sizable role in Turkish political life, and
 some of them are members of the Turkish Parliament.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government permitted visits by foreigners to discuss human
 rights in Turkey during 1986, and, in most cases, facilitated
 contacts with both official and nonofficial visitors.
 Visitors in 1986 included a delegation from the European
 Helsinki Watch Commission, the German Social Democratic Party,
 a British-led Quaker group, and the U.S. Assistant Secretary
 of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Amnesty
 
 
 1050
 TURKEY
 International sent no official request for a visit to Turkey
 in 1986.
 The ILO did not place the situation in Turkey on its agenda in
 1986, given Turkish government commitments to expand labor
 rights. The Council of Europe removed Turkey from its human
 rights agenda after a friendly settlement in December 1985 of
 the five-nation complaint against Turkey in the European Human
 Rights Commission. As part of that settlement, Turkey
 undertook to provide regular confidential reports and permit
 site visits, which it has done.
 In July 1986, a nongovernmental Human Rights Association was
 provisionally formed. In accordance with the Law on
 Associations, it submitted its charter to the Government for
 approval. The Government did not approve it on the grounds
 that the areas of the Association's interest were more
 properly the concern of the Government. Nevertheless, the
 group operates legally pending resubmission of its charter and
 has held public meetings where human rights were discussed.
 The Social Democratic Populist Party also has a human rights
 committee, which is currently preparing a report on the rights
 situation in Turkey.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution regards all Turkish citizens as Turks and
 prohibits any discrimination on ethnic grounds. In the
 Lausanne Treaty, the Turkish Government undertook "to assure
 full and complete protection of life and liberty to all
 inhabitants of Turkey without distinction of birth,
 nationality, language, race, or religion." At the same time,
 it has been the policy of Turkish governments for many years
 to seek assimilation of individuals of non-Turkish ethnic
 backgrounds into the mainstream of Turkish society and
 culture, often to the point of forcefully discouraging
 manifestations of ethnic difference. The size of these
 communities has declined steadily over the years.
 Non-Muslim minority groups continue to complain about
 government policies and procedures regulating the operation of
 community schools, the purchase and sale of community real
 estate, the administration of church properties, and the
 activities of parish councils. Government claims on property
 endowed to charitable religious organizations also continue to
 be a majo. concern.
 The position of the members of the small Assyrian Christian
 community, centered on the southeastern city of Mardin, has
 become rather isolated, and many have chosen to move to
 Istanbul or abroad.
 Turkey's Kurds are concentrated in the economically
 disadvantaged southeast. There are also significant
 concentrations of Kurds elsewhere, the result of Ottoman
 settlement policy and more recent migration to metropolitan
 centers.
 The Government is trying to quell an armed Kurdish insurgency
 of guerrillas based in the southeast and in neighboring
 countries. The five provinces remaining under martial law are
 inhabited primarily by Kurds and are also the center of the
 insurgency. Most government officials and many opposition
 figures blame the Kurdish insurgency on outside influences and
 
 
 1051
 TURKEY
 the depressed economic conditions of southeast Anatolia which
 the Government is seeking to remedy through large-scale
 economic development programs.
 Kurds may be found in every area of Turkish life and at all
 levels of society. But the Government remains adamantly
 opposed to any assertion of a Kurdish ethnic identity and has
 taken a number of steps to suppress it. Publication of books,
 newspapers, and any other materials in Kurdish is forbidden,
 as are books or any other materials in Turkish dealing with
 Kurdish history, culture, or ethnic identity. Use of the
 Kurdish language is not permitted for any official purposes,
 e.g., in the courts, nor is it allowed in certain private
 situations such as receiving visitors in prison.
 Turkey has long been in the forefront of nations in the
 promotion and protection of women's rights. Women have full
 suffrage and educational rights, have attained high office,
 and are represented, though not always in significant numbers,
 in all professions and institutions. Women have served or are
 currently employed at the rank of university rector and dean,
 ambassador, political party vice president, and army colonel.
 Turkish businesswomen play significant roles in many
 industries, and a few sit on the boards of some of Turkey's
 largest private firms. Female lawyers and judges are no
 rarity, and female doctors are dominant in some specialties.
 Nonetheless, the role of women in smaller communities and
 rural areas, especially in the east--and increasingly in the
 urban communities inhabited by migrants from the villages--is
 still defined by centuries of traditional practice which is
 patriarchal and dictates the subordination of females to males
 within the family unit. Many women and girls in the east are
 partially or fully veiled, and certain religious sects, now
 common in cities, also practice the veiling of women.
 Prevailing social or cultural values make it difficult for
 some women to receive primary or secondary education or to
 pursue careers outside the home.
 The right of indigenous minority groups to use their own
 languages is limited. Although the Lausanne Treaty states
 that "no restrictions shall be imposed on the free use by any
 .Turkish national of any language in private intercourse, in
 commerce, religion, in the press, or in publications of any
 kind or at public meetings," the Constitution states that the
 official language of the country is Turkish. One article of
 the Constitution bans discrimination on the basis of language,
 while others prohibit the public use of "languages prohibited
 by law." Legislation prohibiting specific languages has never
 been adopted, but Turkish citizens have been tried on a
 variety of charges relating to the use of Kurdish. In 1986
 provincial officials of the main opposition party were tried
 on charges that their use of Kurdish at party headquarters
 constituted "propaganda denigrating national sentiment." They
 were acquitted. Also acquitted were officials of the State
 Statistical Institute, who prepared a handbook for census
 officials, directing them to ask what languages aside from
 Turkish the interviewees spoke. The charges stated that by
 listing Kurdish alongside such "international" languages as
 English, French, and Arabic, the handbook constituted
 propaganda denigrating nationalist sentiment.
 The Government has stated that the intent of its bans on
 publishing in Kurdish (and its discouragement of languages
 such as Georgian and Laz) is to foster Turkish as the language
 
 
 1052
 TURKEY
 of all citizens for all uses. This is part of an effort to
 inculcate in all Turkish citizens a sense of identity with the
 Turkish State and nation as opposed to identification with any
 particular groups within the nation. In practice, the
 severity of restrictions on the use of a minority language
 appears to depend on the perceived threat the group in
 question presents to the integrity of the State. For example,
 while the Government faces an armed Kurdish insurgency and
 therefore believes the use of Kurdish fosters separatist
 tendencies, the use of Arabic, about which there are no such
 concerns, is not similarly restricted.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution guarantees the right to reasonable conditions
 of labor suited to the worker's age, sex, and capacity, and
 grants the right to rest and leisure and a fair wage. The
 Labor Law forbids the employment of children under 13 years of
 age and restricts children under 15 to "light work which will
 not harm their health and physical development, prevent their
 attendance at occupational training and orientation programs,
 or their ability to benefit from education." Children between
 15 and 18 years of age may not be employed in underground or
 underwater work, nor may they be employed at night. Girls and
 women may not be employed in underground or underwater work,
 but, if over the age of 18, may work night shifts under
 conditions specified jointly by the Ministry of Health and
 Social Welfare and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. A
 board composed of Government, private sector, and labor
 representatives establishes national minimum wages for the
 agricultural and nonagricultural sectors. The Labor Law
 provides for a 7 1/2-hour day and a 45-hour workweek.
 In spite of constitutional guarantees, specific legal
 requirements, and labor union efforts, a considerable gap
 remains between social goals and the reality of occupational
 health and safety levels. Trade unions have repeatedly
 complained that existing regulations governing health, safety,
 and working conditions are not adequately enforced. Outside
 the industrialized sector, where unions exercise considerable
 influence, legal restrictions are generally ignored, both on
 occupational health and safety and on child and female
 employment.
 
 
 1053
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        139.5    175.9    119.6
 LOANS ..............    ... 63.5     85.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    76.3     90.9    119.6
 A.AIO ....................    138.5    175.0    119.6
 LOANS ..............    ... 63.5     85.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    75.0     90.0    119.6
 (SEC.SU2P.ASSIST,)...       138.5     175.0    119.6
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................ .  .0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-T3TAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.0      0.9      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        1.0      0.9      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         1.0      0.9      0.0
 OTHER ............ .... ..00       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        718.3    703.6    618.5
 LOANS ..............  .... 585.0    485.0    409.5
 GRANTS ........ o ....     133.3    218.6    209.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       130.0    215.0    205.8
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       585.0    485.0    409.5
 C.INTL NIL.EO.TRNG ....         3.3      3.6      3.2
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & 4IL,.         857.8    879.5    738.1
 LOANS ..............  .... 648.5    5'70.0   409.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 209.3    309.5    328.6
 OTHER US LOANS ..........    . 70.5      15.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............    ... 70.5     15.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986      1946-86
 TOTAL ........   945.2     706.9   1088.6   8303.9
 IBRO             794.3     698.5   1057.0   6985.6
 IFC              150.0       7.1     31.6    434.5
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0    178.1
 ID3                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0     .0.0      0.0
 UNOP                0.9      1.3      0.0     69.0
 OTIER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0     11.7
 EE:                0.0       0.0      0.0    625.0
 
 
 1054
