 TURKEY
 In December 1983, a new civilian parliamentary government took
 office in Turkey. Before then, Turkey was ruled by the
 military Government which took power at the time of the coup on
 September 12, 1980, ending a period of violence from both the
 extreme right and extreme left. Turkey is still under martial
 law, which at the time of the military takeover was extended to
 the entire nation.
 During-the course of 1983, a number of significant developments
 affected the human xights situation in Turkey. Among the most
 important were the advent of a civilian parliamentary
 government and the partial restoration of freedom of political
 expression. Ultimate power during most of 1983 had been held
 by the five-member National Security Council, composed of the
 Chief of the Turkish General Staff and the heads of the armed
 services. The Government was administered by a Prime Minister
 (a retired Admiral) and a civilian Council of Ministers. In
 October 1981, the Council, under Head of State General Evren,
 established a civilian Consultative Assembly, whose function
 was to draft a new Constitution for the nation and to serve as
 a legislative body. In a national referendum in November 1982,
 91 percent of the voters approved the Constitution and endorsed
 General Evren as President of the Republic for a 7-year term.
 He was the only candidate.
 The Consultative Assembly, prior to going into permanent recess
 on October 15, 1983, drafted a new political parties law, a new
 elections law, new labor laws, and a new associations law. All
 of these were subject to review and revision by the National
 Security Council before they came into effect.
 On December 9, 1983, the military Government stepped down after
 the November elections gave Turgut Ozal's Motherland Party,
 which was not endorsed by the military Government, a
 parliamentary majority. Ozal's cabinet is made up entirely of
 civilian members of his party.
 Under the military Government, abuses of human rights due to
 terrorist activity, and political and religious violence were
 substantially reduced. While nearly 33,000 acts of political
 and religious violence occurred between December 1978 and the
 September 1980 military takeover, in the three years since that
 time fewer than 7,500 violent acts have occurred, and the
 number has continued to drop substantially each year. The
 martial law authorities had--and still have under martial law
 which will remain in effect for at least the next few
 months--the right to censor the media, to limit political
 expression, including the right to assemble, and to restrict
 trade union activities. They also have the power to search and
 arrest without warrants and to try suspects in martial law
 courts.
 The Council, in keeping with its timetable for ending of
 military rule which was announced two years ago, permitted the
 reestablishment of political parties and the holding of the
 election which brought into being both a new parliament and a
 new civilian government. The Turkish military and the
 political parties contesting the elections have commented that
 the transition to full democracy is not yet complete.
 The range of political alternatives represented in the parties
 allowed to contest the elections was severely limited under
 rules which generally applied only to the 1983 election. Using
 its power to veto party founders and candidates, the military
 
 (1106)
 
 
 1107
 Government limited the parties eligible to participate in the
 election to three. Several major parties were prevented from
 meeting the requirements for participation in the parliamentary
 elections, although they subsequently were qualified and will
 participate in the upcoming local elections.
 As part of the process of legalizing parties and holding an
 election campaign, limits on freedom of political expression
 were relaxed in the spring of 1983. Although well-defined
 limits remain on what may or may not be discussed, politicians
 and the press have had considerably more leeway to discuss
 political issues and personalities than in the previous two and
 one half years of military rule. Those who overstepped the
 limits, however, continued to face arrest, and newspapers faced
 the threat of being shut down.
 The Government of Turkey has acknowledged that there have been
 cases of torture of those arrested under martial law.
 Complaints of torture continued to be filed by prisoners in
 1983. In 1983 a number of security officials were
 investigated, brought to trial, convicted and given stiff
 sentences for torturing prisoners. Since 1980 there has
 apparently been a decline in the number of complaints of
 torture and an increase in the number of convictions, although
 the available data are not sufficiently detailed to determine
 their precise significance.
 Turkish military forces continue to be present in Northern
 Cyprus as a result of the 1974 Turkish military intervention
 there. Their role in the human rights situation there is
 addressed in the report relating to Cyprus.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 The only reports of killings by the Government related to armed
 confrontations between security forces and terrorist groups,
 and, very rarely, the killing of a prisoner while attempting to
 escape. Reports of deaths while in custody will be treated
 below.
 Prior to the military takeover in 1980, politically-motivated
 killings by private groups were common. Such killings have now
 virtually ceased. Between September 12, 1980, and
 April 11, 1983, official figures put the number of deaths
 attributable to political terrorism, and government efforts to
 combat it, at 592, compared to 3,856 for the period
 January 1979 to September 1980.
 Armenian terrorist organizations have been active in killings
 both within Turkey and abroad. In June 1983 an attack in
 Istanbul resulted in three deaths including that of the
 terrorist. 'Armenian terrorist attacks on Turkish officials and
 installations overseas, since 1973, hive claimed the lives of
 27 Turkish diplomats and family members and 38 innocent
 bystanders.
 
 
 1108
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by either the
 Government or opposition elements.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The 1982 Turkish Constitution prescribes that "no one shall be
 subjected to torture or ill treatment incompatible with human
 dignity."
 Complaints of torture, especially in cases concerning political
 prisoners, continue to be filed. Both Amnesty International,
 in a report issued in April 1983, and foreign newspaper
 correspondents have reported numerous statements made in court
 by prisoners that they had been beaten or tortured by security
 officials in attempts to obtain confessions or other
 information. A number of these prisoners have stated to the
 courts that statements or confessions presented by the
 prosecution had been obtained by torture.
 The military Government is believed to be the first in Turkish
 history to publicly admit that torture takes place and to
 actively prosecute and punish offenders. An April 1983 Amnesty
 International report stated that torture of political detainees
 was already a major concern prior to September 1980, and that
 torture of criminal suspects had long been "routine practice"
 in Turkish police stations.
 In the period since 1980 there appear to have been declining
 numbers of complaints of torture by prisoners, and increasing
 numbers of convictions of policy personnel for torture.
 Available figures are not detailed enough to establish the
 precise significance of the data. According to April 1983
 government figures, 604 cases involving allegations of torture
 or mistreatment of prisoners came under investigation from the
 1980 military takeover through March 31, 1983. Of these 604
 cases, 305 were still under investigation, 209 had been
 dismissed as groundless, 47 cases were still before the courts,
 and 23 had been completed. The 23 cases completed resulted in
 45 acquittals and 31 convictions. Since March 1983 there have
 been an additional 120 allegations of torture brought by
 prisoners or their families.
 Government investigations of claims that 244 persons under
 detention had died from torture between September 1980 and
 March 31, 1983, showed seven persons to have died as a result
 of torture, and 103 from other causes (suicide, natural causes,
 killed while attempting to escape, etc.); 15 persons were
 discovered to be still alive. A total of 107 claims were still
 under investigation, and 11 were found to have occurred before
 the military takeover.
 In recent cases involving allegations of death by torture, the
 military court of appeals overturned the acquittals of eight
 policemen, including a head superintendent, charged with
 
 
 1109
 torturing to death a suspect. In another case, four police
 officers, convicted of torturing to death an alleged left-wing
 sympathizer, each received a sentence of over seven years. Of
 26 recent cases of alleged brutality, 19 are reported to have
 resulted in convictions. At the end of October, six persons,
 four of whom were soldiers, were convicted and sentenced to
 prison terms of up to 10 years and eight months for the death
 by torture of prominent leftist writer and publisher Ilhan
 Erdost in November 1980. Four of the defendants were convicted
 not for the torture itself, of which they were not accused, but
 for having been in a position to prevent or halt it, and not
 doing so.
 In another case the Penal Council of the Supreme Court of
 Appeals ruled that the death of a prisoner as a result of
 torture must be considered to be premeditated murder, and that
 any security official on trial for such an offense must be
 subject to the death penalty.
 The Turkish press reported on June 15 that the Supreme Court
 for Administrative Matters had convicted the Ministry of the
 Interior of "breach of duty" in a torture case. The case
 against the Ministry was opened by the Ankara martial law
 command's military prosecutor. The court decision made
 explicit the obligation of the Ministry to train properly its
 personnel and to develop procedures to ensure that suspects not
 be beaten or tortured. The Ministry was obligated td pay
 indemnities to the people harmed.
 A recent Turkish government report states that prison capacity
 is inadequate, resulting in serious overcrowding; there is a
 severe shortage of trained personnel, but steps reportedly are
 being taken to improve the situation. While prison conditions
 are not good, they probably have improved with the decrease in
 the number of prisoners. In July 1983, reports surfaced in a
 number of foreign newspapers, based on a story in one Turkish
 newspaper, that extensive hunger strikes were occurring in
 Turkish prisons, primarily involving political prisoners.
 According to the foreign press reports, the hunger strikes
 included several thousand prisoners throughout the country,
 among whose demands were calls for improved prison conditions.
 Complaints reportedly included mistreatment of visiting family
 members, mistreatment and beatings of prisoners, and the
 special treatment allegedly received by some prisoners. Some
 of these reports claimed that several striking prisoners died,
 although there has been no confirmation of this claim.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires that a person taken into custody must
 be charged within 48 hours, although during a time of "state of
 emergency" or martial law a person may be detained without
 charge for 30 days, with a possible extension to 45 days. In
 May 1983 some 451 people were in the stage of investigative
 detention.
 Martial law authorities need no warrant to conduct searches or
 to arrest persons. Preventive or investigatory detention is
 permitted in cases where the authorities decide that there is a
 risk that a suspect will flee or destroy evidence, if left at
 large.
 
 
 1110
 According to official government statistics, as of
 May 31, 1983, some 6,987 persons were serving sentences in
 military or civilian prisons for martial law offenses. An
 estimated '95 percent of these individuals were convicted either
 for personally committing acts of violence or on charges of
 membership in illegal organizations which carried out killings,
 bombings, etc. In addition, 13,683 persons were in custody
 arraigned on charges. of the total of 21,121 persons
 sentenced, charged, or under investigative detention 2,332 were
 identified by the Government as "rightists," 11,508 as
 "leftists," 4,273 as "separatists" (mainly Kurds), and 3,108 of
 "uncertain" political orientation.
 While Turkish law makes no specific provision for habeas
 corpus, the new Constitution includes the right to be
 'arraigned, tried, or released within a reasonable time, and
 provides for notification of next of kin. Under martial law,
 periods of detention after being charged and pending trial are
 largely at the discretion of the martial law authorities. Some
 defendants are released on bail pending conclusion of their
 cases. Bail has, in fact, been allowed for a number of
 defendants in various trials, including, for example, the DISK
 (leftist labor confederation) and Peace Association trials. The
 prosecution has asked the death sentence for a number of the
 persons released on bail.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides a number of basic protections for the
 individual during the judicial process. Among these are the
 right of a defendant to choose his own lawyer and the right, in
 most cases, to an open trial. Family members and lawyers of
 defendants may attend trials, and, usually, members of the
 public and press are also free to attend. Permission to attend
 some trials, particularly those held in military prisons, is
 required and is often given.
 Trials themselves are conducted under rules of procedure based
 on the Constitution and the martial law regulations, and
 civilian and military courts conduct trials under the same
 rules of procedure. Convictions in either system may be
 appealed to civil or military appeals courts respectively. In
 all capital cases, appeals are automatic and go through the
 military high court of appeals and the civilian high court of
 appeals. A number of martial law convictions, including that
 of newspaper publisher and editor Nadir Nadi, have, in fact,
 been overturned by the Military High Court of Appeals.
 Under martial law, all persons accused of acts of terrorism are
 tried in military courts. Martial law court judges normally
 have law degrees, and observe the same professional standards
 as civilian judges. They may not be transferred at the
 discretion of military commanders. Under the new Constitution,
 the civilian judiciary is independent. The High Board of
 Judges and public prosecutors, appointed by the President,
 selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and
 oversees those of the lower court system. Judges have, at
 times, disqualified themselves from cases.
 
 
 1111
 From the imposition of martial law in 1978 to October 1983,
 there had been 25 executions for terrorism-related offenses.
 Of that number, nine were carried out in 1983. Each of those
 cases involved conviction for murder. The cases of several
 hundred other persons who have been sentenced to death for
 terrorism related offenses are in the appeals process.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Turkish Government does not interfere with private life
 except in certain matters involving the secularist and
 nationalist principles governing modern Turkey. Certain
 articles of dress characteristic of the Ottoman period are
 prohibited, although enforcement of these old regulations is
 lax. More recent dress codes exist for universities. The 1982
 Constitution guarantees the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 A judicial warrant is needed for entry by government officials
 into a private residence or other private property and for the
 interception or monitoring of private correspondence or other
 forms of communication such as telephones or telegrams.
 The authorities may "request ... to search residences, or
 buildings of all societies, associations, political parties,
 unions, clubs, business locations or offices belonging to or
 occupied by judicial as well as private bodies." The
 Constitution authorizes the Government to declare a state of
 emergency during a crisis. Under this provision, the
 authorities have the right to search, hold, or seize without
 warrant persons, letters, telegrams, and documents. There has
 been no evidence of this authority's widespread use or abuse,
 nor are there allegations of widespread use of electronic
 surveillance.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Includingt
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The press in Turkey is privately owned and reflects a variety
 of political positions. Martial law continued to limit
 significantly the exercise of freedom of speech and press in
 1983. The right to express and disseminate thought in any
 medium (except in "banned languages," e.g. Kurdish), is
 guaranteed in the 1982 Constitution, but will remain severely
 restricted until martial law is lifted. A certain amount of
 discussion of political issues has continued under martial law.
 Through September 1983, about 117 investigations had been
 opened against journalists since the military takeover. Some
 36 had been convicted for violating Martial Law press
 regulations, 34 had been acquitted, and 47 cases were still
 under investigation. Several significant cases against
 journalists arose in 1983.
 In February, a prosecution was opened against Nadir Nadi,
 publisher and editor-in-chief of the left-wing daily
 Cumhuriyet. He was convicted on May 9 and sentenced to two
 months and 20 days in prison and a fine of about $35. On
 September 25, the Military Court of Appeals overturned his
 conviction and sentence.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 71
 
 
 1112
 Another Cumhuriyet columnist, Oktay Akbal, was convicted in
 January 1983 for having criticized the proposed draft
 constitution in October 1982. He received a three-month
 sentence which allowed him to be free and able to work during
 the day, but which required him to be in jail from 7:00 p.m. to
 7:00 a.m. In August, Metin Toker, a columnist for the liberal
 daily Milliyet was arrested for a column he wrote, and in
 September received a three-month sentence with the same terms
 as those of Akbal and Ilicak. In addition, his editor was
 fined about $40.
 Tercuman columnist Nazli Ilicak was arrested in August 1983, as
 was her paper's editor, for a column critical of the Council
 and its vetoes of party founding members. Ilicak and
 the editor were acquited in November. Both Toker's and
 Ilicak's arrests also resulted in temporary closure of their
 newspapers by the martial law authorities. Throughout the
 martial law period, the authorities have exercised the right to
 close down temporarily or permanently publications in which
 they have found *objectionable content." In 1983, Cumhuriyet
 (leftist) was shut down from January 24-February 17, Milliyet
 (liberal) from August 16-27, Tercuman (conservative) from
 August 11-September 3, and the weekly political journal Nokta
 for one issue in August. The religious/conservative daily
 Milli Gazete was shut down twice, from January 24-March 3, and
 again from October 19 to November 8. On October 31, two more
 papers, Gunaydin (sensationalist) and Tan (sensationalist),
 were also shut down. Tan reopened November 8, and Gunaydin on
 November 18. Hurriyet (mass appeal, and Turkey's largest
 paper) was suspended from December 2-5.
 Under martial law decrees, no one may criticize the September
 1980 military takeover, actions of the Council, of the martial
 law authorities, or certain government actions. All forms of
 Marxist writings or propaganda, as well as advocacy of a
 theocratic state are also banned. Discussion of the former
 political parties and the past and future political system were
 banned through much of 1983. Martial law authorities have
 exercised the power to censor books and film production. There
 is also extensive self-censorship by the media.
 On November 18, 1983, the National Security Council promulgated
 a new restrictive press law, separate from martial law
 regulations. The new law bars any journalists who have been
 convicted of terrorist crimes or affiliation from editorial
 posts, and allows for banning publications before distribution
 and for suspension up to one month.
 With the transition to a parliamentary political system, the
 Council has removed a number of restrictions on political
 discussion. As political parties were legalized, and the
 election campaign began, discussion and commentary necessary to
 the establishment of parties were permitted. Restrictions on
 discussion of political issues in the context of the campaign
 were, within certain limits, lifted. Parties, politicians, and
 the media may discuss party programs and current political and
 economic issues. There are some indications that the press has
 relaxed its own self-censorship. The authorities have,
 
 
 1113
 throughout the martial law period, allowed substantial
 criticism on economic issues. The year 1983 has seen vigorous
 and often critical press discussion of economic matters and of
 those involved in economic policy.
 Turkish institutions of higher education are all operated by
 the state. In the late 1970's they had become extremely
 politicized, and were the source of a substantial share of
 terrorism. Intimidation of, or violence against, faculty and
 students of opposing political views was common, greatly
 reducing freedom of academic inquiry. Since 1980, the
 Government has moved to bring the universities under tight
 centralized control through a Higher Education Council and to
 eliminate the politicization of the universities, especially by
 the left. The new Constitution and Political Parties Law ban
 faculty members and students from becoming members of political
 parties or from involvement in political activities. Parties
 are also forbidden to form youth branches, while student or
 faculty political associations of any type are banned.
 Critics charge, however, that the new system is itself adverse
 to academic freedom. The martial law authorities and the
 Higher Education Council have taken a number of highly
 controversial steps in regard to faculty assignments beginning
 in November 1982. At least 192 university faculty members have
 been dismissed from their positions. This effectively bars
 them from other university jobs within Turkey, from other
 government employment, and research funds. The Higher
 Education Council has claimed that the "dismissed" faculty
 members were those who were not sufficiently qualified. There
 have been charges, though, that these dismissals had less to do
 with teaching qualifications than with political beliefs or
 political activism.
 In addition to the dismissals, at least 68 other academics have
 resigned their positions, and others have taken early
 retirement. Some of these latter actions have been in protest
 over the dismissals; some were by those who expected to be
 dismissed; and others were in reaction to Higher Education
 Council-ordered transfers of professors from one university to
 another.
 The transfers are part of an effort by the Higher Education
 Council to staff the new universities established in the more
 remote provinces in the past few years. Academics have
 objected to being transferred away from Istanbul and Ankara to
 the sometimes difficult living and teaching conditions of the
 provinces and new universities, where there are often
 insufficient libraries and teaching facilities. Others have
 expressed the concern that transfers are in some cases
 politically motivated. In May and July, the Higher Education
 Council also ordered hundreds of university teachers "on loan"
 from various government ministries, such as the Ministry of
 Education, to return to their ministries.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under martial law, permission must be obtained for marches and
 rallies.
 
 
 1114
 A law governing associations has also been enacted, which
 places greater restrictions on the activities and internal
 functioning of those bodies than had existed prior to the
 military takeover. They are banned from any ties to political
 parties and from any type of political activity themselves,
 including endorsing parties or candidates or making political
 campaign contributions.
 In the spring of 1983 new trade union and collective bargaining
 laws were enacted, based on provisions of the 1982
 Constitution. While the new trade union law provides for the
 right to form and belong to trade unions, it introduces more
 stringent controls over the internal affairs and activities of
 unions than the previous legislation. The new collective
 bargaining law provides for the right to strike, but places
 additional restrictions on the exercise of that right.
 Turk-Is, the major trade union confederation, and its
 affiliated unions, have continued to operate under martial
 law. The confederation's sharp, effective criticism of the
 original versions of the draft labor laws resulted in
 substantial modifications to those laws. Turk-Is has also been
 an outspoken critic of the Government's economic policies. In
 May 1983, the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 removed the suspension of Turk-Is membership which it had
 imposed in August 1981 because the Turk-Is General Secretary
 had not relinquished his union position when he accepted a post
 in the Government.
 The trial of leaders of the now-outlawed left wing
 Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions (DISK) which began
 on December 24, 1981, is continuing. Some 33 additional
 defendants have been added to the original 52. The prosecutor,
 following standard legal practice in Turkey, is requesting the
 maximum penalty permitted by the criminal code, i.e. the death
 sentence, for 72 of the defendants. Thus far in Turkey, no
 death sentences have been imposed or carried out in any case
 for an offense other than murder, and death sentences are not
 expected in the DISK trial. To date, 41 of the 85 defendants,
 including some for whom the maximum penalty has been sought,
 have been released on bail. In addition, cases have been
 brought against most DISK Confederation-affiliated unions and
 their leaders, and those trials are also continuing. The
 Government contends that those on trial in these cases are not
 on trial for engaging in union activity but for criminal
 offenses.
 According to official figures, 156 trade union figures were on
 trial and in prison as of March 31, 1983,, while 3,877 were on
 trial but had been released on bail, and seven were under
 detention while their cases were being investigated. Another
 23 had been convicted and were serving their sentences.
 The trial of leading members of the Turkish Peace Association
 concluded on November 14, resulting in 23 convictions and five
 acquittals. The prosecution in the case had charged that the
 Peace Association's administrators had turned the legally
 established organization into an illegal organization which had
 
 
 1115
 engaged in communist propaganda and collaborated with "outside
 forces," including the Communist-front World Peace Council, to
 overthrow the constitution. The defendants denied any intent to
 overthrow the constitution or any connection with groups
 engaged in terrorist activities. Of those convicted, 18
 received sentences of eight years, to be followed by two years,
 eight months in 'internal exile," (See Section 2-d) and five
 received sentences of five years, to be followed by one year,
 eight months in "internal exile." The convicted defendants
 were arrested in the courtroom immediately after the verdicts
 were announced, and have been refused bail, which their lawyers
 have protested. Their appeals in the case, however, cannot be
 filed until the court formally hands down its written verdict,
 which had not been done as of mid-December.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Since the establishment of the Republic after the 1922 War for
 Independence, Turkey has been a secular state. All
 constitutions since then, including the 1982 Constitution now
 in effect, have proclaimed secularism as one of the basic
 characteristics of the state. The importance of the concept of
 secularism for the political elite derives from its view that
 separation of church and state is an essential attribute of a
 modern democratic system.
 Turkey is an overwhelmingly Muslim nation. Followers of Islam
 are broadly divided into majority Sunni and minority Shi'ite
 branches. A number of sects and brotherhoods of both branches
 exist, a few of which advocate transforming the state into an
 Islamic theocracy based on Koranic law. This aim is illegal
 under the Turkish criminal code, which proscribes any person or
 group advocating a theocratic state, Christian as well as
 Islamic. In September 1983, for example, two Turkish Jehovah's
 Witnesses went on trial in Ankara under this code. This law is
 interpreted to include a ban on public display or proselytizing
 for any faith. The religious-conservative daily Milli Gazette
 was closed down for five weeks in early 1983 for an article
 propagandizing Islamic fundamentalism.
 The new political parties law prohibits, as did its
 predecessor, the establishment of any political, party based on
 theocratic precepts or which advocates basing the law and the
 state structure on religious law. Since the legalization of
 political parties in May 1983, the Chief Public Prosecutor's
 Office has opened lawsuits against three new parties, accusing
 them of being religious parties in disguise.
 Turkish law permits no private Muslim schools. Under the 1982
 Constitution, Islamic religious education of about two hours a
 week is compulsory for all public school students except those
 who declare themselves non-Muslim. Islamic charitable
 organizations may organize extra-curricula courses on the Koran
 using government-approved texts. Turkish Muslims may go
 periodically on the Hadj (the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca), but
 there are some restrictions on such travel. The travelers'
 passports must be specifically endorsed for that purpose.
 Turkey has Greek Orthodox, Armenian Orthodox, Jewish, and
 Catholic minorities. Freedom of religion, including the right
 
 
 1116
 to hold public services and ceremonies, is guaranteed to all
 religious groups. For Greeks and Armenians, further guarantees
 of religious and minority rights are contained in the Lausanne
 Treaty.
 There have been complaints among minority religious groups
 concerning taxation, slow administrative procedures, and petty
 harassment by local officials in matters relating to schools,
 registration of church possessions, and church property.
 Turkish law requires that the Government approve the
 appointment of headmasters of religious schools, the formation
 of parish councils, and the repair of church property. However
 relations between the higher authorities and the minorities are
 generally good, and available evidence does not indicate a
 pattern of deliberate official religious persecution of
 non-Turkish religioui minorities.
 In early 1983 a prohibition on selling or transferring property
 was imposed on religious communities; it was lifted in October,
 except for those with relatives who hold Greek citizenship.
 There was speculation that this measure was taken in
 retaliation for similar restrictions by the Greek Government on
 the Muslim minority in Western Thrace or to prevent transfers
 of foreign exchange abroad.
 The Lausanne Treaty guaranteed to minorities the ownership of
 property legally in their hands at the time the treaty was
 signed. However, many property deeds dating from Ottoman times
 are not clear, and minority groups, in particular Greeks, have
 charged that the Turkish authorities have used this as a
 pretext for taking over property, especially church buildings.
 There have also been complaints that the authorities have
 confiscated church possessions. Some of these actions may be
 related to tax disputes, while others, such as registration of
 church valuables, seem to be part of the Government's concern
 that the national cultural treasures not leave the country.
 Church officials acknowledge that religious objects in use by
 the churches, while registered, have remained in their
 possession.
 The use of non-Turkish languages such as Greek, Armenian,
 Hebrew, and Arabic in religious services is allowed. Both the
 Greek and Armenian communities publish newspapers in their own
 languages in Istanbul and, under the provisions of the Lausanne
 Treaty, have the legal right to use those languages in their
 schools, in the courts, and in other official transactions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 While there is general freedom of movement within Turkey, the
 martial law authorities have, and occasionally exercise, the
 power to restrict movement for certain categories of people,
 and there are some border areas of the country off limits to
 foreigners unless they have special permission to enter.
 On June 3, 1983, the martial law statute was amended to empower
 martial law commanders to place in "internal exile" for up to
 five years those individuals whom they believe are taking
 actions harmful to the "general security and public order."
 Although the provision authorizing "internal exile" was not
 Promulgated until June 3, on May 31 the Council ordered
 detained in "internal exile" at a military base at Canakkale
 former Prime Minister and Justice Party Chairman Suleyman
 Demirel and 15 other prominent former politicians whom the
 
 
 1117
 Council accused of trying to control the formation of new
 political parties, in contravention of the Constitution and
 provisions of the new Political Parties Law. The restrictions
 on the "Canakkale 16" were lifted after four months. In July,
 Sheikh M. Resit Erol, leader of the Nakshbendi (Sunni)
 religious brotherhood, was also sent into "internal exile" at
 Canakkale, where he is still being held. These have been the
 only known uses of the "internal exile" power by the martial
 law authorities.
 There are some restrictions on the freedom of Turks to travel
 abroad. The new Constitution guarantees freedom of travel and
 residence abroad, subject only to the purposes of
 investigation, prosecution, or prevention of crime and orderly
 social, economic, and urban development. A passport may be
 refused to anyone facing legal charges of any kind, or to those
 whose travel abroad the Government considers to be contrary to
 the national interest or the national security. A general
 prohibition on travel outside the country for purposes of
 tourism more than one time every two years was in effect
 throughout 1983 in order to prevent excessive outflow of
 foreign exchange. (This was lifted in early 1984.) In
 addition, individuals judged to be security threats or whose
 travel is otherwise considered against the national interest,
 such as some politicians of the pre-September 12, 1980 period,
 have been refused permission to travel abroad.
 Turkish law guarantees citizens protection against deportation,
 being denied reentry into the country, or being extradited.
 The new Constitution guarantees the rights of persons living
 abroad and their families to return home. However, under the
 provisions of the Turkish citizenship law, the Government has
 the power to deprive Turks of their citizenship. Under
 provisions of.this law, about 240 persons have been deprived of
 their citizenship.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change their Government
 A new civilian government headed by Prime Minister Turgut Ozal
 replaced the military government in December 1983. The Cabinet
 is composed of members of Ozal's party, which won the November
 election with an absolute majority. General Kenan Evren
 remains President under the popular referendum of November
 1982. With the assumption of power by a civilian government in
 December 1983, the other four members of the National Security
 Council became a "Presidential Council" attached to the
 Presidency, providing, along with President Evren, an important
 element of continuity and a psychological tie to the military
 and other civilian supporters of the 1980-83 Government. Under
 the military which governed since the September 1980 takeover,
 supreme power throughout most of 1983 was in the hands of the
 five-member Council, composed of the then chiefs of the armed
 forces (army, navy, air force and gendarmerie) and the Chief of
 the Turkish General Staff, Kenan Evren, who later became
 President. President Evren held the dual roles of President
 and Chief of Staff until his retirement from the Armed Forces
 in July 1983. As described in last year's report, he became
 President of the Republic as a result of the November 7, 1982,
 national referendum which approved the new Constitution. The
 original five National Security Council members continued in
 power until the first civilian government elected under the new
 Constitution took office after the national elections on
 November 6, 1983.
 
 
 1118
 The process of returning the country to civilian parliamentary
 rule was completed by the end of 1983. A new Political Parties
 Law and a new Elections Law were passed and went into effect,
 and new political parties were legally established in May. The
 provisions of the constitution, parties law, and election law,
 together with events since the installation of the new
 Government, seem to indicate that most political groupings
 will, in the future, be permitted to organize freely and to
 compete for power under the civilian government. Nonetheless,
 a number of restrictions, some pertaining only to the November
 1983 parliamentary election, have limited the freedom of
 democratic choice. Temporary restrictions' in the Constitution
 and the parties and election laws applying to the November
 election included giving the Council the right to veto proposed
 founding members of newly established parties; the right to
 approve the charters and programs of newly founded parties; and
 the right to veto proposed parliamentary candidates, both
 independents and those running on party lists. All of these
 powers were used.
 Out of a total of 16 parties which were founded under the new
 laws, two right-of-center and one moderately left-of-center
 were permitted by the Council to meet the legal requirements
 for participating in the first parliamentary election. The
 Council set a time limit for parties to organize, and through
 its veto power over founders repeatedly vetoed proposed
 founders of parties of whom it disapproved until the deadline
 had passed.
 Repeated vetoes of founding members by the National Security
 Council prevented two potentially significant parties (the
 Social Democratic Party and the Correct Way Party) from
 achieving the required number of founding members to
 participate in the November elections. (Another group, the
 Great Turkey Party, has been banned earlier on grounds that it
 was, in effect, a successor to one of the former parties
 dissolved after the 1980 military takeover.) The Council also
 vetoed some 20 percent of the candidates proposed by the three
 parties eligible to participate in the elections. The party
 closest to the Government was not treated noticeably better
 than the others. Turgut Ozal's Motherland Party won a majority
 of votes in balloting considered fair and free from government
 pressure on voters. Ozal's party was not considered under the
 influence of the existing government. By the end of 1983, at
 least seven of the *vetoed" parties, including the major
 Correct Way Party and the Social Democratic Party, became
 legally established parties, and can participate in the March
 1984 local elections and in the next national elections.
 In the last stages of the November election campaign parties,
 politicians, and the public were allowed to speak out on
 political issues. They were, however, barred from a number of
 topics, including the September 1980 takeover, the performance
 of the military government and the martial law command, and
 Council.decisions on political parties.
 Among the permanent restrictions on political activity are the
 barring of certain political and social groups from operating
 independently in the political arena and the banning of leading
 figures of the old political system from political activities
 for up to 10 years. In the first category, no political
 parties may be formed which advocate, or are based on the
 principle of, a theocratic basis for the state and the laws; no
 party may advocate the superiority or dictatorship of a
 
 
 1119
 particular social class or group, or "exclusivist" or "elitist"
 political philosophies; and no party may be formed which is
 based on a particular ethnic or cultural group. This precludes
 the reestablishment of Islamic fundamentalist parties or any
 other party based on religion; the establishment of a Communist
 or other Marxist party based on class, or a Fascist "elitist"
 party; or the establishment of a party based on any particular
 ethnic or minority group such as the Kurds. There is no
 prohibition on the participation of members of ethnic or
 religious minorities in political parties so long as the
 parties do not adopt principles banned from the political
 process. Communists and Fascists are banned from party
 membership.
 Other groups permanently banned from joining, or actively
 participating in, political parties include members of the
 faculty of higher education institutions, students, members of
 the armed forces, and certain categories of civil servants.
 Trade unions and foundations of various types may not have any
 tie to a party, and may not make contributions of any type.
 The second category of "permanent" restrictions bans leaders of
 the pre-September 1980 political parties from participating in
 politics or in the organization and control of political
 parties for up to 10 years. These restrictions range from
 five-year bans on being a party leader for some former
 politicians, but with the right to join a party and to run for
 office, up to complete bans on all political activities for 10
 years for former leaders such as ex-Prime Ministers Ecevit and
 Demirel. These restrictions represent an attempt by the
 military to remove from the political process for a time those
 elements which it blames for the anarchy and political
 stalemate that existed before the 1980 military takeover.
 Finally, the new elections law establishes a "barrage"
 requirement, as do other countries, for a party to win seats in
 Parliament, setting the threshold at 10 percent. The intent of
 this provision is to prevent recurrence of a situation such as
 existed in the late 1970's where a number of small parties,
 especially extremist parties of the Right held the balance of
 power in the Parliament between the major parties and extracted
 religious and other concessions from them as their price for
 suport in coalition governments.
 Equal political rights for men and women have been guaranteed
 in all Turkish constitutions since the establishment of the
 Republic. Members of non-Muslim minorities face no legal
 limitations on political participation, so long as they accept
 a Turkish national identity. Kurds have played an important
 role in Turkish political life, but only on this condition.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has freely permitted foreign visits to discuss
 alleged human rights violations in Turkey, but has not always
 cooperated with visiting groups during their visits. During
 the period 1982-83, delegations from the Council of Europe, the
 International Labor Organization, the Western European Union,
 the North Atlantic Assembly, the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions, and the U.S. Helsinki Watch Committee
 visited Turkey to discuss various allegations of human rights
 violations.
 
 
 1120
 A representative of the Council of Europe parliamentary
 assembly who visited Turkey in mid-1982 testified before the
 U.S. House of Representatives Foreign Affairs Sub-Committee on
 Human Rights in April 1983 to the effect that, although his
 group had been assured by the Government of Turkey prior to its
 visit that it would have the freedom to see whom it wanted,
 several meetings had been cancelled at the last minute "under
 duress from the military authorities." According to the
 representative, former Prime Minister Ecevit, some of his
 colleagues, and the President of the Ankara Bar Association
 were said to have been told that they could receive the
 visitors, but that anything said by these visitors thereafter
 in debates of the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly
 would be directly attributed to them, and they could be
 prosecuted as a result.
 In September 1983, during the pre-election period, Turkish
 Government officials declined to see representatives of the
 U.S. Helsinki Watch Committee. Helsinki Watch officials met
 with private citizens with whom they requested appointments,
 and they were granted permission to attend a session of the
 DISK trial.
 In March 1983, an International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions representative was refused admission to a session of the
 DISK trial on the grounds, he was told, that he was there on
 behalf of an international trade union organization. Amnesty
 International has reported that it has received information
 from the Government since 1980 in regard to 74 of approximately
 100 cases of alleged death as a result of torture upon which it
 has requested information. Since the spring of 1983, however,
 the Turkish authorities have stopped responding to its
 requests. Amnesty International's Turkish branch was closed
 down after the military takeover, as were most associations,
 and it is unclear when it might reopen. The International
 Committee of the Red Cross has no representative in Turkey at
 this time. Freedom House describes Turkey as "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Turkish economy has made substantial advances under the
 economic stabilization program begun in early 1980 in
 conjunction with the International Monetary Fund, the World
 Bank, and the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and
 Development. Through a combination of tight monetary and
 fiscal policies, export incentives, and a realistic exchange
 rate, the Government has encouraged the economy to become more
 efficient, more export-oriented, and less dependent on a highly
 protected local market. As a result of these measures the
 balance of payments situation improved dramatically, and
 inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index, fell from
 over 120 percent in February 1980 to about 25 percent in early
 1983.
 Per capita gross national product in 1981 was estimated to be
 about $1,510. Turkey has large agricultural resources which
 provide most of its food requirements and a surplus for
 export. Caloric supply as a percentage of total requirement
 was 115.8 percent.. Under normal weather conditions, clean
 water is available to most of the population. Basic medical
 care is available to the entire population regardless of
 income. Life expectancy is 61.8 years. The infant mortality
 rate in 1983 is estimated to be 96.4 per 1,000 live births.
 
 
 1121
 Primary schooling is compulsory, although not universally
 available. Education through the high school level is free,
 but again, not always available. University tuition is
 subsidized. There are, however, difficult entrance
 examinations for universities, since the number of applications
 always greatly exceeds the present capacity of 27 institutions
 of higher learning (400,000 places). In the decade of rapid
 development from 1965 to 1975, the rate of literacy increased
 from 48 percent to 60.3 percent, and now, according to
 government estimates, stands at 75 percent.
 Women and men have equal legal rights. Divorce is permitted,
 and women act as plaintiffs as often as men. Both men and
 women have access to the universities. Many women have become
 heads of departments and deans, and, in at least one case,
 rector of a university. They have entered politics, the fields
 of journalism, banking, engineering, and the medical, legal,
 and other professions. Some have risen to highly responsible
 positions and national prominence. The Turkish Government has
 integrated women into the police force and has appointed its
 first woman ambassador. Nevertheless, women are subject to
 social and cultural discrimination which keep them from
 enjoying full equality. Such restraints are more pronounced in
 rural areas.
 
 
 1122
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: TURKEY
 1981
 --.-.-----.-----------..-.-...-.----
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A .A ID  .................
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......
 LOANS. ..............
 GRANTS .............
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........
 Rt.  .. i    i L Af4.  .
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........
 E.RLLIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE  CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 
 201 .0
 66.0
 135.0
 200.0
 66.0
 134.0
 200.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 252.8
 250.0
 2.8
 1.1
 250.0
 1.7
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1982     1983
 ......................
 
 301 .1
 100.0
 201.1
 300.0
 100.0
 200.0
 300.0
 0.1
 0.0
 0.1
 0.0
 6.6
 0.0
 0.1
 0.1
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 403.0
 343.0
 60.0
 57.0
 343.0
 3.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 286.0
 85.0
 201.0
 285.0
 85.0
 200.0
 285.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 1.0
 0.0
 402.8
 290.0.
 112.8
 110.0
 290.0
 2.8
 0.0
 0.0
 
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......
 ALL  OTHER ..............
 
 453.8    704
 316.0    443
 137.8   261
 8.0      C
 8.0      0
 0.0      0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983
 ----.-----.-.----.----.----.----.-.-.-.--.-
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFOB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 872.3
 722.0
 13.5
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 1.8
 0.0
 135.0
 
 713.9
 647.8
 14.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 1.8
 0.5
 49.0
 
 674.7
 669.4
 5.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 4.1   688.8
 3.0   375.0
 .1    313.8
 1.0     0.0
 1.0     0.0
 1.0     0.0
 1946-83
 5561.3
 4435.8
 245.9
 178.1
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 64'8
 11.7
 625.0
 
 
