 TURKEY
 Turkey has a vigorous, multi-party, democratic system
 in which strong traditions of governmental responsi-
 bility to parliament, an independent judiciary and a
 free press work to protect the political and civil
 rights as well as the economic interests of the citizen.
 Turkey's Constitution, penal code and administrative
 regulations provide substantial protections for indivi-
 dual rights. The present Turkish Government has shown
 consistent sensitivity to human rights issues in Turkey.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:                       0
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by the Constitution and effective
 legal remedies are available through the court system
 for those claiming to have been subjected to torture.
 There are occasional allegations of torture in the par-
 tisan press, though these appear largely to be politi-
 cally motivated. While isolated incidents of torture.
 may have occurred, there is certainly no evidence or
 indication that torture is used as a matter of policy.
 To the contrary, serious allegations of torture are
 thoroughly investigated by the Government.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment is prohibited by
 the Constitution and there is no evidence that such
 practices are condoned in Turkey. As a developing
 country with competing vital economic priorities, the
 material improvement of the modern penal system established
 after the founding of the Republic has not kept pace
 with population growth and this problem may account for
 the severe, overcrowded conditions reported in some
 Turkish prisons.
 
 (498)
 
 
 499
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from aribtrary arrest or imprisonment is guaran-
 teed by the Constitution and appears to be respected in
 practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials in Turkey are open, proceedings are impartial,
 and defense lawyers are available under all circumstances.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Privacy of the home is protected by law, the requirements
 of which are met.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Governmental policies relating to the fulfillment of
 these vital needs are limited only by the economic
 resources of the country. Recent Turkish Governments
 have pursued egalitarian economic and social policies
 designed to meet basic social needs and to promote social
 mobility. These include a progressive tax system; pro-
 tection of the rights of labor, such as the right to
 organize, bargain collectively and to strike; pricing
 policies and controls for essential foodstuffs; free
 public hospitals; comprehensive social security; aid to
 the aged; and free education through university level.
 Available statistics on income distribution indicate
 that the growing middle class has benefited most from these
 policies. Poorer elements have also benefited, however.
 Between 1972 and 1977, real income of industrial workers
 increased 33 percent, and the income of the poorest
 (largely rural) elements increased slightly. Living
 conditions in Turkey have improved significantly since
 1960. For example, life expectancy at birth has increased
 from 49 to 57 years; the population per physician ratio
 has dropped from 3,000 to 2,130; the population per hos-
 pital bed ratio has dropped from 650 to 460; the per
 capita calorie consumption level, as a percentage of
 requirement, has increased from 110 to 113; and the adult
 literacy rate is up from forty to 55 percent.
 
 
 500
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 Freedom of thought, speech, press, religion and assembly
 is guaranteed by the Constitution. Freedom of speech
 is unimpeded and the press is free and lively. The only
 limitation on such expression is an article in the crim-
 inal code forbidding communist propaganda. Freedom of
 worship is provided for in the Constitution. In the
 case of non-Muslim minorities, it is further guaranteed
 by the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. These provisions are
 respected in practice. Due to the strongly secular
 nature of the Turkish Republic, open advocacy or display
 of sectarian beliefs is forbidden.
 Minority ethnic groups enjoy normal civil and political
 liberties. Kurds from the less economically developed
 eastern regions of the country have benefited from the
 economic mobility of modern Turkey and many, including
 substantial numbers of Deputies and Senators in the Grand
 National Assembly, hold influential positions. At the
 same time, the Turkish Government has prohibited publica-
 tion in, or teaching of, Kurdish since 1925 when a series
 of Kurdish revolts threatened the stability and unity
 of eastern Turkey. The present Government has taken
 initiatives to reduce the bureaucratic impediments to
 free functioning of community institutions (such as
 churches and schools) of the small Greek, Armenian and
 Jewish minorities. Soon after taking office, Prime Minister
 Ecevit met with representatives of these groups and a
 cabinet-level committee was subsequently created to coordin-
 ate the Government's response to the concerns they expressed.
 Actions taken include the facilitation of foreign travel
 for the Greek Orthodox clergy. Where problems must be
 resolved at a lower level - for exapl% in obtaining per-
 mits for new construction and repairs of institutional
 buildings -- changes have been somewhat slower in coming.
 Prime Minister Ecevit has publicly promised to see that
 bureaucratic inertia does not interfere with his Govern-
 ment's commitment to resolve the problems.
 Freedom of assembly provided for in the Constitution can
 be restricted only for the purpose of maintaining public

501
 
 order. The only practical effect of this restriction is
 the requirement for advance notification of large public
 meetings.
 A chronic and increasingly severe problem of politically
 motivated violence has plagued Turkey for the past few
 years. In late December 1978 an episode of unprecedented
 violence left approximately one hundred persons dead in
 the provincial capital of Kahramanmaras. In response, the
 Turkish Government, with the nearly unanimous support of
 the National Assembly, decided on December 26 to invoke
 Article 124 of the Constitution and declare martial law
 in thirteen of Turkey's 67 provinces. It is not yet clear
 what effect the implementation of martial law will have
 on civil and political liberties in the affected provinces.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement, foreign travel and emigra-
 tion. Because of severe foreign exchange shortages,
 foreign travel for purposes.of tourism has been limited
 to one trip abroad every three years and one trip each
 year to the northern area of Cyprus.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The ability to participate in the political process is
 extensively protected in Turkey. Heightened levels of
 politically motivated violence by extremist elements
 have not noticeably inhibited participation. The Turkish
 Constitution and other laws provide for free and equal
 participation of women in the political process. Elec-
 tions are well contested and honest. Articles of the
 criminal code forbid the formation of parties which
 advocate the division of the society on class lines.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Department of State is not aware of any recent re-
 quests for outside investigation. Amnesty International
 has, with the concurrence of the Turkish Government,
 
 
 502
 Established a national section in Turkey. In light of
 the Turkish military intervention in 1974 and the con-
 tinued presence of Turkish armed forces in northern
 Cyprus, Turkey shares responsibility for the human rights
 situation on the island. The report relating to Cyprus
 addresses this question.
 
 
