	TURKEY
At 18 closely printed pages, the report on Turkey is one of the longest and most detailed of the State Department's 1994 Country Reports — second only to the chapter on Israel and the Occupied Territories. In its introduction, the report states bluntly that: "The human rights situation in Turkey worsened significantly during 1994. The police and security forces often employed torture during periods of incommunicado detention and interrogation, and the security forces continued to use excessive force against non-combatants." Such accurate and forthright statements are welcome, and are entirely consonant with the findings of international human rights organizations and reputable Turkish human rights NGOs. Nonetheless, in much of the detailed discussion that follows, the tone of the report is more equivocal. Turkey remains an important political and military ally of the United States, and the influence of such policy considerations can be detected in a careful reading of the 1994 report. Where the evidence of human rights violations is overwhelming and irrefutable, the report is generally hard-hitting. However, in areas that are likely to offend Turkish government sensitivities and complicate bilateral relations, the report is sometimes guilty of pulling its punches.
The majority of human rights abuses in Turkey in 1994 were associated with the military conflict in southeastern Turkey between government forces and the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK). Many violations of civil and political rights reflect the government's use of the 1991 Anti-Terror Law, which adopts, as the report says, "a broad and ambiguous definition of terrorism," and penalizes acts designed to promote separatism or to "threaten the indivisible unity of the State." It is unfortunate, therefore, that the report contains errors of fact that distprt its discussion of the political context in which the majority of human rights abuses occur. In its second sentence, the report states that "[f]or the past decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), whose stated goal is the creation of a separate state of Kurdistan in southeastern Turkey." It is true that independence was the originally declared goal of the PKK. Since 1991, however, PKK spokesmen have declared that their organization does not seek separation
251
CRITIQUE 1994
from Turkey and would accept a federal status for the Kurds within the framework of the Turkish Republic. While the State Department may not credit the sincerity of these statements, it should be aware that it is a misrepresentation to suggest that the PKK in its own words continues to pursue the goal of separation from Turkey. The report also refers to the PKK repeatedly as a "terrorist" organization, without offering any definition of that term or any specific justification for applying such a label to the PKK.
The report's strongest sections are those that deal with torture and infringement on freedom of speech and the press. These are areas where Turkey is so flagrantly in violation of international human rights standards, and (in the case of torture at least) of its own laws, that no disguise is possible. The Turkish Constitution specifically bans torture, as do the European conventions to which Turkey is a party. Nonetheless, as the report points out, "most persons charged with, or suspected of, political crimes usually suffer some torture." In a large number of cases over the past decade, torture has been so severe as to cause death. The report cites 18 alleged instances of death from torture in Turkish jails during the first nine months of 1994, and a government figure of 933 complaints lodged against police or security forces during that same period for torture or maltreatment while under detention.
The State Department report points out that the Turkish government has issued repeated directives ordering an end to torture but that the practice nonetheless continues unabated. The report does not explain, however, why security forces feel they can afford to ignore repeated orders from on high; one must surmise that they consider the directives to be issued for form's sake only. The fact that perpetrators of torture are only rarely prosecuted, and even more rarely punished, would appear to bear out this hypothesis.
For a country that lays claim to being a democracy, Turkey experienced appalling violations of freedom of speech and the press during 1994. The report chronicles these violations in considerable detail. They took several forms: prosecutions under the Turkish Constitution's ban on
252
_TURKEY
"insulting" the president, parliament and the army, which also encompasses remarks about Kemal Ataturk, the founder of the modem Turkish Republic, that the government or a court may find objectionable; a press law that heavily promotes self-censorship by making editors legally responsible for avoiding the publication of objectionable material; the widespread abusive application of the 1991 Anti-Terror Law in such a way as to make almost any remark that is critical of the government's policy toward Turkey's Kurdish minority a serious criminal offense; and the harassment, beating and murder of journalists and other press workers and the bombing of press premises.
In Turkey, in 1994, people were being sent to jail in substantial numbers and in many cases with long sentences, for the mere peaceful written or oral expression of their views. The report estimates at 100 the number of those in custody for 'Treedom of expression crimes" as of September 1994. The mainstream Turkish press has escaped largely unscathed as a result of practicing strict self-censorship. The brunt of the repression fell on political office-holders or candidates, journalists, intellectuals and ordinary citizens who spoke or wrote critically of the government's policy toward the Kurds. The highly partisan pro-Kurdish newspaper Ozgur Giindem was a prime target of governmental persecution during 1994, as it was in previous years. Ozgur Giindem's staff and distributors were harassed, attacked, jailed and tortured, and in April the paper was closed by court order. Its successor, Ozgur Dike, quickly came under even fiercer attack. In December, its Istanbul and Ankara offices were wrecked by powerful bombs, killing one person and injuring some 20. Early in 1995, Ozgur Ulke in its turn was closed by court order.
Despite relatively hard-hitting language on torture and freedom of expression, the report is less direct in dealing with a broad range of other violations. A good example of this is to be found in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, which treads with exceptional care in ascribing responsibility to the Turkish government. Despite clear instructions from the State Department that drafters of the Country Reports should draw conclusions about culpability in their own voice, this section
253
CRITIQUE 1994
prefers to resort to the passive voice ("Political murders and extrajudicial killings attributed to government authorities continued....") or to allow others to point the finger of blame ("Human rights groups and parliamentarians continued to accuse Turkish security forces of carrying out extrajudicial killings and using excessive force during raids on alleged terrorist safe houses.... Prominent credible human rights organizations, Kurdish leaders, and local Kurds asserted that the Government acquiesces in, or even carries out, the murders of civilians .... [The] widow [of assassinated Kurdish parliamentarian Mehmet Sincar] has accused government forces of committing the murder....") One is left to wonder how the US government, with its substantial diplomatic and military presence in Turkey, could have no information or view of its own on these very serious matters.
The Turkish government's most egregious violation of democratic procedure during 1994 was its stripping of parliamentary immunity from six freely elected Kurdish deputies and the dissolution of the all-Kurdish Democracy Party and consequent removal of a further eight freely elected representatives. The report notes that the original six, plus the two of the remaining eight who chose to stay in Turkey, were brought to trial and convicted "on a combination of charges, including disseminating of separatist propaganda, being a member of an armed society or band and knowingly supporting such a band." It glosses over the severity of the penalties meted out to the eight, saying only that they were given sentences "ranging from three years and six months (suspended) to fifteen years." In fact only two of the sentences were for terms of three and one-half years. Five were for terms of fifteen years, with eligibility for parole under the Turkish justice system only after twelve years. Moreover, the report makes no mention of the fact that the bill under which the parliamentary immunity of the six representatives was lifted listed charges relating only to matters of fi^e speech; or of the fact that the Ankara State Security Court violated Turkish constitutional law by subsequently adding charges of collusion with or membership in the PKK. Nor does the report say anything about the fact that persons who speak out in protest of the Turkish government's policy toward its Kurdish minority are frequently the object of apparently fabricated charges of aiding or abetting terrorism.
254
_TURKEY
The report blandly sets forth the mechanisms of the Turkish State Security Courts but fails to say that these courts are a holdover from the days of the military goverrmient of the early 1980s that perpetuates glaring inequities. It also fails to point out that the courts allow prosecutors free rein and severely and unfairly restrict the rights of defendants — as happened in the trial of the eight Kurdish parliamentarians, whose defense attorneys were denied the right to cross-examine prosecution witnesses or to call witnesses in defense of their clients.
The report likewise gives only a sketchy picture of the most egregious collective violation of human rights in Turkey during 1994, namely the Turkish Army's stepped-up campaign of destruction of Kurdish villages, accompanied by the burning of forests and the forced displacement of populations in the southeastern region of the country. Vast stretches of previously inhabited land have been turned into scorched earth and large numbers of people — over two million, by many estimates — have been forced from their homes and obliged to seek refuge in the cities. The report either ignores these violations or speaks of them in euphemistic language that echoes that used in the official pronouncements of the Turkish government. Villages are said to have been "evacuated" or to have "become empty" for the purpose of "prevent[ing] villagers from giving aid and comfort to the PKK." The burning of forests and destruction of croplands and livestock are not mentioned at all. Neither is the fact that, in October 1994, the Turkish government's own Minister for Human Rights denounced the army's destruction of villages, calling it "state terrorism." The State Department report appears not to have considered the possibility that, in laying waste to the rural Kurdish southeast, Turkish authorities may be exceeding their stated purpose of preventing the local population from providing "aid and comfort to the PKK."
The careful reader of the State Department's 1994 human rights report for Turkey will eventually discern that the great majority of human rights violations are related in one way or another to the ongoing struggle between the Turkish state and apparently substantial elements of the country's 10 to 15,000,000-strong Kurdish minority. Rather than allowing
255
CRITIQUE 1994
this central fact to emerge only from a close reading of discrete sections of the report, the report should have stated it with greater clarity. If this had been done, the US public and policymakers would have been given a more accurate notion of where remedies might be found for Turkey's rapidly multiplying human rights ills.
256
