 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliament, the Grand Na-
 tional Assembly, which elects the President. It elected Suleyman Demirel as Presi-
 dent in 1993. In June Necmettin Erbakan, leader of the Islamist Refah Party, re-
 signed as Prime Minister after an intense private and public campaign against his
 Government led by the military, with significant support from other segments of
 civil society which view fundamentalism as a threat to the country's secular repub-
 lic. In July Motherland Party (ANAP) leader Mesut Yilmaz became Prime Minister.
 He formed a coalition government with the Democratic Left Party (DSP) and the
 Democrat Turkey Party (DTP). The Government respects the Constitution's provi-
 sions for an independent judiciary.
 For over a decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist
 Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), whose goal is a separate state of Kurdistan in
 southeastern Turkey. A state of emergency, declared in 1987, continues in six south-
 eastern provinces facing substantial PKK terrorist violence.-Parliament voted in Oc-
 tober to lift the state of emergency in Bingol, Batman, and Bitlis provinces. A re-
 gional governor for the state of emergency has authority over the ordinary governors
 in the six provinces, and six adjacent ones, for security matters. The state of emer-
 gency allows him to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including restrictions
 on the press and removal from the area of persons whose activities are deemed det-
 rimental to public order. The state of emergency decree was renewed for 4 months
 for all provinces in November.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) have primary responsibility for security in
 urban areas, while the Jandarma (gendarmerie) carry out this function in the coun-
 tryside. The armed forces continued to combat the PKK in the state of emergency
 region, thereby taking on an internal security function. Although civilian and mili-
 tary authorities remain publicly committed to the rule of law and respect for human
 rights, some members of the security forces, particularly police "special teams,"
 Jandarma, village guards, and TNP personnel, committed serious human rights
 abuses.
 Turkey's primarily market-based economy is driven by an active private sector.
 The agricultural sector employs nearly one-half of the country's labor force but con-
 tributes only 15 percent of the gross national product (GNP) and total exports. A
 customs union with the European Union, in place since 1996, has boosted the trade
 deficit, but has the potential to increase the country's economic efficiency and pros-
 perity over time. The principal industrial sectors-textiles, iron, and steel-provide
 the leading exports. Impressive economic growth over the past 15 years has trans-
 lated into an improved standard of living and the creation of a growing middle class.
 Per capita GNP is approximately $3,000. Such positive developments, however, have
 been accompanied by substantial macroeconomic imbalances. Successive govern-
 ments have had little success in implementing needed reforms to reduce the budget
 deficit and inflation. Populist economic measures pushed the budget deficit to ap-
 roximately 8 percent of GNP and pushed inflation over 90 percent. Persistently
 igh inflation over the past decade has exacerbated disparities in income distribu-
 tion. The conflict in the southeast and maintenance of a large national defense es-
 tablishment continue to be a sigificant drain on the economy. Corruption has taken
 an economic toll and has sapped popular faith in the Government.
 Despite some reforms and the  vernment's stated commitment to respect human
 rights, serious human rights abuses continued. Human rights nevertheless re-
 mained a priority public issue during the year. There is a general recognition that
 the country's human rights performance is inadequate and needs to be brought in
 line, not only with its international obligations and commitments, but also with pop-
 ular aspirations and demands, and the Government's own policies.
 The situation in the southeast remains a serious concern. The Government has
 long denied the Kurdish population, located largely in the southeast, basic political,
 cultural, and linguistic rights. As part of its fight against the PKK, the Government
 forcibly displaced noncombatants, failed to resolve extrajudicial killings, tortured ci-
 vilians, and abridged freedom of expression. The PKK committed widespread
 abuses, including the frequent murder of noncombatants, as part of its terrorism
 against the Government and civilians, mostly Kurds.
 
 
 1330
 Estimates of the total number of villagers forcibly evacuated from their homes
 since the conflict began vary widely from 330,000 to 2 million. A credible estimate
 given by a former Member of Parliament from the region is around 560,000. The
 Government's resettlement and compensation program for internally-displaced peo-
 ple remained. During the year, 61 villages and 7,608 persons were resettled, accord-
 ingto government figures.
 Human rights abuses were not limited to the southeast. Extrajudicial killing, in-
 cluding deaths in detention, from the excessive use of force, "mystery killings, and
 disappearances continued. The Government investigated some 185 reported dis-
 appearance cases: 40 persons were found and reunited with their families, 7 were
 believed to be abroad, 96 relocated to other parts of the country, and 42 were unac-
 counted for.
 Torture remained widespread: police and Jandarma antiterror personnel often
 abused detainees and employed torture during incommunicado detention and inter-
 rogation. The implementation of reforms to address these problems was uneven.
 Lengthy investigations and trials of officials suspected of abuses continued to be a
 problem. Important cases dating back to 1995 and 1996 continued without resolu-
 tion, including: 48 police officers charged with the 1996 death of journalist Metin
 Goktepe; 10 police officers from Manisa, accused of torturing 15 people, mostly teen-
 agers accused of ties to a leftist terrorist organization; and police and security per-
 sonnel charged with beating to death 10 prisoners during a prison disturbance in
 Diyarbakir in 1996.
 The rarity of convictions of police or other security officials for killings and torture
 fosters a climate of impunity that probably remains the single largest obstacle to
 reducing human rights abuses. The lack of immediate access to an attorney by those
 detained for political crimes is also a major factor in torture by police and security
 forces.
 Prison conditions are poor. Numerous small-scale disturbances and hunger strikes
 erupted throughout the year. Prolonged pretrial detention and lengthy trials contin-
 ued to be problems.
 Limits on freedom of speech and of the press remained another serious problem.
 For example, according to the Human Rights Foundation, at year's end approxi-
 mately 60 journalists were under arrest or had been convicted; the Committee to
 Protect Journalists (CPJ) reported that 40 journalists were imprisoned at year's
 end. Authorities banned or confiscated numerous publications, and a government
 decree has led to self-censorship of reporting on the southeast. One of the Yilmaz
 Government's first steps was to acknowledge the problem as a priority for resolu-
 tion, when, 3 weeks after assuming office, he received a delegation from the CPJ,
 and subsequently won passage of legislation that provided conditional amnesty for
 several imprisoned editors. Nonetheless, the basic laws under which the editors
 were arrested did not change, and all were subject to reimposition of their former
 sentences if tried and convicted for similar offenses. The Government continued to
 use the 1991 Anti-Terror Law, with its broad and ambiguous definition of terrorism,
 to detain both alleged terrorists and others on the charge that their acts, words, or
 ideas constituted dissemination of separatist propaganda. Prosecutors also used Ar-
 ticle 312 of the Criminal Code (incitement to racial or ethnic enmity), Article 159
 (insulting the Parliament, army, republic, or judiciary), the law to protect Ataturk
 (no. 5816), and Article 16 of the Press Law to limit freedom of expression.
 Kurdish-language broadcasts remained illegal (but not printed material in Kurd-
 ish). The Sanliurfa branch of the Mesopotamian Cultural Center, a corporation es-
 tablished to promote the Kurdish langua e and culture, was banned in October by
 the Provincial Governor. In Istanbul the Governor's office refused the Kurdish Cul-
 ture and Research Foundation permission to offer Kurdish language classes. The
 translator and publisher of a Human Rights Watch report on the conflict in the
 southeast were convicted under Article 159 of the Penal Code (defaming the mili-
 tary). The translator received a suspended sentence; both were assessed small fines
 of approximately $12 dollars. They appealed the verdict and are free pending its
 outcome. Private channel television programs and print media continued to debate
 human rights and other issues of freedom of speech and the press:
 The Government imposes limits on freedom of assembly and association. In Sep-
 tember the police detained and beat Turkish and foreign participants in the "Musa
 Anter peace train" demonstration, named after a well-known Kurdish writer. The
 gup was blocked from entering Diyarbakir, where its members had intended to
 demonstrate for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the southeast. Foreign par-
 ticipants were deported, and legal proceedings were brought against some of the
 local organizers. Members of the pro-Kurdish People's Democracy Party (HADEP)
 were sometimes the object of arbitrary arrests and mystery killings and often were
 harassed in the southeast for their legal political activities. HADEP, sympathetic to
 
 
 1331
 the PKK, is under threat of investigation for alleged anticonstitutional activities
 and, depending upon the outcome, faces closure (two of its predecessors, HEP and
 DEP, were closed down).
 In June the Refah/True Path Party (DYP) coalition, the country's first Islamist
 government, resigned after an intense private and public campaign of pressure led
 by the military with support from several segments of society who viewed "fun-
 damentalism" to be a threat to the secular republic. In May before the Refah/DYP
 coalition broke up, the chief state prosecutor, in an attempt to close down Refah,
 charged the Party and five of its leaders, including former Prime Minster Erbakan,
 with attempting to undermin   e secular nature of the state as defined by the Con-
 stitution based in part on public statements made by Refah leaders. In January
 1998 the court ordered the party closed and banned several of its leaders, including
 former Prime Minister Erbakan, from political activity for 5 years. The Democratic
 Mass Party (DKP), a moderate Kurdish party, faces the threat of closure in a case
 before the Constitutional Court on the grounds that its charter questions the indi-
 visibility of the country and advocates support for a minority, namely the Kurds.
 In November the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) found unanimously that
 the Government had violated Article 5-3 (excessive detention of 12 to 14 days) of
 the European convention on human rights in the case of several pro-Kurdish 'former
 Democracy Party (DEP) -Members of Parliament (M.P.'s) and ordered the Govern-
 ment to pay the M.P.s' compensation and court costs. The ECHR did not rule on
 the M.P.s' appeal of their convictions on charges of separatism and membership in
 an armed gang.
 In June the Ankara State Security Court-found .32 members of HADEP, including
 party chairman Murat Bozlak, guilty on a variety of charges of prscribed political
 activity. Government officials continued to harass, intimidate, indict, and imprison
 human rights monitors, journalists, and lawyers for ideas that they expressed in
 public forums. Seven regional offices of the. Human Rights Association were shut
 down during the year; three remain closed. In May Dr. Tfan Kose, a representative
 of the Adana branch of the Human Rights Foundation (HRF), a respected non-
 governmental organization (NGO), was rconvicted and fined for not turning over to
 the authorities the names of torture victims treated by the HRF's torture treatment
 center. He is free on appeal. The president of the Human Rights Association (IIRA),
 along with other U-RA organizers, faces charges of promoting separatism or inciting
 ethnic hatred based on speeches. The president  of the HRF, the HIRA president, and
 the leaders of two small political parties were charged with  holding an unauthorized
 demonstration. A prominent Malatya defense attorney, who often defended alleged
 terrorists, was himself held and charged with assisting terrorist groups. After incar-
 ceration for 3 months, he was freed pending the outcome ofqhis case.
 The Government imposed some restrictions on religious minorities and Par-
 liament passed legislation extending compulsory education from 5 to 8 years. This
 law will lead to the closure of grades six to eight of the Islamist imam-Hatip reli-
 gious schools, along with other private schools. Spousal abuse, some abuse of chil-
 dren, and child labor remain serious problems. Dismrimination against women per-
 sists.
 In July Prime Minister Yilmaz appointed an activist State Minister for Human
 Rights, who also is coordinator for the High Council for Human Rights. The Council,
 comprised of undersecretaries from the Justice, Interior, Education, Health, and
 Foreign Affairs Ministries (along with representatives of the security forces), meets
 weekly to review aspects of the human Rights situation and advise the Government
 on steps for improvement. The Minister and the Council have invited an active dia-
 logue with the increasingly important NGO's that work for human rights reforms
 both inthe capital and in the southeast.
 The Government provides human rights training for the police and military. The
 military continued to-emphasize human rights training for its officers and non-
 commissioned officers, which human rights NG's reported led to a reduction in
 human rights violations. Human rights education in primary schools is mandatory;
 it is an elective in high schools. Senior military leaders met for the first time with
 international human rights NG representatives.
 PKK   terrorists murdered noncombatants, targeting village officials, village
 guards, teachers, and other perceived representatives of the State. They also com-
 mitted random murders in their effort to intimidate the populace.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killin.-Credible reports of political and
 extrajudicial killings by government authorities continued, although accurate fig-
 
 
 1332
 ures were unavailable. The Documentation Center of the HRF reported a number
 of deaths of detainees under suspicious circumstances, some as an apparent result
 of torture. At least seven prisoners died in disturbances during which prison au-
 thorities apparently used excessive force, but one report attributed the deaths to the
 actions of other prisoners.(see Section 1.c.).
 In response, the Government mounted serious investigations. The Office of the
 Minister for Human Rights reported that out of 41 persons whom the HRA alleges
 died in extrajudicial killings in the first 10 months of the year, investigations
 showed that 11 died in clashes with the police. In the cases of another 7 persons,
 the authorities arrested those responsible; 3 others were found to have died of natu-
 ral, rather than violent, causes; 2 others were found to have been executed by indi-
 viduals not connected with the security forces; and 2 more were found alive. The
 remaining allegations are still under investigation.
 Human rights monitors remain greatly concerned about the 1996 Provincial Au-
 thority Law, which authorizes security forces to shoot to kill when challenging a
 suspect and grants provincial governors the power to declare a "state of emergency"
 and to call in security forces. This law was adopted in the wake of the Government's
 decision to lift incrementally the state of emergency in some provinces in the south-
 east. Many human rights monitors are concerned about the expanded authorities
 that this law extends to provincial governors.
 Although government prosecution of reported perpetrators has increased, punish-
 ment remained poor. Police and other law enforcement personnel were occasionally
 arrested in cases of extrajudicial killings, but there were few known successful pros-
 ecutions. The Office of the Minister of Human Rights reports that judicial and ad-
 ministrative investigations were started in seven of the cases of extrajudicial
 killings alleged by the HRA for the first 10 months of the year. Little progress oc-
 curred in the trial of 48 police officers, including 3 senior officers and a deputy com-
 missioner, for the 1996 death of Metin Goktepe, a correspondent for Evrensel news-
 paper, who died from wounds inflicted while in detention in Istanbul. Police initially
 denied that he had been detained, then later said that he died from a fall. Following
 large public demonstrations and parliamentary criticism over the circumstances of
 his death, an investigation led to the arrest of the officers. In May the courts de-
 cided to try separately 11 of the police officers for premeditated murder. Five offi-
 cers remain under arrest; the others returned to duty pending the outcome of the
 trial. No progress was made in the trial of the other 37, who were charged with ex-
 cessive use of force in controlling the demonstration.
 The trial of 29 Jandarma soldiers and 36 antiterror police officers charged with
 manslaughter in the 1996 beating deaths of 10 prisoners while quelling a prison dis-
 turbance in Diyarbakir continued (see Section 1.c.). An Adana criminal court acquit-
 ted 23 antiterror police officers of negligence in the killing of 5 people, including
 children aged 2 and 4, during a raid on a house in the town of Kucukdikii, outside
 of Adana. The number of prosecutions of security force 'members, while increasing,
 remained low.
 The HRA and other human rights NGO's recorded several mystery killings in
 which the assailant's identity was unknown. It is widely alleged in the southeast
 that such killings occur with the complicity of security forces. Most of the reports
 pertain to the southeast, where some of the victims were leaders or prominent mem-
 bers of the Kurdish community, local politicians, or members of HADEP.
 In 1996 a fatal car crash-known as the Susurluk incident-occurred involving:
 Abdullah Catli, an ultra rightwing militant wanted by Interpol on charges of mur-
 dering in 1980 seven university students who were members of the left-wing labor
 party; Huseyin Kocadag, a former Istanbul deputy police chief; Gonca Uz, a former
 beauty queen; and Sedat Bucak (the only survivor), an ethnic Kurdish M.P. and clan
 leader with an important stake in the Government's village guard program. Weap-
 ons and silencers were found in the car. The incident resurrected serious concerns
 about corruption and the abuse of power in the security forces. It also led to the
 resignation of the then-Interior Minister, Mehmet Agar, who had been linked to the
 victims of the accident. In February and the first part of March, a popular protest
 called "a minute of darkness" spread across the country as citizens turned off the
 lights in their households to protest the Susurluk incident and corruption. In May
 a parliamentary committee formed to investigate the incident concluded that links
 existed among politicians, police officials, and organized crime besses. Although the
 Government affirmed its commitment to a full investigation, the report's lack of pre-
 cision in drawing conclusions led to pubic criticism. The Refah Party chairman of
 the committee complained that he was denied access to many government docu-
 ments on the grounds that they contained state secrets; at one point he accused the
 Speaker of the National Assembly of withdrawing documents concerning the role of
 the armed forces. The commander of the Jandarma refused to appear before the
 
 
 1333
 committee. The parliamentary investigation expired in April. In December Par-
 liament lifted the immunity from criminal prosecution of now-opposition True Path
 Party M.P.'a Sedak Bucak and Mehmet Agar, an initiative supported by the Yilmaz
 Government.-According to press accounts in January 1998, a report prepared by
 Prime Minister's Board of Inspectors linked the state's security forces under recent
 Governments to extrajudicial killings and mafia-like activities. The report has not
 been publicly released. In a television interview, Prime Minister Yilmaz committed
 himself to a full investigation of these events.
 The case of eight police officers charged in the 1995 death of Sinan Demirtas, who
 died while in police custody, continued. The case of police officer Abdullah Bozkurt,
 charged with-the 1994 murder of Vedat Han Gulsenoglu, also continues; Bozkurt
 was reassigned- from Istanbul to Van. The 1993 case of the death in detention of
 Vakkas Dost continues; policeman Nurettin Ozturk, the accused murderer who dis-
 appeared after being freed, was found and rearrested in September.
 Eleven police officers were acquitted in May in Adana of the 1992 killing of Remzi
 Basalak while he was under detention. The case continues before the Court of Ap-
 peals. The following cases remain unresolved: the 1992 case of Yucel Ozen, the 1994
 illing of HEP party official Faik Candan, and the 1993 killing of journalist Ugur
 Mumcu.
 The PKK continued to, commit political and extrajudicial killings, primarily in
 rural southeast Anatolia. Political killings perpetrated by the PKK have included
 state officials (Jandarma; local mayors, imams, and schoolteachers), state-paid para-
 military village guards and their family members, young villagers who refused to
 be recruited, and PKK guerrillas-turned-informants. According to government statis-
 tics, as of November the PKK killed 667 people, including at least 130 unarmed ci-
 vilians. The Government also reported that in 1997, approximately 260 soldiers and
 Jandarma, 12 police officers, 149 village guards, and-2,200 PKK.members lost their
 lives.
 Turkish Hizbullah, an-Islamist Turkish terrorist group (not related to Lebanese
 Hizbullah), continued to target civilians in the southeast. According to the HRF,
 Hizbullah reportedly was.,responsible for at least four deaths in 1997. Four trials
 continued against 89 Hizbullah members charged with a total of 113 murders. In
 1996 the Foreign Ministry stated that a case had been brought against Hizbullah
 for the 1993 murder of DEP parliamentarian Mehmet Sincar; human rights groups
 consider the case a mystery killing. Some human rights activists in the southeast
 believe that Turkish Hizbullah was founded by the Government in the 1980's to tar-
 get the PKK and its sympathizers.
 According to Human Rights Watch, Far-left armed groups, such as Revolutionary
 Left (Dev Sol/DHKP-C) and the Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Liberation Army
 (TIKKO), continued to commit abusive, violent acts. In May TIKKO members re-
 portedly killed four civilians in Tokat. In September a radical Islamic group, Vasat,
 a splinter group of the Islamic Great Eastern Raiders Front (IBDA-C), killed 1 per-
 son and injured 24 others in a grenade attack at a book fair in Gaziantep. A total
 of 25 Vasat members were arrested for the attack. In October in a joint operation,
 PKK, DHKP/C, and TIKKO terrorists kidnapped three engineers, killing one and
 holding two as hostages in Giresun on the Black Sea.
 b. Disappearance.-Accurate statistics on disappearances of those previously
 under detention are hard to confirm; nonetheless, HRA figures indicate that such
 disappearances appear to have declined from a total of 194 in 1996 to 63 in 1997
 (as of November). The Government has made-a serious effort to investigate and ex-
 plain reported cases of disappearance. Some persons disappeared after witnesses re-
 ported that security forces or law enforcement officials took them into custody. Fikri
 Ozgen, a 73-year-old, disappeared in Diyarbakir on February 27 when, according to
 numerous witnesses, he was taken into custody by plainclothes police. Later the
 same week, flyas Eren disappeared under similar circumstances in Diyarbakir. In
 a case reported by Amnesty International (AI), Burhan Aktus disappeared on Octo-
 ber 22 when he was forced into a car by three men whom his mother believed were
 plainclothes police officers. On September 16, 1996, at least five bodies were found
 on the outskirts of the village of Baharli, near Diyarbakir. Some of the victims had
 reportedly been in police custody earlier in the month. The disappearances and
 deaths are under investigation; no one has been charged.
 For more than 2 years, mothers who claim that immediate relatives have dis-
 appeared have, gathered weekly in Istanbul. The Ministry of Interior operates a
 Missing Persons Bureau, which is open 24 hours a day and handled 185 cases as
 of November. Most families of the persons who disappeared hold the Government
 and security forces responsible and consequently avoided contact with the govern-
 ment office.
 
 
 1334
 The Government, human rights organizations, and the media report that the PKK
 routinely kidnaps young men or threatens their families as part of its recruiting ef-
 fort. PKK terrorists continued their abductions of local villagers, teachers, journal-
 ists, and officials in the southeast.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, the Government's cooperation with un-
 scheduled foreign inspection teams, and public pledges by successive governments
 to end the practice, torture continued to be widespread. The HRF's torture rehabili-
 tation centers-in Ankara, Izmir, Istanbul, and Atana reported 530 credible applica-
 tions for treatment during the year. Human rights attorneys and physicians who
 treat victims of torture say that most persons detained for or suspected of political
 crimes usually suffer some torture during periods of incommunicado detention in po-
 lice stations and Jandarma stations before they are brought before a court.
 Government officials admit that torture occurs. Although they deny that torture
 is systematic, they explain its occurrence by stating that it is closely tied to the fight
 against terrorism. Many cases of torture, however, occur in western Turkey, outside
 the zone of conflict. Eight complaints of torture or mistreatment were filed with the
 Parliamentary Human Rights Commission during the year. In January the United
 Nations (U.N.) Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrad-
 ing Treatment or Punishment reported that he continued to be concerned by the ap-
 parently widespread practice of torture in Turkey. The Government has invited bth
 the Special Rapporteur on torture and the working group on disappearances to visit
 the country.
 In a particularly egregious case, two police officers were convicted in Adana of tor-
 turing Songul Yildiz, whom they had questioned on suspicion of PKK membership
 after a demonstration in March. In November the court convicted the two policemen
 of torture, but the judge imposed only a 1-year suspended sentence, and the two
 men were allowed to remain on the police force. The victim's lawyer has appealed
 the sentence.
 According to Amnesty International, in March journalist Hatun Temizalp was de-
 tained for a week in the anti-terror branch Istanbul Police headquarters where she
 was subjected to various forms of torture and abuse (blindfolded interrogation, tied
 to and suspended from a wooden bar, and electric shocks). The State Forensic Medi-
 cine Institute issued a medical certificate detailing a fractured and dislocated shoul-
 der blade, as well as signs of light blows. She was charged in a State Security Court
 where she complained of torture, despite police attempts to dissuade her through
 intimidation. She says that she requested access to a lawyer but that the request
 was denied. In November according to the Government, two police officers were con-
 victed and sentenced to over 5 years in prison for torturing and eventually killing
 Ali Riza Aydogan while the latter was in custody at the Beyoglu police precinct in
 Istanbul in 1992.
 In Istanbul five police officers from the antiterror division were indicted in crimi-
 nal court, and accused of torturing Gulderen Baran and four other detainees in 1995
 during an interrogation about their alleged membership in a terrorist organization.
 In May Gulderen Baran and one of her colleagues were found guilty as charged and
 sentenced to life imprisonment. Another was acquitted and the remaining two were
 sentenced to 121/2 years in prison. Baran remains incarcerated at Istanbul's
 Bayrampasa prison pending her appeal. The timing of the police and Baran's trials
 precluded consideration that Baran's conviction may have been based on torture.
 Human rights observers report that because the arresting officer is also respon-
 sible for interrogating the suspect, some officers may resort to torture to obtain a
 confession that would justify the arrest. Many detainees state that prosecutors ig-
 nore their claims of abuse during interrogation. Commonly employed methods of tor-
 ture alleged by the HRF's torture treatment centers include: high-pressure cold
 water hoses, placing large ice blocks on the chest and stomach, electric shocks, beat-
 ing on the soles of the feet, beating of genitalia, hanging by the arms, blindfolding,
 sleep deprivation, deprivation of clothing, systematic beatings, and vaginal and anal
 rape with truncheons and, in some instances, gun barrels. Other forms of torture
 were sexual abuse, submersion in cold water, use of truncheons, hanging sandbags
 on detainees' necks, forcing detainees to stand on one foot, releasing drops of water
 on detainees' heads, oxygen deprivation, sitting on detainees' laps, riding on their
 shoulders, and withholding food.
 The Government maintains that medical examinations occur once during deten-
 tion and a second time before either arraignment or release. However, former de-
 tainees assert that some medical examinations took place too long after the event
 to reveal any definitive findings of torture. Members of security and police forces
 often stay in the examination room when physicians are examining detainees, re-
 sulting in intimidation of both the detainee and the physician. Physicians responded
 
 
 1335
 to the coercion by refraining from examining detainees, performing cursory exami-
 nations and not reporting findings, or reporting physical findings but not drawing
 reasonable medical inferences that torture occurred. Turkish Medical Association of-
 ficials reported that some police officers tore up reports that documented torture,
 demanding that a clean report be drawn up instead.
 Credible sources in the human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate very few of the formal complaints involving torture and pros-
 ecute only a fraction of those. Security personnel accused of violating human rights
 are held to a different standard than other citizens. The Anti-Terror Law provides
 that officials accused of torture or other mistreatment may continue to work while
 under investigation.
 Special provincial administrative boards rather than regular courts decide wheth-
 er to prosecute such cases. Suspects' legal fees are paid by their employing agencies.
 Under the state of emergency, any lawsuit directed at government authorities must
 be approved by the state of emergency governor. Approval is rare. These constraints
 contribute to the paucity of convictions for torture.
 Under the Administrative Adjudication Law, an administrative investigation into
 an alleged torture case is conducted to determine if there is enough evidence to
 bring a law enforcement officer to trial. Under the Criminal Trials Procedure Law
 (CMUK), prosecutors are empowered to initiate investigations of police or Jandarma
 officers suspected of torturing or mistreating suspects. In cases where township se-
 curity directors or Jandarma commanders are accused of torture, the prosecutor
 must obtain permission to initiate an investigation from the Ministry of Justice, be-
 cause these officials are deemed to have a status equal to that of judges.
 In March the CMUK was amended to grant immediate access by attorneys to
 those arrested for common crimes, and after 4 days of detention for those persons
 detained under the Anti-Terror Law or for other "security" crimes. Private attorneys
 and human rights monitors reported uneven implementation of these reforms, as-
 serting that in some cases police officers would postdate the day of detention to com-
 ply with the new law (see Section 1.d.).
 The trial continues of 10 police officers, including 2 superintendents, from Manisa
 (western Turkey) for allegedly torturing a group of 15 young people, mostly teen-
 agers suspected of belonging to a leftist terrorist organization in 1995. The youths'
 trial ended in January, when the courts found 11 teenagers guilty of belonging to
 a terrorist organization, and acquitted 4 others. In May all 15 were acquittedon
 the separate charge of throwing a Moltov cocktail at a barber shop. Lawyers ap-
 pealed the convictions. The timing of the police and teenagers' trials precluded con-
 sideration that the teenagers' confessions may have been based on torture. A judge
 in the case of the police officers-who remain on active duty-relieved them of their
 obligation to personally appear in the court room due to concern that such an ap-
 pearance would compromise their undercover investigative work. Human rights at-
 torneys complained that this ruling undermined the prosecution's case against the
 officers.
 In September the European Court of Human Rights ruled against Turkey in the
 case of a woman from the town of Derik in the southeast, concluding that she had
 been tortured and raped by Jandarma and village guards while forcibly detained for
 3 days in 1993 (see Section i.e.). The Government was ordered to pay compensation
 and to reimburse the applicant's legal expenses.
 Prison conditions remain poor. Juveniles and adults are incarcerated together and
 most prisons lack a medical health care program to provide routine and even urgent
 medical care. Families often must supplement the poor quality food. Prisons are run
 on the ward system. Prisoners, often those of the same ideological bent, are incar-
 cerated together and indoctrinate and punish their own. Government efforts to re-
 form prisons by adopting a cell system have been criticized by prisoners, attorneys,
 and human rights activists alike, who view the ward system as a more humane
 form of incarceration. Plagued by overcrowding, underfunding, and very poor admin-
 istration, prisons periodically become the scene of explosive situations.
 A total of at least seven prisoners were killed in two separate prison disturbances.
 In July six prisoners were killed by other inmates during a prison disturbance at
 Istanbul's Metris prison. The disturbance reportedly originated with the killing of
 one prisoner; the other five were killed in the actual disturbance during which
 Jandarma and prison officials were videotaped using excessive force. According to
 a human rights NGO, forensic medicine reports revealed that all prisoners had been
 stabbed to death by homemade weapons. In August a disturbance in an Adana pris-
 on resulted in the death of a prisoner. The HRF noted that the prisoner reportedly
 died at the hands of other inmates.
 Torture of convicted prisoners decreased, but security personnel continued to use
 excessive force in quieting disturbances. Small-scale hunger strikes to protest prison
 
 
 1336
 ,conditions, the proposed transfer to a cell system, and poor treatment by guards oc-
 curred at many institutions throughout the year.
 Several monitoring groups, both domestic and-international, carried out prison
 visits. The Government accepted unannounced visits by the Council of Europe's
 Committee- for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) and is in -regular dialog with the
 CPT. The International Committee of the Red Cross and the Government are dis-
 cussing ICRC access to prisoners accused of PKK membership.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. To take a person into custody, a prosecutor must issue a detention order,
 except in limited circumstances such as when a person is caught committing a
 crime. The maximum detention period for those charged with common individual
 crimes is 24 hours. The detention period may be extended by a judge for a maxi-
 mum of 7 days. Under the CMUK, detainees are entitled to immediate access to an
 -attorney and may meet and confer with the attorney at any time. In practice, this
 degree of access continued.
 In March -parliament passed new legislation that reduced detention periods. Per-
 sons detained for individual crimes that fall under the Anti-Terror Law must be
 brought before a judge within 48 hours, while those charged with crimes of a collec-
 tive,-political, or conspiratorial nature may be detained for an initial period of 48
 hours, extended for up to 4 days at a prosecutor's discretion and, with a judge's per-
 mission, for up to 7 days in most of the country -and up to 10 days in the southeast-
 ern provinces under the state of emergency. Attorneys are allowed access only after
 the first 4 days. Private- attorneys and human rights monitors reported uneven im-
 plementation of reforms that shortened pretrial detention periods of those charged
 under the Anti-Terror Law, asserting that some police officers postdate the day of
 detention to comply with the new law. -Like their colleagues in Batman, defense law-
 yers in Diyarbakir reported that in spite of the new law, access to detainees in polit-
 ical cases remains difficult, even after the expiration of the initial 4-day detention
 period. Diyarbakir lawyers knew of only one case, as of September, in which access
 by attorneys to detainees was permitted and only then after repeated attempts and
 because of the high-profile of the case.
 No immediate access to an attorney is provided under the law for persons whose
 cases fall under the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts; these include those
 ,charged with smuggling and with crimes under the Anti-Terror Law. This lack of
 early access to an attorney is a major factor in the use of torture-by police and secu-
 rity forces. The decision concerning early access-to counsel in such cases is left to
 the public prosecutor, who often denies access on the grounds that it would preju-
 dice an ongoing investigation. Although the Constitution specifies the right of de-
 -tainees to request speedy arraignment and trial, judges have ordered that a signifi-
 cant number of suspects be detained indefinitely, sometimes for years. Many cases
 involve persons accused of violent crimes, but it is not uncommon for those accused
 of nonviolent political crimes to be kept in custody until the conclusion of their
 trials.
 By law a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after arrest,
 a requirement - observed in practice in criminal and civil cases. Once formally
 charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is arraigned by a judge and allowed to retain
 a lawyer. After arraignment, the judge- may release the accused upon receipt of an
 appropriate assurance, such as bail, or order him detained- if the court determines
 that he is likely to flee the jurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 The Government does not use forced external exile, but the Government retains
 the authority to authorize internal exile (see Section 2.d.).
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and in practice the courts generally act independently of the executive. The
 Constitution stipulates that judges be independent of the executive in the discharge
 of their duties and provides for security of tenure. The High Council of Judges and
 Prosecutors, which is appointed by the President and includes the Minister of Jus-
 tice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and is responsible for over-
 sight of those in the lower courts. The Constitution also prohibits state authorities
 from issuing orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial power.
 The judicial system is composed of general law courts, State Security Courts, and
 military courts. There is also a Constitutional Court. Most cases are prosecuted in
 the general law courts, which include the civil, administrative, and criminal courts.
 Appeals are heard either by the High Court of Appeals or the Council of State. Pro-
 vincial administrative boards established under the Anti-Terror Law decide whether
 cases in which state officials are accused of misconduct should be heard in criminal
 court. Military courts, with their own appeals system, hear cases involving military
 law and members of-the armed forces, and cases in which civilians are alleged to
 
 
 1337
 have impugned the honor of the armed forces or undermined compliance with the
 draft.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, andpar-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decrees with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war.
 State Security Courts (SSC's) sit in eight cities. They are composed of panels of
 five members-two civilian judges, one military judge, and two prosecutors-and try
 defendants accused of crimes such as terrorism, drug smuggling, membership in ille-
 gal organizations, and espousing or disseminating ideas prohibited by law such as
 damaging the indivisible unity of the state." SSC verdicts may be appealed only
 to a specialized department of the High Court of Appeals dealing with crimes
 against state security. Prosecutors and judges vested with responsibility for SSC
 cases are often housed in military barracks in the southeast, expressly for their per-
 sonal protection. According to a human rights monitor this arrangement subjects
 them to significant pressure in reviewing cases. The law gives prosecutors far-reach-
 ing authority to supervise the police during an investigation. However, according to
 Human Rights Watch, prosecutors seems to make little use of this power, especially
 in cases of security detainees.
 In 1997 SSC's predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror Law and Sec-
 tion 312 of the Criminal Code. The Government claims that these courts were estab-
 lished to try efficiently those suspected of certain crimes. These courts may hold
 closed hearings and may admit testimony obtained during police interrogation in
 the absence of counsel. The trial of 20 Diyarbakir lawyers charged in 1993 with act-
 ing as couriers for the PKK continues at the Diyarbakir SSC. All of the defendants
 remain free. In September nine Erzurum lawyers charged with similar crimes were
 acquitted.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a public trial in a court of
 law. By law the bar association must provide free counsel to indigents who make
 a request to the court. Bar associations in large cities, such as Istanbul, have attor-
 neys on call 24 hours a day. Costs are borne by the Association. There is no jury
 system; all cases are decided by a judge or a panel of judges. Trials may last for
 months or years, with one or two hearings scheduled each month.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the public prosecutor's files after ar-
 raignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving violations
 of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the president or "defam-
 ing Turkish citizenship," defense attorneys may be denied access to files that the
 state asserts deal with national intelligence or security matters. Attorneys defend-
 ing controversial cases occasionally face legal harassment. Hasan Dogan a re-
 spected Malatya attorney, who frequently defends persons in SSC cases, was himself
 detained. He was charged in May under Article 169 of the Criminal Code for mem-
 bership in an illegal organization on the basis of evidence supplied by a convicted
 prisoner cooperating with the authorities in the hope of receiving more favorable
 treatment. Dogan is free pending trial. Many lawyers who practice before SSC's con-
 tend that cases in which testimony provided by informers is used are difficult to
 challenge.
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against minorities.
 However, since legal proceedings are conducted solely in Turkish, and the quality
 of interpreters varies, some defendants whose native language is not Turkish may
 be seriously disadvantaged. There are still some laws in effect that discriminate
 against women.
 Turkey recognizes the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights and
 the European Commission of Human Rights. Citizens may file applications alleging
 violations of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fun-
 damental Freedoms with the Commission. According to the Government, as of No-
 vember a total of 29 cases have been brought before the Court, 13 of which remain
 pending. An amicable resolution was reached in 6 cases, the court ruled in Turkey's
 favor in 2 cases and against Turkey in 8 cases (see also Section 1.f.).
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political prisoners. The Government
 claims that most alleged political prisoners are in fact security detainees, convicted
 of being members of, or assisting, the PKK or other terrorist organizations. The
 number of people charged, suspected, or convicted of offenses under the Anti-Terror
 Law, according to government statistics, was as follows: during the first 10 months
 of 1996, 1,024 persons were in custody and an additional 1,943 were suspects not
 in custody related to offenses under the Anti-Terror Law (latest available statistics).
 Eighty were convicted through October 1996.
 According to AI, Sevil Dalkilic, a lawyer, was detained in her hometown of
 Karman in March 1994, held in public custody in Ankara for 15 days, and severely
 tortured until she signed a statement implicating her in several bombing incidents.
 
 
 1338
 Convicted in the Ankara SSC of membership in a terrorist organization, employing
 explosives, and separatism based on "confessions extracted by the police," she was
 sentenced to 30 years in prison in 1995, even though she recanted her confession
 in court. A subsequent appeal confirmed the verdict.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. With some exceptions, Government officials
 may enter a private residence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only
 upon issuance of a judicial warrant. These provisions are generally respected in
 practice outside the state of emergency region. A judge must decide whether to issue
 a search warrant for a residence. If delay may cause harm to the case, prosecutors
 and municipal officers authorized to carry out prosecutors' instructions may conduct
 a search. Searches of private premises may not be carried out at night, unless the
 delay would be damaging to the case or the search is expected to result in the cap-
 ture of a prisoner at large. Other exceptions include persons under special observa-
 tion by the Security Directorat General, places anyone can enter at night, places
 where criminals gather, places where materials obtained through the commission of
 crimes are kept, gambling establishments, and brothels.
 In the six provinces under emergency rule, the regional state of emergency gov-
 ernor empowers secuity authorities .to search without a warrant residences or the
 prmises of political parties, businesses, associations, or other organizations. The
 Bar Association asserts that it is not constitutional for security authorities in these
 provinces to search, hold, or seize without warrant persons or documents. A total
 of six provinces remain-under "adjacent province" status, which authorizes the
 Jandarma to retain security responsibility for municipalities as well as rural areas
 and grants the provincial governor several extraordinary powers. Due to an im-
 proved security situation, the use of roadblocks in the southeast decreased; security
 officials periodically still search vehicles and travelers. Over the past 5 to 6 years
 security forces have evacuated thousands of villages and hamlets in the southeast
 to prevent villagers from giving aid and comfort to the PKK (see Section 1.g.). The
 Government claims that village evacuations occur as the consequence of pressures
 by- and fear of the PKK and because security operations against the PKK in the re-
 gion make continued occupancy unsafe. Security. forces have confiscated citizens'
 satellite dishes in some parts of the southeast-to prevent them from viewing pro-
 PKK broadcasts (see Section 2.a.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law In Internal Con-
 flicts.-Since 1984 the separatist PKK has waged a violent terrorist insurgency in
 southeast Turkey, directed against both security forces and civilians, almost all of
 them Kurds, whom the PKK accuses of cooperating with the State. The TNP,
 Jandarma,.village guards and the armed forces, in turn, have waged an intense
 campaign to suppress PKK terrorism, targeting active PKCK units as well as persons
 they believe support or sympathize with the PK. In the precess, both government
 forces and PKK terrorists have committed human rights abuses against each other
 and noncombatants. According to the Government, from 1984 through November
 1997, 26,532 PKCK members, 5,185 security force members, and 5,209 civilians lost
 their lives in the fighting.
 In an effort to deny the PIK logistical support, the Government rationed food and
 other essentials in the province of Tunceli, the village of Tepe, near Lice in
 Diyarbakir Province, and parts of Bingol Province, causing severe shortages and
 hardship among the population. Other than in Tunceli where the rationing has been
 ongoing for some time, implementation of food rationing elsewhere is sporadic or lo-
 calized. According to local human rights monitors, Tepe was blockaded by the mili-
 tary for 2 months in reprisal for the PKK murder of a village guard.
 JnNovember the European Court of Human Rights found Turkey in violation of
 Article 8 (right to respect for home) in the case of three applicants whose homes
 were burned down by .security forces in 1993. The Court attached particular weight
 to the fact that the public prosecutor did not carry out any meaningful investigation
 into the matter. The applicants were awarded court costs and expenses with dam-
 ages to be determined at.a future date.
 Because so many villages have already been evacuated and because the fighting
 has now moved to mountains, government security forces evacuated and destroyed
 fewer villages than in previous years. According to the Government, only 4 villages
 and hamlets (settlements of 3 or-4 houses) and 970 persons were evacuated during
 the year. The Government's stated purpose was to protect civilians or prevent PKK
 guerrillas from obtaining logistical support from the inhabitants. Some villagers al-
 leged that the security forces evacuated them for refusing to participate in the para-
 military village guard system. Journalists and human rights monitors were not per-
 
 
 1339
 mitted to enter the village of Lice where there were reports of large-scale detentions
 of villagers by the Jandarma for refusal to become village guards.
 The exact number of persons forcibly displaced from villages in the southeast
 since 1984 is unknown. Most estimates agree that 2,600 to 3,000 villages and ham-
 lets have been depopulated. A few NGO's put the number of people forcibly dis-
 placed as high as 2 million. Official census figures for 1990-before large-scale
 forced evacuations began-indicate that the total population for the 10 southeastern
 provinces then under emergency rule was 4 to 4.5 million people, half of them in
 rural areas. Since all rural areas in the southeast have not been depopulated, the
 estimate of 2 million evacuees is probably too high. On the low end, the Government
 reports that through 1997 the total number of evacuees was 336,717. Rapidly grow-
 ing demands for social services in the cities indicate that migration from the coun-
 tryside has been higher than this figure. Although this urbanization is also ac-
 counted for in part by voluntary migration for economic or educational reasons also
 related to the conflict, the figure given by a former M.P. from the region-560,000-
 appears to be the most credible estimate of those forcibly evacuated. At the request
 ofRepublican Peoples' Party (CHP) M.P. Algan Hacaloglu, a former human rights
 monitor, a parliamentary committee was formed to investigate the causes of dis-
 placement and status of the displaced. It began work in July.
 Goverment programs to deal with and compensate the forcibly evacuated villag-
 ers remain inadequate. Local and provincial officials are nevertheless making efforts
 to address the basic needs of some migrants. The governor of Diyarbakir, for exam-
 ple, opened a newly constructed neighborhood of 500 houses to resettlement by mi-
 grant families. The governor of Van resettled 257 migrant families in a new neigh-
 borhood in the provincial capital. A free "restaurant" run by the Van governor's of-
 fice feeds nearly 1,000 migrants daily. In several provinces, officials provided looms
 for use by unemployed women. The rugs produced are then purchased by the Gov-
 ernment for resale on the open market. Officials overseeing some of these programs
 acknowledge that funding is inadequate, and that much more needs to be done.
 Many migrants continue to live in overcrowded, unhealthful conditions with little
 opportunity for employment.
 According to the Government 7,608 persons were returned to 61 villages in the
 southeast during the year. The Foreign Ministry noted that some displaced persons
 chose to resettle in urban areas and are receiving assistance there. The Government
 initiated in 1996 an "emergency support program" to expedite resettlement in the
 southeast. The funds are used for rebuilding homes and roads, as well as for animal
 husbandry and beekeeping programs. Human rights activists criticize government
 efforts as inadequate in relation to the number of forcibly displaced persons.
 There are credible allegations that serious abuses by security forces during the
 course of operations against the PKK continue. The Government organizes, arms,
 and pays for a civil defense force in the region known as the village guards. Local
 villagers' participation in this paramilitary militia is theoretically voluntary, but
 they are sometimes caught between the two sides. If the villagers agree to serve,
 the PKK may target them and their village. If the villagers refuse to participate,
 government security forces may retaliate against them and their village. The village
 guards have a reputation for beingthe least trained and disciplined of the Govern-
 ment's security forces and have been accused repeatedly of corruption, common
 crimes, and human rights abuses. In addition to the village guards, the Jandarma
 and police "special teams" are viewed as those most responsible for abuses.
 The Government state of emergency, modified and most recently renewed for 4
 months in November, imposes stringent security measures in six provinces in the
 southeast. The regional governor for the state of emergency may censor news, ban
 strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile. The decree also provides for doubling
 the sentences of those convicted of cooperating with separatists. Informants and con-
 victed persons who cooperate with the state are eligible for rewards and reduced
 sentences. Only limited judicial review of the state of emergency governor's adminis-
 trative decisions is permitted.
 Although schools have remained open in most urban centers in the southeast,
 rapid migration has led to severe overcrowding of schools and chronic teacher short-
 ages. The PKK policy of murdering teachers exacerbated the situation (see Section
 L.a.). Government officials claim that a significant effort is being made beth to re-
 open schools and to build new schools in regions faced with acute overcrowding. Ac-
 cording to government figures, 3,223 primary schools remain closed in 22 provinces
 in the east and southeast for security reasons or because of a teacher shortage. No
 secondary schools are closed. Although the Government continues to build boarding
 schools in the region's larger towns, these new schools have failed to fill the gap.
 A total of 88 boarding schools were completed with a total capacity of 49,614 stu-
 dents. Additional boarding schools numbering 38 are under construction. Some eth-
 
 
 1340
 nic Kurdish leaders expressed concern that the government favored building board-
 ing schools, rather than rebuilding local schools, as a way to accelerate the process
 of Kurdish assimilation.
 Turkish ground forces with air support conducted several operations during the
 year in northern Iraq against the PKK. According to press reports, in May the Gov-
 ernment sent between 25,000 and 50,000 troops into northern Iraq, and in Septem-
 ber sent an estimated 8,000 to 15,000 ground troops and warplanes. In November
 Turkish forces joined local Iraqi Kurd forces of the Kurdistan Democratic Party
 (KDP) in pitched battle against the PKK and forces of another Iraqi Kurd group,
 the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). During all these operations, PKK forces
 were'reported by several sources to have attacked local civilians and damaged civil-
 ian property. Additional details are in the Iraq country report. The Turkish military
 strictly limited press access to the region during these operations. A report filed by
 a  rup granted controlled access to the Zap Valley area in northern Iraq, along
 with reports obtained from Kurdish and U.N. sources suggest that the security
 forces minimized civilian causalities. The Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK),
 charged that the Turkish military targeted villages in several of these operations,
 but these charges were not confirmed by other observers on the scene. The Turkish
 Government maintained-that it targeted only the PKK in northern Iraq, not any
 other groups or civilians.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. -Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 -and the.press; however, the Government continued to limit these freedoms. The
 Criminal Code .provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the Par-
 liament, and the army." Numerous -other-provisions in -various laws restrict freedom
 of expression to one' degree or another, those most frequentl employed include Arti-
 cle 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and Article 312 of the Crimina Co e. Judges generally
 examine evidence rigorously and dismiss many charges brought under these laws.
 Domestic and foreign periodicals providing a broad spectrum of views and opin-
 ions are widely available. Government censorship of foreign periodicals is very rare.
 While overall readership of the local press is not large for a country of 60 million,
 the newspaper business is intensely competitive.
 Electronic media reach nearly every adult, and their influence is correspondingly
 -great. Radio and television have experienced explosive growth in the 6 years since
 privately owned-broadcasting has been allowed: as of October, over 230 local, 15 re-
 gional, and 15 national television stations-the majority private-were registered,
 along with 1,056 local, 108 regional, and 36 national radio stations. Other television
 and radio stations broadcast without an official license. In 1994 Parliament passed
 regulatory legislation making it illegal for broadcasters to threaten the country's
 unity or national security and limiting the private broadcast of television programs
 in languages other than Turkish. The increasing availability of satellite dishes and
 cable television allows access to foreign broadcasts, including several Turkish-lan-
 guage private channels. In some areas of the southeast, security forces have system-
 atically confiscated private satellite dishes in order to prevent viewing of pro-PKK
 MED-TV. This policy was aplied selectively in migrant neighborhoods of Adana.
 Internet use is growing and aces no government restrictions.
 Despite the Government's restrictions, the media daily criticize government lead-
 ers and policies. Media coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be unre-
 liable, underreporting it in some instances and sensationalizing it in others. Govern-
 ment Decree 430 gives the Interior Ministry upon the request of the regional gov-
 ernor the authority to ban distribution o any news viewed as misrepresenting
 events in the region, leading to self-censorship of news reporting from or about the
 southeast. In the event that such a government warning is not obeyed, the decree
 provides for a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days for
 subsequent offenses.
 Two weeks after assuming office, to signal the new Government's commitment to
 freedom of expression, the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Min-
 ister, and President Demirel each received a delegation from the CPJ. Immediately
 thereafter, the Government won passage of a law granting probationary amnesty to
 editors imprisoned under a press law still in existence that permits prosecutors to
 seek a court order for the confiscation of a newspaper or magaine and requires that
 each publication's "responsible editors" bear legal responsibility for the publication's
 content. The new law granted a full pardon to the responsible editors if they did
 not commit the same crime within 3 years. If they are convicted of the same crime
 during this probationary period, then they must serve sentences for both convic-
 tions.Under the August law, six imprisoned editors received a provisional amnesty;
 however, many others remain imprisoned.
 
 
 1341
 Ismail Besikci served 10 years in prison between 1971 and 1987 for his publica-
 tions on the Kurdish situation in Turkey. He has been in prison since 1993 on a
 variety of new charges based upon his ongoing articles on Kurdish issues. SSC pros-
 ecutors ordered the confiscation of numerous issues of leftist, Kurdish nationalist,
 and pro-PKK periodicals, although many continue to circulate. The pro-PKK news-
 paper Ozgur Ulke, and its successors Yeni Politika and Demokrasi, resumed publi-
 cation in June as Ulkede Gundem. The newspaper has been increasingly difficult
 to find on newsstands in the southeast; the newspaper's distributor in Diyarbakir
 has been detained repeatedly, and copies have been confiscated by the Jandarma.
 In Adana, however, the newspaper appears regularly. Offices of small leftist publica-
 tions are frequently raided by the pol ice in the southeast.
 Individual journalists are subject to harassment and police violence. In December
 the Committee to Protect Journalists listed 40 journalists under imprisonment.
 In April Sanar Yurdatapan, a well-known musician and spokesman for freedom
 of expression was arrested at the Istanbul airport with false passports destined for
 two former PKK members. According to Yurdatapan, after these two individuals
 served their sentences for ties to the PKK, they became agents for the Turkish secu-
 rity forces and later contacted Yurdatapan to give him information about acts in-
 cluding political murder that they had carried out on behalf of the State.
 Yurdatapan claimed to have videotapes of interviews and photographs of the men
 in military uniforms to substantiate his charges. He remains free pending the out-
 come of his SSC trial in Istanbul on charges of harboring members of an illegal or-
 ganization.
 According to Human Rights Watch, the case of three journalists arrested in June
 exemplified the arbitrary and contradictory nature of the repression of free expres-
 sion. Two journalists from the now-defunct Demokrasi newspaper and the
 Diyarbakir correspondent from the ATV television station were arrested in June for
 interviewing two former PKK members alleged to have taken part in killings and
 illegal activities on behalf of the State. The three journalists were charged with forc-
 ing the pair to make the statements "in accord with the goals of the PKK." The
 men, however, made the same statements without incident to two other newspapers,
 two television programs, including Mehmet All Birand's "32nd Day," and to a par-
 liamentary commission investigating the 1993 death-suad style killing of journalist
 Ugur Mumcu. A similar case occurred with the Turkish-langage edition of Leo
 Muller's book, "Gladio: The Legacy of the Cold War," origally published in Ger-
 many. While Pencere publishing, a small Istanbul publishing house, released the
 first edition without incident, the second edition of the book published in February
 was confiscated, and both the publisher and translator were tried under Article 312
 and the Anti-Terror Law. In September they were given a suspended sentence on
 the Article 12 charge and fined under the Anti-Terror Law. Both sentences have
 been appealed.
 The authorities have suspended for a period of 3 years the case against some
 1,080 writers and others for their support for novelist Yasar Kemal. In 1995 Kemal
 wrote an article entitled "Black Sky Over Turkey," which was published in a Ger-
 man news magazine and later reprinted in Turkey in a book entitled "Freedom of
 Expression," in which he ironically criticized the Government for its censorship re-
 lating to the Kurdish question. His appeal continues. In March Ertugrul Kurkcu
 and Ayse Nur Zarakolu, respectively the translator and publisher of a 1995 report
 by the Human Rights Watch Arms Project, "Weapons Transfers and Violations of
 the Laws of War in Turkey," were found guilty under Article 159 of the Penal Code
 of "defaming the state's security and military forces." Zarakolu and Kurkcu were
 both fined approximately $12, while Kurkcu received a 10-month suspended sen-
 tence.
 In December Sukru Kazratepe, mayor of Kayseri, was sentenced to a year in pris-
 on under law 5816 for reportedly insulting Ataturk, the founder and first president
 of the Turkish republic. He criticized his required attendance at annual commemo-
 ration ceremonies on the death of Ataturk.
 Esber Yagmurdereli, a blind human rights activist and respected lawyer, was con-
 victed in May of promoting Kurdish separatism on the basis of public assertions
 that the ethnic Kurdish minority is oppressed. In October he was remanded into
 custody to begin serving a 22-year sentence, but in November, a prosecutor released
 him for a year subject to renewal upon review.
 According to press reports, a youth organization of the True Path Party (DYP) ap-
 peared to be responsible for the May 2 armed raid on the Istanbul studios of Flash
 TV, which the preceding day had broadcast live "phone in" accusations by alleged
 Mafia chief Alaattin Cakici that then-deputy Prime Minister Tansu Ciller and her
 husband were involved in criminal activities. The temporary shutdown of the sta-
 tion's Bursa headquarters on May 3 was conducted on behalf of the Wireless Coin-
 
 
 1342
 munications Directorate of the Ministry of Transportation, headed by a Ciller loyal-
 ist. On May 7, the Radio and Television Supreme Board imposed a 2-day suspension
 on the station for broadcasting "scandalous remarks" about Ciller.
 In. November Erol Anar, a writer and former HRA secretary general received a
 suspended sentence of 10 months imprisonment for the publication of his book "free-
 dom of thought,' in which he allegedly insulted the parliament, government, and
 security forces. In a separate case, the Istanbul SSC acquitted Anar of violating the
 Anti-Terror Law by publishing his book "he History of Human Rights," which re-
 portedly was critical of Turkey.
 In May, with Refah's Erbakan still Prime Minister, the chief state prosecutor, in
 an attempt to close down Refah, charged the party and five of its leaders, including
 Erbakan, with attempting to undermine the secular nature of the state based in
 part on public statements made by the Refah leaders. In January 1998, the court
 closed the party and banned six Refah leaders, including former Prime Minister
 Erbakan, from political activit for 5 years.
 Seven pro-Kfirdish former DEP M.P.'s and one independent M.P, convicted in
 1994 on charges ranging from disseminating separatist propaganda to supportingor
 being a member of an armed band or gang, appealed their sentences in 1995. The
 15-year sentences of four of the defendants for being members of a terrorist group
 were upheld. In November the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) found
 unanimously that the Government had violated Article 5-3 (excessive detention of
 12 to 14 days) of the European convention on human rights in the case of several
 pro-Kurdish former DEP Members of Parliament (M.P.'s) and ordered the Govern-
 ment to pay the M.P.'s compensation and court costs. The ECHR did not rule on
 the M.P.s' appeal of their convictions on charges of separatism and membership in
 a terrorist organization. The Court overturned the sentences of the other four in
 1995, but they were retried and found guilty in April 1996 on the revised Article
 8 charges. In September 1996 the Court upheld these sentences on appeal. These
 four defendants also plan to appeal to the European Commission of Human Rights;
 the Government pledged to abide by its decision. In 1996 the Ankara SSC prosecu-
 tor charged Mehmet Emin Sever, Mahmut Uyanik, and Muzaffer Demir, former
 DEP M.P.'s, with assisting the PKK, and former CHP M.P. Abdulkerim Zilan with
 producing separatist propaganda. The charges stem from a 1991 incident during
 which the accused publicly termed the parliamentary swearing-in oath as "racist,
 chauvinistic, antidemocratic, and a violation of human rights.' Additionally, during
 the swearing-in ceremony the three defendants wore handkerchiefs in colors associ-
 ated with the PKK. The three left the DEP party prior to its being banned in 1994
 and remained in Parliament as independents until their terms expired in 1995.
 Until that time, they had parliamentary immunity and could not be tried for alleged
 offenses. The delay of a year between the end of the defendants' terms in Par-
 liament and the bringing of charges is not considered unusually long, given the sen-
 sitive nature of the case. If convicted, they could face prison terms ranging from 4VY2
 to 7 years. Zilan faces a prison term of 1 to 3 years. The case continues.
 In June the Ankara SSC ruled against members of the pro-Kurdish HADEP, in-
 cluding party chairman Murat Bozlak, based on an incident at the party's 1996 con-
 vention in Ankara, during which the Turkish flag was torn down and replaced by
 a PKK banner. The court sentenced Faysal Akcan, who reportedly took down the
 flag, to 221/2 years in prison; Bozlak and party convention chairman- Hikmet Fidan
 each were sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment, while 29 other officials and party
 members received 6 2-month sentences. The defendants plan to a ppeal the verdict.
 Of the original defendants, 14 were acquitted. The court also found evidence linking
 HADEP to the PKK.
 Between 1995 and 1997, former independent M.P. Hasan Mezarci faced some 10
 charges for insulting modern Turkey's founder, Kemal Ataturk, the military, the
 Government, and the Parliament. He was acquitted on some of the charges, served
 prison terms for others, and now is serving a 10-month sentence at Istanbul's Metris
 prison for insulting Parliament.
 Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects continued to be
 available, although periodic suppression of the media continued. The Kurdish-lan-
 guage weekly, Azadiya Welate, and some 10 other publications were available only
 on an infrequent basis. As a result of state intimidation and economic pressure,
 Diyarbakir-based Can-TV ended its brief experiment in Kurdish-language broadcast-
 ing. Over the past 2 years, Can-TV has tested the legal ban on broadcasting in
 Kurdish by airing Kurdish-language music clips. The station also attempted to
 present independent news programs on the southeast as well as panel discussions
 on regional problems, especially the Kurdish issue. Although the news programs
 were in Turkish, their content angered local officials: two investigations against
 Can-TV were begun at the SSC, and the station was threatened with closure by the
 
 
 1343
 
 Broadcasting Board. The final action that contributed to the end of Can-TV's broad-
 casting came when the station manager was forced to sell many of his shares in
 the station because of newly adopted antimonopoly legislation. Some potential cus-
 tomers are afraid to purchase Kurdish-language materials because possession of
 such items may be interpreted as evidence of PKK sympathies. Kurdish-language
 broadcasts are still illegal. A group of academics, however, began a series of radio
 call-in programs to discuss problems and solutions in the southeast.
 In December the Broadcasting Board penalized a number of private radio and tel-
 evision stations for alleged violations of broadcast regulations. Two Kurdish-based
 radio stations, Karacadaga Radyo in Sanliurfa and Radio Arkadas in Adana, were
 among those ordered off the air for temporary periods. Both stations occasionally
 play Kurdish songs and have broadcast news reports (in Turkish) critical of the Gov-
 erinent. Karacadaga Radyo alleges that Sanliurfa authorities have banned 13
 Kurdish music cassettes from being broadcast, thus reducing the list of Kurdish
 songs payed by Karacadaga Radyo to fewer than 10. In June privately-owned Metro
 TV mDiyarbakir was ordered off the air for 30 days for inciting ethnic hatred by
 televising a panel discussion on democratization and the Kurdish issue. Pro-PKK
 Med TV, based in Belgium and England, broadcasts via Intelsat and can be received
 by satellite dish in the southeast.
 In January the Turkish Industrialists and Businessmen's Association (TUSIAD)
 issued a lengthy report with a wide range of democratization recommendations for
 legislative and constitutional reform. The report stimulated political debate- it was
 both commended and criticized extensively by many segments of society. In April
 a group of Turkish and Kurdish academics, politicians, and intellectuals initiated
 a series of nationwide panel discussions on the Kurdish problem and its possible so-
 lutions. Despite minor police attention, the group continued to explore explicitly
 nonviolent solutions within a democratic context, especially in the largely Kurdish
 southeast. Academics continued to publish articles and papers on the Kurdish issue
 without government interference. The Sanliurfa branch of the Mesopotamian Cul-
 tural Center, a corporation established to promote Kurdish language and culture,
 was banned in October by the provincial governor. In Istanbul the Governor's office
 refused the Kurdish Culture and Research Foundation permission to offer Kurdish
 language classes.
 In August Parliament passed legislation necessary to implement a 1995 constitu-
 tional amendment permitting student and faculty associations and labor union in-
 volvement in political activities.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but authorities may deny permission if they believe that the
 gathering is likely to disrupt public order. Prior notification of gatherings is re-
 quired, and the authorities may restrict meetings to designated sites.
 In May the Human Rights Association sought to host in Ankara an international
 conference on the peaceful settlement of the Kurdish problem in Turkey. The An-
 kara provincial governor banned the conference on the grounds that it risked pro-
 voking a climate of intolerance but permitted individuals, including some par-
 liamentarians and former government officials, to gather informally.  
 According to the HRF, some 2,000 people sought to attend one of the court ses-
 sions of the Metin Goktepe trial (see Section L.a.); however, due to the physical limi-
 tations of the court, many were unable to be admitted. Subsequently, around 100
 of these people were interrogated for staging an unauthorized public demonstration
 outside the court.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but associations and founda-
 tions must submit their charters for government approval, a lengthy and cum-
 bersome process.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and private dissemination
 of religious ideas. The Government generally observed these provisions in practice.
 About 99 percent of the population is Muslim. Under the law, religious services may
 take place only in designated places of worship. Although Turkey is a secular state,
 religious instruction in state schools is compulsory for Muslims. Upon written ver-
 ification of their non-Muslim background, Lausanne Treaty minorities (Greek, Ar-
 menian, and Jewish) are exempted by law from Muslim religious instruction, al-
 though students who wish to attend may do so with parental consent. Syriac Chris-
 tians are not exempt because they are not an official Lausanne Treaty minority.
 Taikats and other mystical Sunni Islamic orders were banned in the 1920's, but
 were largely tolerated until recently. On February 28, the National Security Council
 (NSC), a half-military, half-civilian body entrusted in part with responsibility "for
 protecting the state against any foreign or domestic threat to its interests" called
 
 
 1344
 for strict enforcement of the ban against Tarikats as part of its campaign against
 Islamic fundamentalism. Some Tarikats, like members of the Aczimendi Brother-
 hood, have.faced legal action for their-vocal public demonstrations.
 At the, formal urging of the NSC, the Yilmaz Government introduced and Par-
 liament, passed a law that will lead to the closure of grades six through eight of the
 Islamic imam-Hatip schools in existence since 1950, along with other private
 schools-This- action will affect over 500 state-supported imam-Hatip schools. Under
 the new law,-students will have to wait until the completion of their 8 years in order
 to pursue  egular study at the imam-Hatipschools. Although new enrollments in
 those grades have been terminated, children already in tho.se classes are allowed to
 finish their grades. Amendments to administrative procedures were made that will
 allow students completing 5 years of primary school to enroll in Koran classes on
 weekends and summer vacations. For many weeks Islamists staged protests against
 the law on the imain-Hatip schools outside mosques after Friday prayers.
 Turkey's Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam) is estimated to
 number at least 12 million. There are, however, no government-salaried Alawi reli-
 gious leaders, in contrast to Sunni religious leaders. In December, nonetheless, the
 Government allocated $15 million (3 trillion TL) to the Alawi community. Some
 Alawis allege discrimination in the form of failure to-include any Alawi doctrines
 or beliefs in religious instruction classes. Alawis charge a Sunni bias in the Reli-
 gious Affairs Directorate, and claim-that the Directorate tends -to view the Alawis
 as a cultural rather than a religious group. Sunni Islamic political activists, how-
 ever, charge the secularist state favors, and is under the influence of, the Alawis.
 - Many prosecutors regard proselytizing and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they deem such
 activities to have political overtones. Since there is no law explicitly prohibiting
 proselytizing, police sometimes arrest Islamists or evangelical Christians for dis-
 turbing the peace. Courts usually dismiss such charges. If the proselytizers are for-
 eigners, they may be. deported, but generally they are able to reenter the country
 easily.
 Several human rights monitors complained that the Government periodically en-
 forced a 50-year-old ban on the wearing of religious head garments in government
 offices and other state-run facilities. According to these groups, some women wear-
 ing the hejab-the scarf worn by Muslim women-have lost their jobs in the public
 sector as nurses and teachers. Mazlum-der, an:Islamist human rights group, alleged
 that the Turkish military dismissed from the service individuals whose official files
 reflect Islamist fundamentalist tendencies. One officer, Major Abdul Muhalib
 Yildirim, reportedly committed suicide when, following his dismissal from the mili-
 tary for religious reasons, he was likewise banned from working in the public sector.
 In August the armed forces dismissed a group of 76 officers- and soldiers, many for
 prohibited religious and political activities. Earlier, in July the European Court of
 Human Rights ruled against a former army captain who had been separated alleg-
 ediy for inappropriate religious activities.
 Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. The number of Christians
 in the southeast has been declining as the younger Syriac generation leaves for Eu-
 rope and North America. Minority religions not recognized under the Lausanne
 Treaty may not acquire additional property for churches. The Catholic Church in
 Ankara, for example, is confined to diplomatic property. The Office of Foundations
 (Vakiflar Genel Mudurlugu) must approve the operation of churches, monasteries,
 synagogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations, such as hospitals and or-
 phanages. Restoration or construction may also be carried out in buildings and
 monuments considered to be "antique" with authorization by the Regional Board on
 the Protection of Cultural and National Wealth. The Armenian Orthodox Church
 was granted permission to restore properties and construct a new church in Hatay
 province. The Syriac Church, however, on the grounds that it lacks proper author-
 ization from the Regional Board, the Education Ministry, and security forces, was
 ordered to halt restoration efforts to its monasteries in the southeast, to terminate
 its Aramaic langage classes, and to end the housing of students and other visitors
 on church-owned property. Church and government officials continued to meet to re-
 solve the issue.
 The authorities monitor the activities of Eastern Orthodox Churches and their af-
 filiated operations. The Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul has consistently ex-
 pressed interest in reopening the seminary on the Island of Halki in the Sea of
 Marmara. The seminary has been closed since 1971 when the State nationalized
 most private institutions of higher learning. Under current restrictions, including a
 citizenship requirement, religious communities remain unable to train new clergy
 for eventual leadership.
 
 
 1345
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Under the law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (because
 of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff local religious councils or for
 lack of adherents) revert to government possession. Some non-Muslim minorities,
 particularly the Greek Orthodox community and, to a lesser extent, the Jewish com-
 munity, the Armenian Orthodox community, and the shrinking Syriac Christian
 community are faced with the danger of losing some of their houses of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement domestically and the
 freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted only in the case of a national emergency, civic obligations (mili-
 tary service, for example), or criminal investigation or prosecution.
 Travel to parts of the southeast is restricted periodically for security reasons.
 Roadblocks, set up by both security forces and the PKK, can slow down travel in
 the region.
 The internal exile law was repealed in 1987, but in 1990 the government granted
 the southeast regional governor the authority to "remove from the region," for a pe-
 riod not to exceed the duration of the state of emergency (now in its 12th year), citi-
 zens under his administration whose activities "gve an impression that they are
 prone to disturb general security and public order. There were no known instances
 of the use of this broad authority during the year.
 When Turkey ratified the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status
 of Refugees, it exercised the option of accepting the Convention's obligations only
 with respect to refugees from Europe. It has not subsequently lifted the geographic
 limitation of its treaty obligation. As a result the Government does not recognize
 non-European asylum seekers as refugees and requires that they register with the
 authorities within 5 days of entering the country. The Government screens these ap-
 plicants, determines those that it considers bona fide, and then refers them to the
 U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It provides only very limited first
 asylum opportunities designed to allow non-European applicants time to be proc-
 essed for onward resettlement. A negative decision usually leads to immediate ex-
 pulsion. Early in the year, the Government began more strictly enforcing its asylum
 regulations. The UNHCR reported that in February and March, 70 Iranian refugees
 who had not registered with the Government were deported to northern Iraq even
 though UNHCR had determined that they were-in need of international protection
 and had arranged for third country resettlement. There were additional reports of
 similar deportations throughout the first half of the year.
 At the end of June, however, an Ankara court overruled a Ministry of Interior
 Order to deport an Iranian asylum seeker who had not been in compliance with the
 5-day rule because she had already been accepted for resettlement in the U.S. The
 court based its decision on Article 31 of the Geneva Convention which prohibits the
 deportation of a person who has already been accepted as a refugee by a third coun-
 try.
 In July, after lengthy discussions with UNHCR, the Government agreed to help
 resolve the status of the approximately 3,300 "illegal" asylum seekers then reg-
 istered with UNHCR who had not registered with Turkish authorities. According to
 the terms of this agreement, individuals would be eligible for legalization if UNHCR
 determined that they had legitimate claims to refugee status and UNHCR referred
 them for third-country resettlement by April 1998. UNHCR reports that as of the
 end of 1997, the Government is implementing the amnesty decision as intended.
 In the first half of the year, there were also increasing reports of Iraqi and Ira-
 nian asylum seekers being apprehended in border areas and deported or refouled
 directly without UNHCR ever having the opportunity to examine their claims to ref-
 ugee status. Following discussions with DCR on this issue, towards the end of
 the year, the Government began to take steps to address this problem. The Ministry
 of Interior sent an official circular to border officials clarifying that any individual
 who presents him/herself to a berder official requesting asylum must have the op-
 portunity to be seen by UNHCR before a deportation order can be issued. UNHCR
 reported that the number of known summary deportations and refoulements de-
 creased significantly after the issuance of the circular. It also reported that the Min-
 istry of Interior took disciplinary action against one recalcitrant border official in
 Hakkari province who, in contravention with the precepts of the circular, had sum-
 marily deported 17 asylum seekers without allowing them access to UNHCR.
 Turkey continues to be a major transit and departure point for illegal migrants
 and would-be asylum seekers of various nationalities en route to Europe. Several
 European governments reported that the number of such individuals, especially
 Turkish and Iraqi Kurds, who had arrived in their countries from Turkey increased
 dramatically in 1997. While many traveled in small groups utilizing land routes
 
 
 1346
 across the Turkish-Greek border, increasing numbers departed via boat and ship.
 There were several tragic cases of overloaded small boats sinking in the Aegean, re-
 sulting in dozens of drownings. There were also, at the end of 1997, a number of
 high profile cases where large vessels, carrying hundreds of people each, arrived in
 Italy after having departed from Turkish ports. In the wake of those high profile
 cases, and in response to European calls that it take action to stem the flow, the
 Government began cracking down on the smuggling rings who had organized the
 mass departures and began rounding up hundreds of illegal aliens in Istanbul,
 many of whom were deported.
 The Government declined numerous offers from the UNHCR to assist in establish-
 ing reception centers for undocumented asylum seekers in border areas. The offer
 included funding and training for officers conducting interviews.
 Due to the cessation of fighting in the former Yugoslavia, the number of Bosnian
 refugees living in Turkey decreased significantly. According to the Government, 760
 Bosnians were granted- residence permits during the year, and only 341 remain in
 temporary status, down from a peak of 15,000 to 20,000 in the early 1990's. As
 "guests" there is no restriction on the period that they are allowed to remain. They
 are not allowed to work or attend school; however, most do.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides- citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice. Turkey has a multiparty par-
 liamentary system, in which national elections are held at least every 5 years on
 the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for all citizens 18 years of age and over.
 As of October, more than 30 political parties were active (most of them minuscule),
 8 of which were represented in Parliament. The Grand National Assembly (Par-
 liament) elects the President as head of state every 7 years or when the incumbent
 becomes incapacitated or dies.
 In June the Refah/DYP coalition, the country's first Islamist-led Government, re-
 signed after an intense private and public campaign of pressure led by the armed
 forces with significant-support from several segments of civil society including some
 political parties, the media, labor unions, and NGO groups. The military declared
 fundamentalism Turkey's number one threat and held "seminars" on the fundamen-
 talist threat; the NSC presented the Erbakan Government with an 18-point pro-
 gram against Islamist activity; political parties introduced in Parliament several un-
 successful motions pf no-confidence; unions and NGO's marched in protest against
 the antisecular policies of the Government. On June 12, the Ministry of Foreign Af-
 fairs Information Bureau reported that "the Presidency of the TGS announced that
 it would use weapons, if necessary, in the struggle against fundamentalism trying
 to destroy the Turkish Republic."- In public statements, some Refah politicians af-
 1firmed a commitment to an Islamist, antisecular program. In one incident, Refah
 politicians called for-support for a Middle Eastern terrorist organization.
 The Government neither coerces nor forbids membership in any political organiza-
 tion,although the Constitutional Court may close down political parties for uncon-
 stitutional activities. In..January 1998 the Supreme Court banned the Islamist
 Refah party. In January Serafettin Elci, a-former minister and CHP M.P., who is
 an ethnic Kurd, founded the Democratic Mass Party (DKP). In June charges were
 filed against the party on the grounds that its platform in defense of Kurdish rights
 violated provisions of the Constitution and the Political Party Law.
 There are no legal restrictions against women or minorities voting or participating
 in politics. The Constitution calls for equal political rights for men and women.
 There were 13 women in the 550-seat Parliament and 2 female ministers in a 39-
 member cabinet in the Yilmaz Government. Women's committees are active in polit-
 ical party organizations.
 Section 4. GovernmentalAttitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The nongovernmental Human Rights Association has branches in 50 provincial
 capitals. The HRA claims a membership of about 17,000. In 1990 the BRA estab-
 lished the Human Rights Foundation, which operates torture rehabilitation centers
 in Ankara, Izmir, Istanbul, and Adana and serves as a clearinghouse for human
 rights information. Other domestic NGO's include the Istanbul-based Helsinki Citi-
 zens Assembly, the Ankara-based Turkish Democracy Foundation, human rights
 centers at a number of universities, and the Islamist-oriented Mazlum Der, the Or-
 ganization of Human Rights and Solidarity for Oppressed Peoples.
 The Mersin Migrants' Association, an organization founded by ethnic Kurds to as-
 sist displaced Kurdish migrants, is the first NGO of its kind in the southeast. The
 
 
 1347
 Association assisted thousands of Kurdish migrants who fled villages in southeast
 Turkey to the southern port city of Mersin. The Association provides medical and
 legal services to migrant families negotiates wage contracts for migrant laborers,
 and serves as an ombudsman for urdhsh migrants with the Government.
 Senior government leaders met with representatives of major international NGO's
 during the year. Prime Minister Yilmaz, Deputy Prime Minister Ecevit, and other
 senior leaders met with a CPJ delegation. The Deputy Chief of the General Staff
 met with NGO human rights representatives in July.
 In September the Government lifted a ban on travel to Turkey that it had im-
 posed on certain German critics of Turkey's human rights record. However, Amnesty
 Internationars foreign expert on Turkey is still banned from the country.
 Despite the Government's outreach to the NGO community, local-level govern-
 ment agents, some as senior as provincial governors, harassed human rights mon-
 itors as well as lawyers and doctors involved in documenting human rights viola-
 tions. HRA branches were particularly hard hit in most cases allegedly or posses-
 sion of "illegal publications. In October HRA Chairman Akin Birdal and two other
 human rights monitors were found guilty of inciting ethnic hatred based on a speech
 Birdal gave during World Peace Day in 1996. In December Birdal was acquitted of
 the same charge relating to his participation in the pro-Kurdish "Musa Anter peace
 train" demonstrations.
 Eleven HRA board members, including Chairman Akin Birdal, faced charges of
 disseminating separatist propaganda and inciting racist and ethnic enmity in the
 Ankara SSC for comments and speeches they made condemning human rights viola-
 tions in Turkey during events organized by the HRA in 1996 to commemorate
 Human Rights Week. The prosecutor in this case asked the courts to order the clo-
 sure of BRA because of its alleged failure to operate within the limits proscribed
 by the Law on Associations. A closure order would put an end to the work of more
 than 50 branches. The HRA branch in Diyarbakir was closed for an indefinite period
 by court order in May for activities that threaten the integrity of the state; it re-
 mains closed. Human rights monitors believe that the branch was targeted in part
 for its work in preparing several cases for consideration by the European Commis-
 sion on Human Rights. HRA branches in Sanliurfa and Mardin were shut down in
 June and August and remain closed. In December a local court extended the provin-
 cial governors initial 6-month closure of the Sanilurfa Branch to closure for an "in-
 definite" period. The local governor closed the BRA branch in Malatya in June but
 allowed it to reopen in July. The Konya, Izmir, and Balikesir HRA branches were
 closed down for about a month during the year by the authorities.
 In May Adana HRF president Mustafa Cinkilic won acquittal on charges of oper-
 ating an unlawful hearth center. In the same case, however, Dr. Tufan Kose, who
 operates the HRF's center for the treatment of torture victims, was convicted and
 fined for refusing to reveal the names and records of 167 alleged torture victims to
 the authorities. Similar charges had been leveled unsuccessfully against the opera-
 tors of the other HRF torture treatment centers in Izmir, Ankara, and Istanbul.
 In the spring, Yavuz Onen, President of the HRF, Akin Birdal and Ufuk Uras of
 the left-of-center Freedom and Democracy Party, and Abmet Turk from HADEP
 were charged with holding an' authorized demonstration. They were protesting the
 Susurluk incident. The trial was ongoing at year's end.
 Dr. Seyfettin Kizilkan, former president of the southeast chamber of doctors and
 director of Diyarbakir's largest state hospital, remains free pending the outcome of
 his appeal. In 1996 Kizilkan was convicted and sentenced to a 3-year, 9-month pris-
 on term after police allegedly found bomb materials and PKK documents in his
 home. Dr. Kizilkan and his associates maintain that the police planted the evidence.
 The trial of seven members of the Diyarbakir branch of the BRA who were ac-
 cused of aiding the PKK continues at the Diyarbakir SSC. The trial, which began
 in 1995, focuses mainly on the publication of the booklet "Emergency Situation-
 1992." All seven remain free pending a verdict.
 In September the police detained and beat Turkish and foreign participants in the
 "Musa Anter peace train" who sought to enter Diyarbakir to demonstrate for a
 peaceful resolution of the conflict in the southeast. egal proceedings were brought
 against some of the local organizers. The train itself, which was to travel from Brus-
 sels to Diyarbakir, was barred from departing for Turkey by various European gov-
 ernments. In Istanbul police violently broke up attempts by organizers of the peace
 train to arrange a press conference. Many of the participants were injured and two
 were hospitalized. Europeans detained were deported, and one Istanbul-based for-
 eign diplomat was detained briefly, even after his identity had been ascertained.
 The State Minister for Human Rights, as chair of the High Council for Human
 Rights, invited leaders of the human rights NGO community to participate in a ses-
 sion of the Council in August. In order to broaden its research and outreach efforts
 
 
 1348
 beyond Ankara, the High Council convened in several cities. Since 1991 Parliament
 has convened a Human Rights Commission. The Commission is authorized to over-
 see compliance with the human rights provisions of domestic law and international
 agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, investigate alleged abuses, and prepare
 reports. During the year, the Commission traveled to the southeast and investigated
 allegations of compulsory membership in the village guard program in Lice, outside
 Diabakir.
 ireresentatives of diplomatic missions who wish to monitor human rights are free
 to speak with private citizens and groups and other government officials. Security
 police often place such official visitors in the southeast under visible surveillance,
 intimidating those they meet.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all citizens as
 equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. Discrimi-
 nation nevertheless remains a problem in several areas. The Government officially
 recognizes only those religious minorities mentioned in the Treaty of Lausanne
 (1923), which protects the rights of Eastern Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, and Jew-
 ish adherents.
 Particularly since the resignation of the Erbakan government in June, free and
 lively political debate has taken place over the role of state institutions, including
 the military, in safeguarding the proper balance between the protection of secular
 democracy from religious fanaticism and the protection of freedom of religion.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is serious and widespread. Parliament passedlegislation
 in January 1998 making spousal abuse illegal. Nevertheless, spousal abuse is still
 considered an extremely private matter, involving societal notions of family honor.
 Few women go to the police, who in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic
 disputes and frequently advise women to return to their husbands. Turks of either
 sex may file civil or criminal charges but rarely do so. Laws and ingrained societal
 notions make it difficult to prosecute sexual assault or rape cases. Penalties may
 legally be reduced if a woman was not a virgin prior to a rape, or if a judge deems
 the woman to have acted provocatively. "Honor murders"--the killing by immediate
 family members of women who are suspected of being unchaste--continue in rural
 areas or among recent immigrants to cities. The traditional practice of "virginity
 testing" continues as well among the same groups.
 According to the Family Research Institute in the Prime Minister's Office, beating
 is one of the most frequent forms of violence against women in the home. Data were
 not available for 1997, but in the past the Institute has noted complaints of beat-
 ings, threats, economic pressure, and sexual violence. In a survey of 12 provinces,
 physical abuse reportedly, occurred in roughly 30 percent of families. There are sev-
 eral shelters for battered women, and at least two consultation centers-Istanbul's
 Purple Roof foundation and Ankara's Altindag Center city shelter.
 In May Parliament amended the Civil Code to permit married women to retain
 their maiden names, should they so desire. The Civil Code prohibits granting gen-
 der-based privileges or rights but retains some discriminatory provisions concerning
 marital rights and obligations. Because the husband is the legal head of househol,
 he is authorized to choose the domicile and represents the conjugal unit. As parents,
 husband and wife exercise joint child rearing rights, but when they disagree, the
 husband's view often prevails. Women's groups have lobbied to change the provision
 that the husband is the legal head of household. A single woman who gives birth
 to a child out of wedlock is not considered automatically to be the legal guardian
 of her child: a court decision may be required. Divorce law requires that the divorc-
 ing spouses divide their property according to property registered in each spouse's
 name. Because in most cases property is registered in the husband's name, this can
 create difficulties for women who wish to divorce. Under inheritance laws, a widow
 generally receives one-fourth of the estate, her children the rest.
 The literacy rate for women is approximately 79 percent. Particularly in urban
 areas, women continue to improve their position, including in the professions, busi-
 ness, and the civil service, although they continue to face discrimination to varying
 degrees. Numerous women have become lawyers, diplomats, doctors, and engineers
 since the 1960's. Women make up between 43 and 50 percent of the work force.
 They generally receive equal pay for equal work in the professions, business, and
 civil service jobs, although a large percentage of women employed in agriculture and
 in the trade, restaurant, and hotel sectors work as unpaid family help. Women may
 take the examination required to become governors or subgovernors; several have
 been appointed subgovernors.
 
 
 1349
 Independent women's groups and women's rights associations exist and are grow-
 ing, increasing to over 50 in the past few years but the concept of lobbying for wom-
 ens rights is still in its infancy. In February close to 10,000 women-gathered in
 downtown Ankara to march and demonstrate against recent social policy initiatives
 of the then Islamist-led government. Demonstration organizers spoke forcefully
 against any attempt to impose Islamic Law (Shari'a) and asserted that they would
 not accept the turning back of secularism. This message was echoed by the crowd,
 composed of women from across the socioeconomic classes. In March the Foundation
 for Solidarity with Kurdish Women opened in Istanbul. Foundation president
 Zennes Baran stated that the Foundation's aim was to help women solve their prob-
 lems. The opening party was attended by Kurdish women as well as some Turkish
 women.
 Children.-The Government is committed to furthering children's welfare and
 works to expand opportunities in education and health, including further reduction
 of the infant mortality rate. The State Minister for Women's and Family Issues
 oversees implementation of the Government's programs for children. Government-
 provided education for children is mandatory. In August Parliament passed an edu-
 cation reform bill that extended compulsory primary education from 5 to 8 years,
 or through age 14. Traditional family values in rural areas place a greater emphasis
 on advanced education for sons than for daughters. The new 8-year compulsory edu-
 cation requirement is expected to allow more girls to continue their education.
 Children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in the southeast. The mi-
 gration-forced or voluntary-of many families, terrorism against teachers, and
 school closings in the southeast have uprooted children and moved them to cities
 that are hard pressed to find the resources to extend basic, mandatory services such
 as schooling. Many cities in the southeast are operating schools on double shifts,
 with as many as 100 students per classroom (see Section 1.g.). The Government is
 establishing regional boarding schools to help combat this problem, but these are
 insufficient. In practice, in rural Anatolia and the southeast, the literacy rate for
 girls is very low, and many do not complete primary school. The literacy rate for
 boys, most of whom complete primary school, is higher. Some continue on to high
 school, for which they generally must travel or live away from home. Instances of
 child beating and abuse are more frequently reported than in previous years, ac-
 cording to women's groups. The increase likely is attributable to greater public
 awareness of the problem.
 People With Disabilities.-Legislation dealing with the disabled is piecemeal, and
 little legislation exists regarding accessibility for the disabled. Certain categories of
 employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent of their employee pool,
 although there is no penalty for failure to comply.
 Religious Minorities.--Jews and numerous Christian sects freely practice their re-
 ligions and report little discrimination in daily life. Extremist gups target minor-
 ity communities from time to time. Religious minority groups,  man in the secu-
 lar political majority, fear the possibility of rising Islamic extremism. Islamist jour-
 nals also frequently publish anti-Semitic diatribes. In September efforts by the
 Greek Orthodox community to promote environmental awareness in the Black Sea
 area were met with extreme hostility by ultra rightwing extremists.
 In December a bomb was thrown onto the roof of the Ecumenical Patriarchate ca-
 thedral where it exploded. A patriarchal deacon was severely injured and remains
 hospitalized. Structural damage was minimal, although many windows were broken.
 No group has claimed responsibility. To provide greater security, the police have
 built a guard post by the attack site manned 24 hours a day.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Constitution does not recognize the
 Kurds as a national, racial, or ethnic minority. There are no legal barriers to ethnic
 Kurds' participation in political and economic affairs, but Kurds who publicly or po-
 litically assert their Kurdish ethnic identity risk harassment or prosecution. Many
 M.P.'s and senior officials and professionals are ethnic Kurds. Kurds who are long-
 term residents in industrialized cities in western Turkey have been for the most
 part assimilated into the political, economic, and social life of the nation, and much
 intermarriage has occurred over many generations. Kurds who are currently migrat-
 ing westward (including those displaced by the conflict in the southeast) bring with
 them their culture and village identity, but often little education and few skills.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communications in Kurdish
 legalized private spoken and printed communications in Kurdish. The use of minor-
 ity languages, including Kurdish, in television and radio broadcasts by political par-
 ties and in schools, is restricted by a plethora of laws and even articles of the Con-
 stitution; these restrictions are arbitrarily invoked. Materials dealing with Kurdish
 history, culture, and ethnic identity continue to be subject to confiscation and pros-
 
 
 1350
 ecution under the "indivisible unity of the state" provisions of the Anti-Terror Law
 (see Section 2.a.).
 A series of recent actions against predominantly Kurdish organizations in the
 southeast has convinced many in the region that despite the Government's public
 commitment to improve its human rights record, the boundaries for cultural and po-
 litical expression are in fact shrinking. Some contend that official harassment of
 Kurdish groups in the southeast has increased.
 The Mesopotamian Cultural Center (MKM), a corporation established to promote
 Kurdish language and culture, has branches in Adana, Mersin, Sanliurfa, and
 Diyarbakir in addition to cities in western Turkey. During the latter part of the
 year, police pressure against MKM branches in Mersin, Adana, and Sanliurfa in-
 creased significantly. In late October, the newly-opened branch in Sanliurfa was
 banned by the provincial governor. In Mersin the MKM was raided by police on No-
 vember 2. During the performance of a Kurdish-language play by a visiting theater
 troupe from Istanbul, the play was disrupted, the identities of all spectators were
 checked and recorded, and 12 of the actors were detained. Although all but one of
 the actors were later released with no charges filed, a court case continues against
 Kemal Ulusoy for making separatist propaganda. Ulusoy was released from prison
 in December.
 In Adana police raided the MKM on December 21 as a visiting musical group was
 performing a concert of Kurdish music. (Kurdish music concerts are not illegal.) One
 hundred spectators inside the concert room and another 100 to 200 waiting outside
 were hotographed, asked for their identity cards, and ordered to leave the prem-
 ises. he building was then sealed off by police, and the MKM director and the mu-
 sicians were taken into custody. All were released within 24 hours, and no charges
 were filed. When MKM leaders attempted to hold a press conference the following
 week to publicize the incident, police prevented newsmen from approaching the
 MKM building.
 In Sanliurfa the MKM opened its newest branch to a crowd of several thousand
 people on October 25. Within 2 days, police had blockaded the MKM building and
 prevented the previously-announced performance of a Kurdish-language play. Based
 on the recommendation of the Sanliurfa security director, the provincial governor
 subsequently closed down the MKM for an indefinite period. All three MKM
 branches report that they have been prevented from selling~urdish-language music
 cassettes and warned against organizing more cultural events.
 The Ministry of Education tightly controls the curriculum in foreign-language
 schools. Many Greek-origin students report difficulty in continuing their education
 in Turkey and go to Greece, often never to return.
 The Romani population is extremely small, and there were no reported incidents
 of public or government harassment directed against them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have the right to associate freely and form
 representative unions, except police and military personnel. In June Parliament
 passed implementing legislation for the 1995 constitutional amendments that gave
 civil servants, including schoolteachers, the right to form legally recognized unions.
 (Even prior to passage, civil servants' unions existed and worked for legal recogni-
 tion, collective bargaining, and the right to strike through demonstrations and 1-
 day work stoppages.) In 1995 Parliament amended Article 53 of the Constitution to
 permit civil servants' unions to bring cases to court on behalf of members, carry out
 collective talks with the Government to pursue their objectives, and sign an under-
 standing with the Government if agreement is reached. The amendment, language
 did not mention strikes.
 The Constitution stipulates that no one shall be compelled to become or remain
 a member of, or withdraw from, a labor union. The law states that unions and con-
 federations may be founded without prior authorization based on a petition to the
 governor of the province of the prospective union's headquarters. Although unions
 are independent of the Government and political parties, they must obtain official
 permission to hold meetings or rallies and must allow police to attend their conven-
 tions and record the proceedings. The Constitution requires candidates for union of-
 fice to have worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union. Slightly over
 12 percent of the total civilian labor force (15 years old and above) is unionized.
 There are three confederations of labor unions: the Turkish Confederation of Work-
 ers Unions (Turk-Is), the Confederation of Turkish Real Trade Unions (Hak-Is), and
 the Confederation of Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK). Unions and their offi-
 cers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly affecting members'
 economic and social interests.
 
 
 1351
 Prosecutors may ask labor courts to order a trade union or confederation to sus-
 pend its activities or to go into liquidation for serious infractions, based on alleged
 violation of specific legal norms. The Government, however, may not summarily dis-
 solve a union.
 The constitutional right to strike is partially restricted. For example, workers en-
 gaged in the protection of life and property and those in the mining and petroleum
 industries, sanitation services, national defense, and education do not have the right
 to strike.
 Collective bargaining is required before a strike. The law specifies the steps that
 a union must take before it may strike or before an employer may enga e in a lock-
 out. Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. A party that fails to comply
 with these steps forfeits its rights. The employer may respond to a strike with a
 lockout but is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using administrative person-
 nel to perform jobs normally done by strikers. Article 42 of Law 2822, governing col-
 lective bargaining, strikes, and lockouts, prohibits the employer from terminating
 workers who encourage or partici pate in a legal strike. Unions are forbidden to en-
 gage in secondary (solidarity), political or general strikes, or in slowdowns. In sec-
 tors in which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through binding arbitra-
 tion.
 The Government has the statutory power under Law 2822 to suspend strikes for
 60 days for reasons of national security or public health and safety. Unions may pe-
 tition the Council of State to lift such a suspension. If this appeal fails, and the par-
 ties and mediators still fail to resolve the dispute, it is subject to compulsory arbi-
 tration at the end of the 60-day period. The International Labor Organization's
 (ILO) Committee of Experts and the Committee on the Application of Standards re-
 Kard the Government's application of the law as too broad and have called on the
 Government to limit the application of the law and recourse to compulsory arbitra-
 tion to essential services in the strict sense of the term. The Government asserts
 that the law does not contradict the Committees' principles.
 During the first 7 months of 1997, there were 37 strikes involving 6,738 workers,
 which resulted in approximately 158,670 lost work days. During the same period
 there were no lockouts. No strikes or strike decisions were suspended by the first,
 second, or third coalition governments since their formation following the December
 24, 1995, general elections.
 Some labor union members faced government limits on freedom of speech and as-
 sembly (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.), while some civil service organizations continued
 to demonstrate for the right to strike and for higher salaries. In response to these
 protests, the Ankara public prosecutor's office initiated two separate court cases
 against Turk-Is in 1995, charging that two demonstrations held by Turk-Is in An-
 kara that year to protest the deadlock in collective bargaining negotiations were ille-
 gal. In the first case, the public prosecutor demanded prison terms for the Turk-
 Is officials of a minimum of 6 months. In the second case, the prosecutor's office ac-
 cused Turk-Is management of violating the associations law when it announced its
 support for opposition parties before the 1995 general elections. The trials began in
 the Ankara court of first instance in 1996. The Turk-Is president stated in his de-
 fense that he and other officials actually calmed down the workers during the dem-
 onstrations. Judicial officials postponed the trials to a later date to hear the testi-
 mony of other Turk-is officials who were not present at the first trial. The cases are
 pendng.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bodies, as long as these organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) approved DISK as an affiliate in 1992; Hak-Is became a member
 in December.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at a given work site, but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10 percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 unions, particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that represents
 nearly 80 percent of organized labor.
 The ILO has called on Turkey to rescind this 10 percent rule. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however. In 1994
 the Government informed the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards that
 the Ministry of Labor and Social Security proposed to remove the 10 percent numer-
 ical restriction and that it had communicated its proposal to the social partners. The
 
 
 1352
 ILO took note of the Government's statement that it continued to study removal of
 this requirement despite objections from employer and worker organizations.
 The law on trade unions stipulates that an employer may not dismiss a labor
 union representative without rightful cause. The union member may appeal such a
 dismissal to the courts, and if the ruling is in the union member's favor, the em-
 ployer must reinstate him and pay all back benefits and salary. These laws are gen-
 erally applied in practice.
 In January Turk-Is, the largest trade union confederation, organized thousands
 of workers from all over the country in a mass protest demonstration. Organizers,
 supported by several political parties and NGO's, calling the event a "struggle for
 democracy," conveyed their demands for higher wages, ending widespread corrup-
 tion in government, controlling inflation and unemployment, and allowing civil serv-
 ants the right to strike and the right to collective bargaining.
 In December DISK organized a 9-day protest march to press for union rights.
 After completing the peaceful march,, which was supported by several political par-
 ties, labr umons, and other NGO's, DISK representatives presented their demands
 to the Government. The march elicited sympathy from top government leaders, but
 labor continues to warn that labor peace is fragile. In December tens of thousands
 of public sector employees, members of the Confederation of Public Workers' Union
 (KESK), went on strike to prtest the Government's 30 percent salary increase.
 They also demanded the right to strike and to engage in collective bargaining en-
 joyed by their private sector colleagues.
 A law enacted in 1984 provides for the establishment of free trade zones, which
 are intended to attract domestic and especially foreign investment and to promote
 international trade. There are nine such zones operating in Mersin, Antalya, the Ae-
 gean region, Trabzon, Istanbul(2), Eastern Anatolia, Mardin, and Rize. Union orga-
 nizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the zones, but the right to strie
 is suspended for the first 10 years of operation. In the meantime, labor disputes that
 cannot be settled by the parties themselves are subject to compulsory arbitration.
 Workers inside the zones are paid in foreign exchange rather than Turkish cur-
 rency, giving them a hedge aganst inflation.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and statutes pro-
 hibit compulsory labor, including that performed by children. The laws are enforced.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution and labor laws forbid employment of children younger than age 15, with
 the exception that those 13 and 14 years of age may engage in light, part-time work
 if enrolled in school or vocational training. The Constitution also prohibits children
 from engaging in physically demanding jobs such as underground mining and from
 working at mght. The Ministry of Labor effectively enforces these laws only in the
 organized industrial sector.
 In practice many children work because families need the supplementary income.
 An informal system provides work for young boys at low wages, for example, in auto
 repair shops. Girls are rarely seen working in public, but many are kept out of
 school to work in handicrafts, especially in rural areas. The bulk of child labor oc-
 curs in rural areas and is often associated with traditional family economic activity,
 such as farming or animal husbandry. It is common for entire families to work to-
 gether to bring in the crop during the harvest. The Government has recognized the
 growing problem of child labor and has been working with the ILO to discover its
 dimensions and to determine solutions. The Ministry of Labor, the Ankara munici-
 pality, the Turk-Is labor confederation, and the Turkish Employers Association are
 among the institutions participating in the ILO'S International Program on the
 Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), a project to solve the problems of working chil-
 dren. The Ministry of Labor and the ILO have jointly produced a study showing that
 almost one-half (44 percent) of the children working are below the age of 15, are
 paid less than the minimum wage, and have no insurance. According to a 1996
 study conducted by the Turk-Is child workers bureau, for every 100 workers, 32
 were between the ages of 6 and 19. Children employed at work sites and homes con-
 stitute 5 percent of the total working population and were mostly employed in the
 metal, shoe, woodworking, and agricultural sectors. The young workers employed on
 a monthly or daily wage payment basis worked over 40 hours a week, and those
 employed at home and not receiving a wage payment worked less than 40 hours per
 week. The study reported that 56 percent of these workers were uninsured. It added
 that the total number of working young people between the ages of 12 and 19 was
 3.5 million and that 45 percent of them were under the age of 16.
 According to the Ministry of Labor, 37 child labor inspectors were trained during
 the year to add to the 40 already working. However, according to Turk-Is, there are
 over 600,000 work sites and a mere 450 regular inspectors. A labeling system is
 scheduled for implementation in 1998.
 
 
 1353
 
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, including that performed by chil-
 dren, and the laws are enforced (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. In recent years, it has done so annually. In August
 the nominal minimum wage was increasedby approximately 108 percent over the
 year before (compared to annual inflation of over 85 percent). The monthly gross
 minimum wage rates, which became effective on August 1, are approximately $208
 (T1 35,437,500) for workers older than age 16 and about $176 (Ti 29,925,000) for
 workers under age 16.
 It would be difficult for a single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on
 the minimum wage .without support from other sources. Most workers earn consid-
 erably more. Workers covered by the labor law, who constitute about one-third of
 the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or a daily food allowance and other
 fringe benefits which according to the Turkish Employers' Association, make basic
 wages alone account for only about 37 percent of total compensation.
 The Labor law sets a 45-hour workweek, although most unions have bargained
 for fewer hours. The law prescribes a weekly rest day and limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 a day for up to 90 days in a year. The Labor Inspectorate of the
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces wage and hour provisions in the unionized in-
 dustrial, service, and government sectors, which cover about 12 percent of workers.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. Law
 1475 sets out procedures under which workers may remove themselves from hazard-
 ous conditions without risking loss of employment. The law alsa allows for the shut-
 down of an operation if a five-man committee, which includes-safety inspectors, em-
 ployee, and employer representatives, determines that the operation endangers
 workers' lives. In practice, financial constraints, limited safety awareness, careless-
 ness, and fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and
 health by workers and employers alike.
