 TURKEY
 Turkey, a functioning democracy, is a republic with a
 multiparty parliamentary system and a relatively strong
 presidency. Prime Minister Turgut Ozal's right-of-center
 Motherland Party won a 5-year mandate in national elections
 held in late 1987.
 The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma in
 the countryside are responsible for maintaining public order.
 In 1987 the Government lifted martial law in the last five
 provinces where it had been in effect. A legal "state of
 emergency" continues to exist in eight provinces in the
 southeast, where the Turkish Government is combating armed
 Kurdish separatists. The state of emergency allows the
 civilian governors to exercise some martial law powers.
 The Government has liberalized the economy in recent years and
 given it a strong free market, export orientation. The
 economy is rapidly expanding, and the gross national product
 in 1988 grew at a rate of between 7 and 8 percent.
 Unemployment and inflation, however, remain serious problems.
 Turkey continued to make progress in the observance of human
 rights in 1988. In January Turkey became the first country to
 ratify the Council of Europe Convention for the Prevention of
 Torture. In August 1988, it ratified a similar U.N.
 convention. By becoming party to these conventions, Turkey
 for the first time accepted the role of outside observers in
 investigating allegations of torture in Turkey and monitoring
 Turkish places of detention.
 There were fewer allegations of torture in 1988 than in
 preceding years. Nevertheless, some charges of torture
 persisted and were reported in the press. The existence of a
 legal framework that allows lengthy incommunicado pretrial
 detention creates both an opportunity for abuse and makes it
 difficult to prove or disprove charges of mistreatment and
 torture that do emerge.
 Turkish law limits the extent to which minorities can express
 distinct or separate identities (the word "minorities"
 throughout this report refers to groups which comprise less
 than one half of the population and is devoid of political
 connotation). Amid deeply rooted feelings regarding potential-
 threats to the integrity of the State, Turks are extremely
 sensitive to suggestions that they have an obligation to
 provide autonomy to any of the groups which make up the
 intricate mosaic of Turkish society. The Government only
 recognizes non-Muslim groups, as mentioned in the Lausanne
 Treaty of 1923, as minorities. It restricts the separate
 cultural identity of Muslim groups, such as Turkish Kurds.
 Publishing materials in Kurdish or writing about Kurdish
 history has resulted in imprisonment, and even the singing of
 Kurdish songs in public performances has been prohibited. In
 1988, however, the Government did permit, for the first time
 the sale of cassettes containing songs in Kurdish.
 In the late summer of 1988, the Turkish Government undertook a
 major humanitarian effort when it gave refuge to 60,000 Iraqi
 Kurds, who had fled across the border into Turkey. By year's
 end almost 40,000 remained.
 Some inhibitions on full press freedom continue to exist, but
 the press is active and freely criticizes the Government.
 
 
 1199
 TURKEY
 Over the past few years, journalistic practice and court
 decisions have steadily expanded the scope of press and
 individual freedom of expression.
 RESPECT FOR HU.AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known unlawful killings instigated by government
 or political opposition groups in 1988.
 Since 1984 a small, number (perhaps 3,000) of Kurdish
 separatists, mostly members of the illegal Marxist Kurdish
 Workers Party (PKK), have conducted a campaign of terrorism in
 southeast Turkey against security forces as well as fellow
 Turks of Kurdish origin who do not support them, causing 1,400
 deaths, most of them civilian. The Government in 1988 made
 major strides in combating the campaign, both through improved
 coordination of the security forces and the creation of better
 economic conditions for the inhabitants.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by government forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Article 17 of the 1982 Turkish Constitution states that "no
 one shall be subjected to torture or ill treatment
 incompatible with human dignity." Nevertheless, there were
 credible allegations of torture and other mistreatment during
 1988, though at a reduced level compared to past years.
 In one case, Turkish Christians, detained by Turkish security
 forces for alleged proselytizing during the spring and summer
 of 1988, were victims of police brutality and some of their
 non-Christian cellmates were more severely abused. According
 to one credible report, one man was beaten, subjected to cold
 water hoses, and hung from a bar running under his arms with
 his hands tied behind him.
 An Amnesty International report written in June 1988 alleged
 several incidents of torture, including the reported sexual
 abuse of 16-year-old Saadet Akkaya in April in Istanbul Police
 Headquarters. Miss Akkaya reportedly lodged a formal
 complaint against the police.
 Other charges were levied by two members of Turkey's
 opposition Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP). In January
 an SHP deputy from the southeast asserted that torture was
 systematic in the Erzurum Military Prison. In late August,
 SHP Chairman Erdal Inonu asserted that torture was a
 continuing phenomenon in Turkey, but he did not offer any
 specifics. In September an SHP deputy from the same area
 claimed that a man whose body had been returned to his family
 by the Jandarma--who said the man had been killed by Kurdish
 separatists--had actually been tortured to death by the
 police. As reported by the opposition deputy, a police
 autopsy showed the man had been killed by gunfire from PKK
 members, while a second autopsy ordered by the family showed
 the man had been tortured before he died. In December a
 
 
 1200
 TURKEY
 delegation of SHP members travelling in eastern Turkey
 publicized an incident in Kars province in which three
 Jandarma officers allegedly tortured seven villagers while
 investigating a murder stemming from a local blood feud.
 According to press reports, two victims were hospitalized.
 The President of the Istanbul chapter of the Human Rights
 Association charged that inmates of Bursa prison, including
 Hasan Fikret Ulusoydan, a Communist writer, were beaten in
 late September. The beatings led to a widely publicized
 hunger strike. In December the President of the Ankara
 chapter of the Human Rights Association announced that three
 students (two of whom accompanied him to the press conference)
 had been beaten and hung by the arms after being detained for
 hanging posters and distributing leaflets. They were later
 released by a judge.
 The Government in January 1988 became the first country to
 ratify the Council of Europe Convention for the Prevention of
 Torture. In August it ratified a similar U.N. Convention
 Against Torture. In taking these actions, the Government
 accepted the legitimate role of outside observers in
 investigating torture allegations in Turkey and monitoring
 Turkish prison conditions. In September a U.N. rapporteur
 conferred in Turkey with government officials and visited
 prisons in Istanbul and Ankara.
 Current Turkish legal procedures permit incommunicado
 detention of suspects for up to 15 days upon court order and
 up to 30 days in cases to be tried in a state security court.
 It is during this period of detention that most alleged acts
 of torture are said to occur. Turkish human rights activists
 and foreign observers alike agree that ending this practice of
 incommunicado detention and allowing lawyers and family access
 to prisoners during these periods of detention would be one of
 the most effective ways of assuring that torture does not
 occur. Proposed revisions to the criminal code under
 consideration by the Government would allow immediate access
 for lawyers.
 Observers note that the current system creates a situation in
 which allegations of torture are difficult to prove or
 disprove. This was clearly demonstrated in the case of Haydar
 Kutlu and Dr. Nihat Sargin, leaders of Turkey's outlawed
 Communist Party, who were arrested in November 1987 after
 their voluntary return to Turkey. After being held
 incommunicado for several weeks, the two claimed they had been
 tortured. They also said that all signs of torture had
 disappeared and that court-appointed doctors would be unlikely
 to find any marks. Court-appointed physicians did examine
 them and found no indications of torture. The two continued
 to repeat their charges as their trials went forward in 1988.
 In 1988 a.number of officials were convicted of having
 tortured people in their custody. Izmir policeman Mehmet
 Sonmez was sentenced to 7 years for the beating death of Ali
 Guven during an arrest in 1983, but other offenders received
 lighter sentences. Proposed revisions to the criminal code
 would double the penalty for murder by torture, classified as
 manslaughter, from 8 to 16 years.
 Turkish prison conditions suffer in comparison with those in
 many richer countries. In February Prime Minister Ozal
 announced a series of reforms that increased visiting hours
 and gave prisoners greater access to television and printed
 
 
 1201
 TURKEY
 matter, among other things. Stringent new prison regulations
 were issued on August 1, leading to hunger strikes in
 13 prisons. The strikes, during which prisoners refused
 prison meals but not other forms of sustenance, ended after
 negotiations in early December which relaxed some of the new
 regulations. One important reform allows the family members
 of prisoners who do not speak Turkish to converse during
 visits in their own language. This change constituted an
 important step for Turks of ethnic Kurdish origin living in
 eastern Turkey. (See also Section 5.)    &
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except in limited circumstances, such as when a person is
 caught in the act of committing a crime, a judge must issue a
 detention warrant to the prosecutor if a person is to be
 incarcerated. This can lead to at least 2 weeks of
 incommunicado detention.
 In the eight provinces under a legal state of emergency, the
 governor (or regional governor) may authorize initial .
 detention of a person for up to 30 days without charge. Once
 formally charged, a detainee is arraigned before a judge and
 is allowed to retain a lawyer.
 A proposed revision of the criminal code under consideration
 by the Government would accord suspects the right to obtain
 and have access to a lawyer from the outset of detention.
 Under existing legislation, a detainee's next of kin must
 normally be notified "in the shortest time." A detainee does
 not have a right'to bail; the arraigning judge may release the
 accused on presentation of an appropriate guarantee, or order
 him held in preventive detention if the court determines that
 he is likely to flee or destroy evidence.
 The Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request
 "speedy conclusion of arraignment and trial." Nevertheless,
 judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained
 while their cases progress, sometimes for a period of years.
 While many of these cases involved persons accused of violent
 crimes, others involved membership in illegal organizations.
 There is no formal exile. The Government-has refused to renew
 the passports of a number of Turks working abroad who have
 refused to return home to face court charges or perform
 military service. These persons may apply to the Interior
 Ministry for permission to return to Turkey. According to a
 1987 report, about 14,000 Turks living abroad (most of them in
 West Germany) have been denied passports for these and other
 reasons. In a well-publicized incident, eight Turks tried to
 enter Turkey on December 17. Five were refused entry on the
 grounds that they had lost their citizenship; the other three
 were detained pending investigation of outstanding charges
 against them. Two were later released. All were allowed to
 contact lawyers and hold press conferences.
 Some human rights observers continue to assert that Turkish
 detention facilities contain many political prisoners or
 prisoners of conscience. The authorities detained many
 persons following the 1980 military intervention, including
 many charged with acts of violence. Early release under the
 "Execution of Sentences Act" for those convicted of crimes,
 and the conclusion of most of the mass trials dating from the
 same period, in which courts have distinguished carefully
 
 
 1202
 TURKEY
 between violent and nonviolent acts in meting out sentences,
 have reduced those numbers significantly.
 One such mass trial, which began in 1981, ended in late
 August. Over half of the 800 defendants were acquitted, and
 271 received sentences ranging from 1 to 20 years. Of 53
 defendants for whom the prosecutor requested death sentences,
 46 were given lesser sentences. The defendants, members of a
 revolutionary group, had taken over a town shortly before the
 1980 military intervention and declared it a *liberated
 zone." It was retaken by the military without loss of life,
 but the revolutionaries had allegedly executed a number of
 people during their brief rule.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Turkish court system and judicial procedures are modeled
 on Italian (criminal) and Swiss (civil) law codes. Defendants
 normally have the right to an open trial.
 The Constitution declares that judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties and provides for the security of
 their tenure. It also prohibits authorities from giving
 orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial
 power. In many instances, charges brought by prosecutors, who
 are also independent, are dismissed by the courts.
 Eight state security courts try defendants accused of terrorism
 or other offenses against the security of the State, including
 drug smuggling and membership in an illegal organization. The
 same standards of evidence and general rules of procedure are
 required as in civilian courts. A conviction or acquittal in
 either system may be appealed. If an appeals court overturns
 a lower court's guilty verdict, the case is sent back to the
 lower court for reconsideration. If the lower court insists
 on its original verdict, the case is returned to the appeals
 court for a binding opinion.
 In some cases, particularly capital cases, appeals to the
 Supreme Court or to the High Court of Military Appeals are
 mandatory and automatic. If a death sentence is confirmed by
 an appeals court, it must be approved by the Council of
 Ministers, then by Parliament, and finally by the President.
 No death sentence has been carried out since 1984. In
 September the Chairman of the Parliamentary Justice Committee
 remanded the dossiers of 287 prisoners sentenced to death to
 the Parliamentary Archives, effectively commuting their
 sentences to life.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Entry by government officials into a private residence and
 interception or monitoring of private correspondence are
 permitted only upon issuance of a judicial warrant.
 In the eight provinces still under a state of emergency,
 however, the governor (or regional governor) may empower
 authorities to search residences or the premises of political
 parties, businesses, associations, and other organizations
 
 
 1203"
 TURKEY
 without a warrant. They may also search, hold, or seize
 without warrant persons, letters, telegrams, and documents.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Turkish press is lively and vigorous. There are many
 newspapers and periodicals, all of which are privately owned
 and reflect a wide range of opinion. There is no government
 newspaper; all papers reflect opposition views to a greater or
 lesser extent.
 While it is permissible to criticize government leaders or
 policies, the criminal code has provisions to prosecute those
 who "insult the President, the Parliament, the Government, and
 the Army." Penalties range from a 3-year minimum sentence for
 insulting the President to a 6-year maximum for insulting the
 other branches of government. The criminal code also has
 longstanding prohibitions on speech or writings considered
 threatening to the democratic and secular system of government
 and the security of the State. The proscriptions apply to:
 advocacy of a government based on class or racial domination
 (e.g., communism or fascism); the establishment of a theocratic
 state (e.g., Islamic fundamentalism); or the creation of a
 separate state on ethnic lines (e.g., Kurdish separatism).
 Public prosecutors have been vigorous in bringing charges
 under these laws, and the number of people charged with such
 violations fluctuates and is hard to estimate but may be
 several thousand. However, judges have generally been
 rigorous in examining the evidence in such cases and dismiss
 most of them.
 The former mayor of Samsun was convicted for insulting the
 President. He was accused of saying that the upper levels of
 government are occupied by ignorant people whose obsession
 with women covering their heads is perverse, meaning that he
 felt that conservative female Muslim students should be allowed
 to wear headcoverings on university campuses. (The issue has
 become an important one between secularists and religious
 fundamentalists. The Higher Education Council has recently
 permitted headcoverings, but some faculty members have refused
 to teach students who wear scarves to class.) The mayor's
 case is being appealed.
 Prosecutors sometimes use these laws to harass newspapers.
 All papers have a "responsible editor" whose only function is
 to represent it before the courts and bear the penalty if the
 paper is found guilty. In a number of instances in 1988 fines
 were imposed, often for obscenity convictions, but no
 "responsible editor" actually went to jail.. In December the
 elditor of a leftist magazine, Toward the Year 2000, was
 sentenced to 1 1/2 years in prison for "having insulted
 Ataturk" in an article. The case is being appealed, and there
 are indications that the appeals court will reverse the
 conviction. Meanwhile, the magazine's "responsible editor,"
 Fatma Yazici, was fined $75 for the same incident. Yazici, a
 prominent leftwing journalist, is involved in as many as 30
 other court cases as "responsible editor" and could serve many
 years in jail for sentences currently under appeal or new
 convictions. So far, however, she has not served any time in
 jail.
 A publisher and reporter of the major daily, Milliyet, are
 currently on trial for having published in 1988 a series of
 
 
 1204
 TURKEY
 interviews with a Kurdish leader advocating separatism. It is
 widely expected that they will be acquitted or, at most,
 receive a relatively minor fine. The editions of the
 newspaper containing the interviews were seized by authorities
 before reaching the newsstands. A book reprinting a series of
 articles legally published in 1966 on Kurdish life in eastern
 Turkey was banned. The books were reportedly physically
 destroyed, and charges were brought against the publisher.
 The case had not yet been heard at year's end.
 Judicial rulings in 1988 affecting freedom of the press have
 consistently favored more freedom. This is one reason why,
 despite the possibility of prosecution, the press constantly
 tests the laws. Government prosecutors continued to use some
 statutes to harass the press and were at times effective in
 doing so; but the courts, for the most part, continued to come
 down on the side of free expression and to expand the bounds
 of press and individual freedom.
 Turkish Radio and Television (TRT) is a government monopoly.
 Despite fairly extensive coverage of the activities of
 opposition leaders and their parties, opposition figures
 complain TRT's broadcasts and news coverage have a strong
 progovernment bias. A government commission apportions party
 access to television and radio during election and referendum
 campaigns based on the percentage of parliamentary seats they
 presently hold. Works of certain leftist and Kurdish
 performers and writers are said to be banned from broadcast on
 TRT for political or cultural reasons.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior permission from
 the authorities. Such requests are generally granted, but
 assemblies are restricted to sites chosen by the authorities.
 The Law on Associations reflects concern over the involvement
 of some organizations in the violence which preceded the
 military intervention of 1980. It prohibits associations from
 having ties to political parties or engaging in political
 activity. The Government closely monitors association
 activity. Associations must submit their charters for
 government approval before they are allowed to form.
 Academic freedom is circumscribed in that the Constitution and
 the Political Parties Law proscribe student and faculty
 involvement in political activities. These prohibitions stem
 from concern over university involvement in pre-1980
 violence. Political parties may not form youth branches.
 Students and professors may, however, participate in politics
 and political parties as individuals, and a number of
 academicians have been elected to Parliament.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Turkey is a secular state. The Constitution provides for
 freedom of belief, freedom of worship (if in a public
 building, the building must be specifically designated for
 this purpose and approved by the State), and private
 dissemination of one's religious ideas. It is illegal,
 however, to advocate the establishment of a theocratic state.
 Systematic proselytization is a legal gray area but the
 
 
 1205
 TURKEY
 government consistently discourages it, and anyone engaging in
 such activities may be detained, investigated, and possibly
 prosecuted.
 In January and February, a series of articles in a mass-
 circulation newspaper claimed that various Christian groups
 were trying to convert Turks through such inducements as sex,
 language lessons, and trips abroad. The police detained some
 50 foreign and Turkish Christians throughout Turkey on
 suspicion of organizing illegal activities. Most of the
 detainees belonged to evangelical Protestant groups. While
 some hearings are still pending, the courts have dismissed all
 cases heard to date. Nevertheless, some foreigners were later
 forced to leave Turkey whea their residency permits or
 employment contracts were not renewed. Police in Ankara
 detained a group of foreign and Turkish Christians for a
 second time in September. The group was held for 7 days, but
 none of the detainees was charged with a crime. Several
 Turkish detainees complained of police brutality during their
 detention, and one was beaten; none of the foreign detainees
 was mistreated, but consular access was denied.
 Although Turkey is a secular state, Turkey's population is
 overwhelmingly Muslim. Instruction in "religious culture and
 moral education" in accordance with a state-prepared
 curriculum is compulsory for all Muslim students. A recent
 decree combined the practical and theoretical aspects of this
 curriculum but also stated that non-Muslims can attend such
 classes only with written permission of their parents. This
 superseded a 1986 Education Ministry decree to the effect that
 non-Muslims had to attend classes in general religious
 instruction but were excused from the practical sections,
 which included memorization of Koranic verses and instructions
 in prayer.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom of movement within Turkey, and Turks are
 generally free to travel abroad. The Constitution provides
 that a citizen's freedom to leave may be restricted on account
 of the national economic situation, civic obligations
 (generally military service), or criminal investigation or
 prosecution.
 In April, the Government eased some of the regulations
 governing passport issuance. Critics, however, point out that
 while the reforms made it easier for people who had been
 convicted on criminal charges to obtain passports, the reform
 has not been fully applied to people accused or convicted of
 having advocated a government based on class or religion.
 There is also evidence that some people under indictment for
 such offenses, as well as others under no indictment at all,
 are unable to obtain passports or only get them after lengthy
 delays.
 Turkey has resettled approximately 4,500 Afghan refugees in
 recent years. In the late summer of 1988, it generously
 provided temporary refuge to some 60,000 Iraqi Kurds. It also
 provides two temporary settlement facilities for East European
 refugees. Though the Turkish Government does not grant
 Iranians refugee status, Turkey serves de facto as a country
 of first asylum and safehaven for many Iranians. Before the
 current ceasefire in the Iran/Iraq war, there were an estimated
 500,000 Iranians in Turkey, mostly in Istanbul and other large
 
 
 1206
 TURKEY
 cities. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has
 raised with the Turkish Government a small number of cases of
 refoulement of persons who had violated Turkish law.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Turkish citizens have the right and ability peacefully to
 change their government, within certain legal constraints.
 Parties advocating a theocratic state, the superiority or
 dictatorship of a particular social class or group, or
 "exclusive" or "elitist" political philosophies are
 prohibited. Among the political groupings which are
 effectively barred by these provisions are Communist, Marxist,
 Islamic fundamentalist, Kurdish, and Fascist parties. These
 are regarded as inimical to a Western-style democracy and a
 threat to Turkey's fundamental integrity. Fascists and
 Communists as individuals are banned from membership in other
 parties. Members of the armed forces and certain categories
 of civil servants may not join any political party.
 Members of the Communist party, such as Haydar Kutlu and Nihat
 Sargin, and of Kurdish separatist parties, such as Fatma Unal
 and Sabri Erbil, are among those held on charges of advocating
 rule by a particular social class or ethnic group. Kutlu and
 Sargin voluntarily returned to Turkey in November 1987. Over
 400 Turkish lawyers volunteered to defend the two and their
 trial has occasioned domestic debate over the suitability in a
 democracy of outlawing Communist parties.
 At the time of their arrest, Prime Minister Ozal said that he
 personally would not object to the legalization of Communist
 parties of the Eurocommunist type, though he felt that many
 Turks might not agree. President Evren stated that he could
 foresee the eventual legalization of a Turkish Communist
 party, but the time had not yet come. The issue of legalizing
 the Communist party continues to be a subject of debate in
 Turkey, with members of several parties calling for an
 amendment to the Constitution.
 Turkey has a multiparty, presidential parliamentary system.
 The President is elected by Parliament for a single 7-year
 term. The current President, whose election was approved with
 the adoption of Turkey's new Constitution in the 1982
 referendum, is retired General Kenan Evren, former Chief of
 the Turkish General Staff and head of the National Security
 Council which governed Turkey during the period of military
 rule (1980-83). In 1989, a new president will be elected by
 the Members of the current Parliament.
 Elections for public office are on the basis of mandatory
 universal suffrage and secret ballot. Turgut Ozal's
 Motherland Party won a 5-year mandate in the national elections
 held in November 1987, in which political leaders formerly
 banned from political activity were allowed to participate
 following a referendum to this effect in September 1987.
 The unicameral Parliament has 450 seats elected on a weightea
 proportional representation basis. Under a "barrage" system,
 the Turkish election law excludes parties obtaining less than
 10 percent of the total national vote. This measure is
 intended to prevent political fragmentation and recurrence of
 the parliamentary paralysis of the late 1970's. The law is
 structured to assist a party which obtains a plurality of the
 popular vote to obtain a strong majority in Parliament. In
 
 
 1207
 TURKEY
 the November 1987 parliamentary elections, a 36-percent
 plurality of the popular vote provided Prime Minister Ozal's
 Motherland Party 292 seats in the 450-person Parliament.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and
 women. There are currently six female Members of Parliament,
 one of whom is the Minister of Labor. Several women hold
 important positions in the party hierarchies. Members of
 minorities, Muslim and non-Muslim, face no legal limitations
 on political participation as long as they accept Turkish
 national identity and do not form "exclusive " parties. For
 example, many Turks of Kurdish descent serve in the
 Parliament, the Cabinet, and senior government posts.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government's attitude toward private organizations
 monitoring human rights situations is ambivalent. Their
 representatives are free to come, but the degree of official
 cooperation extended to them varies and reflects, at times,
 clear resentment over what the Government perceives as
 "unfair" reporting by such groups following visits to Turkey.
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association has been active
 since its charter was officially approved in 1987. It has
 opened branches in provincial cities, and organizes
 discussions, publications, rallies, and petitions. It
 gathered 150,000 signatures in support of the abolition of the
 death penalty and a general amnesty for all political
 prisoners. Because of this campaign, several association
 officials were charged with having illegally participated in
 politics in contravention of the law on associations, but they
 were acquitted in early December.
 The Social Democratic Populist Party, the main opposition
 party, also has a human rights committee and has actively
 pursued human rights issues. in Parliament. In December the
 Government formed an interministerial working group to
 coordinate government efforts on human rights matters.
 Under the European and U.N. conventions against torture
 ratified by Turkey, committees or rapporteurs are allowed to
 visit all places of detention (police stations, civilian and
 military prisons, mental hospitals, etc.) at any time,
 following notification to the Government. In early September,
 a U.N. rapporteur met with government officials and visited a
 prison in Ankara and a prison in Istanbul.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no legal discrimination based on race, sex, religion,
 or social status. The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a
 secular state, regards all Turkish citizens as equal, and
 prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial
 grounds. The Treaty of Lausanne also guarantees the rights of
 Turkey's non-Muslim minorities. In many respects, there is
 also little actual discrimination in Turkey. Many prominent
 Turks are of Kurdish origin. The tiny Jewish and Christian
 minorities are heavily represented in business and the
 professions. There are, however, some problems.
 
 
 1208
 TURKEY
 Turkish Governments since Ataturk have sought the assimilation
 of all ethnic groups residing within the territorial boundaries
 of Turkey into the mainstream of Turkish society. As a result,
 a variety of Turkish laws and practices make it difficult for
 ethnic or religious minority groups to maintain fully distinct
 or separate identities within Turkish society. Turks feel
 that to permit such groups to do so could eventually bring the
 unity of their State into question. Pursuit of this policy
 has, however, caused social strains, particularly with regard
 to citizens of Kurdish origin.
 Although millions of Turkish Kurds are fully integrated into
 the political, economic, and social life of the nation, the
 Government's pursuit of full assimilation has led to the
 proscription of publication of any book, newspaper, or other
 material in the Kurdish language. Neither are materials
 dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic identity
 permitted, and there have been instances of arrests of
 entertainers for singing songs or performing in Kurdish.
 While some forms of cultural activity are permitted, the
 foregoing limits on cultural expression are a source of
 genuine discontent to many Turks of Kurdish origin,
 particularly in the economically less developed southeast,
 where they are in the majority.
 There are no legal restrictions on the private use of
 Kurdish. In addition, as part of his February announcement on
 prison reforms, Prime Minister Ozal lifted restrictions on
 allowing Kurdish-speaking prisoners to converse in Kurdish
 with visitors or lawyers. This brought an end to a widely
 publicized and resented situation in which some Kurdish
 prisoners and their families were unable to converse during
 family visits for want of the ability to do so in Turkish.
 Turkish laws and regulations insist on the use of Turkish in
 court, with interpreters provided to those who cannot speak
 Turkish.
 The entire Kurdish issue is one of great sensitivity and
 controversy for the majority of Turkey's citizens. Early in
 1988, a small group of deputies broke a longstanding taboo
 when they tried to initiate a parliamentary discussion on the
 condition of Turkish Kurds. The move was rejected by
 parliamentary colleagues from all political parties, but the
 attempt constituted an unprecedented public discussion of this
 issue. The emotions surrounding this problem are heightened
 by the ongoing Kurdish separatist armed violence in the
 southeast.
 As one way of ameliorating the problems of the southeast, the
 Government has put great efforts into creating better economic
 conditions through large-scale economic development programs.
 Dams have been built to provide irrigation and hydroelectric
 power. Almost all villages are now electrified. Tractors are
 common. Virtually every village now has a primary school
 where children learn Turkish. The introduction of television
 to rural areas is having a major impact, giving the inhabitants
 of this area the same access to Turkish-language information
 and cultural programs afforded other Turks.
 Notwithstanding the sensitivity of its internal Kurdish issue,
 the Government generously afforded refuge to some 60,000 Kurds
 fleeing chemical warfare in Iraq in the late summer of 1988.
 Foreign observers praised the Government for providing
 humanitarian assistance under difficult circumstances.
 
 
 1209
 TURKEY
 Under the Treaty of Lausanne, the equality of non-Muslim
 Turkish nationals with Turkish Muslims is guaranteed. Among
 non-Muslim religious groups there are some 50,000 Armenians,
 20,000 Jews, 6,000 Greek Orthodox, and several thousand Syriac
 Christians. These groups operate churches, monasteries,
 synagogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations,
 such as hospitals and orphanages, but have faced a number of
 restrictive bureaucratic policies and procedures governing
 their activities and institutions. In some instances, these
 problems have been caused by municipal governments which have
 sought to expropriate, by legal means, real estate owned by
 religious groups and non-Muslims. Over the last few years,
 the Ozal Government has been sympathetic to these concerns and
 has taken a number of steps to alleviate them, particularly in
 regard to the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate in Istanbul.
 Nevertheless, a variety of obstacles to the efficient operation
 of their schools, churches, and seminaries have contributed,
 along with economic factors, to a dwindling of these minority
 populations. The population of non-Muslim minority groups has
 declined steadily over the years to under 200,000 people.
 The Government has long been a leader in promoting and
 protecting women's rights. Their marriage and property rights
 are guaranteed-by laws based on the Swiss civil code. Women
 have full suffrage and educational rights, have attained high
 office, and are represented in all professions and
 institutions, including the law and medicine. Still, in much
 of the country, particularly small towns and villages,
 cultural constraints severely limit womens' roles in society.
 Traditional attitudes tend to keep women out of blue-collar
 jobs, though women do perform certain unskilled and
 semiskilled labor in factories and farm work. In work sites
 covered by labor agreements, they receive equal pay.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Most workers have the right-to associate freely. Among those
 who do not have the right to form representative unions are
 public schoolteachers, civil servants, the police, and the
 military.
 Union officers may serve no more than eight consecutive 3-year
 terms in a given office. The Constitution requires candidates
 for office to have worked 10 years in the industry represented
 by the union. Like other associations, unions must have
 government permission to hold special meetings or rallies, and
 police officers must be allowed to attend and record the
 proceedings of both special and mandatory meetings. The
 Government protects the person and property of trade unionists.
 The 1982 legislation banned unions and their officers from any
 political activities. The 1988 amendments to those laws
 clarified the right of unions and their officers to express
 their views on issues which directly affect their members'
 economic or social interests, but they did not undo
 constitutional provisions which forbid any union role in party
 politics. Unions may not establish organic or financial
 connections with any political party or other association. In
 practice, union leaders and the executive board of the Turkish
 Confederation of Labor (Turk-Is) have undertaken significant
 political activities. In 1988 Turk-Is campaigned hard against
 the Government's position in a referendum on the timing of
 local elections, a clearly political issue. While several
 
 
 1210
 TURKEY
 members of the ruling party called for legal action against
 Turk-Is, no case arising from its referendum activities has
 yet been opened against the Confederation.
 In some circumstances, the Government may take over the assets
 of a union or confederation after a lengthy court proceeding.
 This procedure was used in the case of the Confederation of
 Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK), which was dissolved by a
 military court in a proceeding which began in 1981. At year's
 end the case was on appeal.
 Workers have the right to strike. Turkish law and the labor
 court system, however, require collective bargaining before a
 strike. The law specifies a series of steps which a union
 must take before it may legally strike, and a similar series
 of steps before an employer may engage in a lockout.
 Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. Once a
 strike is declared, unions are restricted in the actions
 pickets may take, as well as the number of pickets they may
 place at each entrance and exit of a strike site. The struck
 employer may respond with a lockout. If he chooses to remain
 open, he is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or from
 using administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done
 by strikers. Unions are forbidden to engage in secondary or
 solidarity strikes, wildcat strikes, or general strikes. In
 the peak strike year of 1987, all strikes were peaceful, and
 all ended in collective agreements. That trend continued in
 1988.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has, for a number
 of years, considered allegations Lhat Turkish laws contravene
 the standards of ILO conventions which Turkey has ratified.
 Several ILO missions have visited Turkey in recent years and
 suggested significant changes in Turkey's labor laws and
 Constitution. The May 1988 amendments to the Labor Law
 addressed some of the ILO recommendations. In November the
 ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association noted improvements
 in the existing labor legislation but insisted on several
 additional major amendments to correct provisions incompatible
 with freedom of association: specifically, the right to
 establish organizations without previous authorization; to
 draw up constitutions and rules and elect representatives in
 full freedom; and to bargain collectively without government
 interference.
 Turk-Is is affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and the European Trade Union
 Confederation (ETUC) and represents Turkish workers at the
 ILO. The Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions (DISK),
 although dissolved by court action, is still carried as a
 member of the ETUC, and its legal appeals have been actively
 supported by all three major trade union internationals: the
 ICFTU, the World Federation of Trade Unions, and the World
 Confederation of Labor.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize and bargain collectively exists for
 almost all industrial workers in Turkey. The Constitution,
 the Labor Law, and the Collective Bargaining, Strike, and
 Lockout Laws make these rights clear. Most industrial
 activity is organized, as well as some public sector
 agricultural activities.
 
 
 1211
 TURKEY
 The law favors established unions by requiring that a union
 must have as members 10 percent of the workers in a given work
 branch as well as 50 percent plus one of the workers at a
 given work site in order to become a bargaining agent. There
 is no agent election. The union submits its membership roll
 to the Ministry of Labor and requests certification as the
 bargaining agent. Once certified, the union receives dues,
 check-off privileges, and compensatory payment from nonunion
 members. The employer must enter good-faith negotiations with
 the certified union.
 In the organized sector of the economy, collective bargaining
 is the norm. Even in those sectors in which there is no right
 to strike (for reasons relating to national security, broadly
 defined, or in newly established free trade zones) collective
 bargaining, followed if necessary by binding arbitration, is
 the rule.
 Unions complain that the ban on strikes outside the collective
 bargaining process makes it impossible to protect members
 against retribution for organizing or performing other union
 functions. Charges of employer retribution against union
 activists may be raised in labor courts, which most employers
 regard as fundamentally prolabor. Few incidents of antiunion
 discrimination are reported.
 Although organization and collective bargaining are permitted
 in newly established, duty-free zones near Adana and Antalya,
 workers in those zones will not be allowed to strike until
 1994 (10 years after the zones were legally established).
 Until that date, differences between union and employer which
 cannot be settled otherwise will be determined by binding
 arbitration. Workers in these zones are paid in foreign
 exchange rather than in Turkish currency.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution and labor laws forbid employment of children
 younger than 14 years of age and require those above 14 who
 are in school to have their work hours adjusted accordingly.
 The Constitution also prohibits women and children from
 engaging in physically demanding jobs, such as underground
 mining, and from working at night. The Ministry of Education
 and Sports enforces the laws effectively in the organized
 industrial area.
 In practice, many children work in Turkey. In the major
 cities, many young boys shine shoes and sell pretzels and
 sandwiches on the street. In family-owned businesses,
 including restaurants, boys visibly younger than 14 work long
 hours as busboys. Rural families frequently need the small
 income their children can generate by working outside the
 family.
 In addition there is an informal and essentially unsupervised
 apprentice system, in which young boys work at low wages in
 hopes of learning a trade. Auto repair shops frequently have
 underage helpers. Girls, because of traditional efforts to
 shield them from public view, are rarely seen in such
 circumstances, but many are kept out of school to work at
 
 
 1212
 TURKEY
 home, especially in rural areas, and may also be employed
 while under age in the manufacture of handicrafts and rugs.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A tripartite group made up of representatives of labor,
 Government, and employers sets an annual minimum wage. On
 July 1, the monthly minimum wage was raised from $45 to $76 at
 the exchange rate of November 1988. Take-home wages rose from
 $30 to $51 per month. Inflation and rapid devaluation of the
 Turkish currency against the U.S. dollar had reduced its
 international value significantly by year's end.
 The minimum wage is effectively enforced. unions argue
 annually that the minimum wage should be set to reflect the
 needs not just of the worker, but of a worker and three
 dependents. Most workers, however, earn considerably more
 than the minimum wage, which generally is restricted to those
 new to the work force or those providing temporary or
 part-time services. It would be difficult for a single worker
 to live on the minimum without support from other sources, and
 it would be impossible to raise a family on it. It should be
 noted, however, that workers also receive a hot meal daily (or
 a food allowance), transportation to and from work, a fuel
 allowance, and other fringe benefits which make the salary
 only about one-third of total remuneration.
 The Constitution provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek and
 mandates a right to leisure. Most unions have bargained for
 fewer hours in the workweek, both to produce more leisure time
 and to ensure more overtime, which earns premium pay. Labor
 law limits the number of overtime hours a worker may be
 required to work to 270 per year.
 Occupational safety and health regulations are nominally
 mandated by the Constitution. In practice, limitations on
 financial resources and knowhow, lack of safety awareness,
 fatalism, and carelessness often lead workers and employers to
 eschew basic devices, frequently resulting in poor
 occupational safety and health records. To date, the
 Government has not carried out an effective inspection and
 enforcement program.
 
 
 1213
