 TURK~EY
 Turkey is a republic with a multiparty parliamentary system
 and- a relatively strong presidency. The Grand National
 Assembly elected Prime Minister. Turgut Ozal as President to
 succeed Kenan Evren in November. Yildirim Akbulut of the
 right-of-center Motherland Party, which won a 5-year mandate
 in national elections in 1987, became Prime Minister. In
 nationwide municipal elections held in March, the Motherland
 Party obtained 21 percent of the vote. Opposition parties
 have so far called unsuccessfully for early elections.
 The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma in
 the countryside are responsible for maintaining public order.
 A legal "state of emergency" continues to exist in eight
 provinces in the southeast, where the Turkish Government is
 combatting Kurdish terrorists. The state of emergency allows
 the civilian governors to exercise certain quasi-martial law
 powers.
 Turkey has a mixed economy with state-owned, publicly owned,
 and privately owned companies and a significant agricultural
 sector. The Government has liberalized the economy in recent
 years ani given it a strong, free market, export orientation.
 Approximately 80 percent of 1989 exports were industrial
 goods. After ,several years of rapid growth, the economy has
 stalled, and'the gross national product grew at a rate of less
 than 1 percent in 1989. Unemployment, running at approximately
 15 percent, and inflation, which climbed to an annual rate of
 75 percent in 1989, remain serious problems.
 Although Turkey in 1988 ratified the United Nations and the
 European Conventions Against Torture, continuing instances of
 torture were the principal human rights problem in 1989.
 Other concerns included restrictions on incommunicado
 detention, use of excessive force against noncombatants in
 effort  to suppress Kurdish terrorists, freedom of expression,
 and various forms of discrimination against Kurds. Charges of
 tortuie persisted. Almost altyays, they arose out of police
 interrojations that took place during preliminary
 investigations when suspects were held in incommunicado
 detention and before they had been allowed access to counsel.
 Draft legislation introduced in September to allow detainees
 access to legal counsel within 24 hours was preempted by a
 Prime Ministry circular ordering detainee access to attorneys,
 but most detainees do not receive immediate access in
 practice. Also in September, the Government submitted a bill
 to Parliament which would shorten the time a detainee may be
 held for investigatory interrogation. In November, the main
 opposition Social Democratic Populist Party submitted to
 Parliament draft legislation to repeal Articles 141, 142, and
 163 (so-called thought crimes). The Justice Committee is
 currently considering it. At year's end, the Government was
 edging toward its own proposal to amend these three articles.
 The Government may ease some provisions but now appears
 unlikely to support full repeal. The Government announced its
 intention to consult with the two opposition parties
 represented in Parliament while drafting a proposal. The
 Government also announced that it would accept decisions of
 the European Court of Human Rights without reservation.
 The press is active and criticizes the Government vigorously.
 But certain penal code articles and laws restrict full freedom
 of expression, both for individual persons and the press. in
 December President Ozal acknowledged publicly the.need to
 
 
 1261
 TURKEY
 change these laws but said time is needed to develop a
 national consensus. Prosecutors continue to apply these laws
 aggressively although court decisions in general continue to
 expand the scope of press and individual freedom of
 expression. Women enjoy full legal equality with men but
 continue to be subject to economic and other discrimination
 owing to traditional social attitudes.
 The Government rejects the assertion of a separate cultural
 identity for Muslim groups, such as those of Kurdish ethnic
 origin. Publishing materials in Kurdish or writing about
 Kurdish history is prohibited and has resulted in
 imprisonment, and entertainers have been arrested for singing
 Kurdish songs in public performances. However, political
 leaders and the Parliament are now discussing Kurdish issues
 more openly. Parliamentarians of all parties, including some
 members of the ruling Motherland Party, have called for easing
 restrictions on speaking Kurdish and expressions of Kurdish
 culture. The opposition Social Democratic Populist Party
 introduced a repeal bill to Parliament in November, but no
 action had been taken by year's end.
 RESPECT FOR HU4AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known politically motivated, unlawful killings
 instigated by government or political opposition groups.
 There have been allegations of death by torture of detainees
 in police custody (see Section l.c.). Kurdish terrorists
 active in the southeast murdered numerous fellow Turks of
 Kurdish origin; and Jandarma searches for Kurdish Workers
 Party (PKK) terrorists are alleged to have resulted in
 expulsions, beatings, torture, and arbitrary killings of
 innocent civilians (see Section l.d.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances caused by government forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Article 17 of the 1982 Turkish Constitution states that "no
 one shall be subjected to torture or ill treatment
 incompatible with human dignity." In 1988 Turkey ratified
 both the Council of Europe Convention for the Prevention of
 Torture and the U.N. Convention Against Torture. However,
 credible allegations of torture continued in 1989. A
 carefully researched report by the New York Bar Association in
 1989 concluded that torture was widespread in Turkish police
 stations and that the Government thus far has taken only
 limited steps to implement its obligations under pertinent
 .international conventions. Suspects in common and political
 crimes frequently appear to be tortured by the police during
 initial interrogations while held incommunicado. Critics and
 former detainees accused the police of employing such methods
 as beatings on the soles of the feet, cold water hoses,
 electric shocks, and hanging by the arms. Where torture did
 not occur, they charged that beatings and psychological abuse
 were common. Contacts with former detainees and others
 indicate that these sorts of abuse did, in fact, occur.
 
 
 1262
 TUREY
 Allegations of torture are difficult to prove or disprove
 since government-ordered medical examinations generally take
 place after signs of abuse would have disappeared. The Ankara
 Medical Association in June banned one doctor for 6 months
 because she had allegedly issued certificates saying detainees
 had not been tortured, when in fact they had.
 In September the parliamentary Justice Committee, with the aid
 of experts from the Ministry.of Justice, initiated draft
 legislation which could effectively eliminate the practice of
 incommunicado detention by allowing detainees prompt access to
 legal counsel and by permitting lawyers to be present during
 police interrogations. In September a Prime Ministry circular
 ordered prosecutors to allow detainees immediate access to
 counsel. According to the circular, suspects detained for
 individual crimes are allowed access to an attorney within 24
 hours, and those detained for collective crimes are allowed
 such access within 48 hours. Thus far, few detainees have
 benefited from the circular because, in practice, the
 prosecutor's office must approve the suspect's request to see
 an attorney. In October the Ministry of Justice clarified the
 circular--although to what effect is unclear--stating that
 prosecutors should not deny detainees' requests to meet with
 their attorneys.
 In September the Council of Ministers introduced a bill in
 Parliament to reduce the period a suspect could be detained
 prior to formal arraignment in State Security Court and
 criminal cp.rt cases from 15. to a maximum of.10 days,, In
 "collective" or group conspiracy crimes, detention would last
 4 days, extendable up to 10 days if requested by the
 prosecutor. Those accused of individual crimes could be held
 only 48 hours. The proposal would not take effect in the
 eight southeastern provinces currently under a state of
 emergency. Here authorities could continue to hold detainees
 up to 3Q days.. The Government also announced it would accept
 the European Court of Human Rights' decisions without
 reservation.
 Government officials in 1989 still asserted that torture was
 neither widespread nor systematic. Compared to the nature and
 number of torture allegations, however, the number of actual
 prosecutions was low and the sentences disproportionately
 mild. In October two police officials from Hatay were
 sentenced to prison terms of 4 years and 3 months for a
 torture-death in 1985. -Accused officials are generally
 allowed to work and draw salaries until convicted, and they
 may benefit from the Turkish law that reduces all sentences by
 one-third for good behavior.
 It is unclear how many, if any, people died of torture during
 1989. In one claim filed with the Turkish Human Rights
 Association, the petitioners asserted that Adem Satilmis,
 accused of theft, died in the Ankara Central Prison on May 30
 as a result of torture administered in the course of an
 interrogation the week before. The examining doctor's report
 noted that the cause of death was "suspicious."
 In February the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, trying to refute
 Amnesty International claims that more than 100 people died of
 torture while being detained in Turkish prisons in the 1980's,
 issued a statement that police had found evidence of torture
 in "only" 32 deaths, 3 of which occurred in 1988. In a later
 clarification, it declared that "only" 14 deaths could be
 
 
 1263
 ascribed to torture, though investigation into 12 other cases
 was continuing.
 Torture is not practiced in Turkey's prisons. However,
 Jandarma and guards have beaten prisoners in the course of
 searches, particularly following the discovery of escape
 tunnels. Two prisoners who had been participating in an
 organized hunger strike died in the course of being
 transferred to another prison. The authorities ascribed their
 deaths to dehydration, but others allege the two had been
 beaten.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except in limited circumstances, such as when a person is
 caught in the act of committing a crime, a prosecutor must
 issue a detention order. This can lead to 15 days of
 detention under present legislation. In provinces under a
 state of emergency (currently 8 in the southeast), the
 detention period may be extended to 30 days. Once formally
 charged, a detainee is arraigned before a judge and allowed to
 retain a lawyer.
 Under existing legislation, a detainee's next of kin must
 normally be notified "in the shortest time" after arrest. A
 detainee does not have the right to bail; the arraigning judge
 may release the accused on presentation of an appropriate
 guarantee or order him held in preventive detention if the
 court determines that he is likely to flee or destroy evidence.
 The Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request
 "speedy conclusion of arraignment and trial." Nevertheless,
 judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained
 while their cases progress, sometimes for a number of years.
 While many cases involve persons accused of violent crimes,
 others involve simple membership in illegal organizations.
 There is no formal external exile. The Government has refused
 to renew the passports of a number of Turks'working abroad who
 have refused to return home to face court charges or perform
 military service. These persons may apply to the Interior
 Ministry for permission to return to Turkey. Internal exile
 is legal but is rarely invoked.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Turkish court system and judicial procedures are modeled
 on Italian (criminal) and Swiss (civil) law codes. Defendants
 normally have the right to an open trial.
 The Constitution declares that judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties and provides for the security of
 their tenure. It also prohibits authorities from giving
 orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial
 -power. In many instances, charges brought by the prosecutors
 are dismissed by the courts.
 Eight state security courts try defendants accused of
 terrorism or other offenses against the security of the State,
 including drug smuggling and membership in an illegal
 organization. The same standards of evidence and general
 rules of procedure are required as in ordinary courts. A
 conviction or acquittal in either system may be appealed. If
 
 
 1264
 an appeals court overturns a lower court's guilty verdict, the
 case is sent back to the lower courts for reconsideration. If
 the lower court insists on its original verdict, the case is
 returned to the appeals court for a binding opinion. The
 court provides counsel for indigents in all cases.
 In some cases, particularly capital cases, appeals to the
 Supreme Court or to the High Court of Military Appeals are
 mandatory and automatic. If a death sentence is confirmed by
 an appeals court, it must be approved by the Council of
 Ministers, then by the Parliament, and finally by the
 President. No death sentence has been carried out since 1984.
 Two martial law courts in Istanbul and Ankara are still
 conducting trials relating to arrests made during the martial
 law regime following the 1980 military takeover of power.
 Most of these arrests date from the early 1980's. At least
 one mass trial involving Dev-Sol (Revolutionary Left), with
 1,400 defendants, is still continuing in Istanbul. The total
 number of defendants in detention being tried or awaiting
 trial in the martial law courts probably numbers several
 thousand.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Government officials may enter a private residence and
 intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance
 of a judicial warrant.
 In the eight provinces under a state of emergency, the
 governor (or regional governor) may empower authorities to
 search residences or the premises of political parties,
 businesses, associations, and other organizations without a
 warrant. Authorities may also search, hold, or seize without
 warrant persons, letters, telegrams, and documents. There is
 some evidence that these powers have been used for political
 purposes, particularly against activists involved in
 opposition parties and the labor movement.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Since 1984 several thousand violent Kurdish separatists,
 mostly members of the illegal PKK, have conducted a campaign
 of terrorism in southeast Turkey against security forces as
 well as against fellow Turks of Kurdish origin who do not
 support them. According to November government figures, 193
 security force members and 326 civilians have been killed in
 terrorist incidents in the southeast since July 1987. In the
 same period, security forces killed 308 terrorists. The
 summer of 1989 saw an expansion of PKK activity, despite
 extensive security operations and government efforts to create
 better economic conditions for the inhabitants of the region.
 Attempts by security forces to evacuate some'villages in order
 to facilitate operations were halted after well-publicized
 public outcries. Other villagers claimed that the activities
 of both the PKK and government security forces compelled them
 to leave their homes. Villagers complain that Jandarma
 searches for PKK terrorists and for evidence of local support
 for them have resulted in expulsions, beatings, torture, and
 arbitrary killings of innocent civilians. In January
 
 
 1265
 villagers in Yesilyurt in southeastern Turkey accused Jandarma
 members of having tortured them and having forced them to eat
 human excrement. A Jandarma major is currently on trial for
 his involvement in this incident.
 In July opposition Social Democrat Populist Party deputy Fuat
 Atalay and the victim's family claimed that Osman Esendemir, a
 villager from Siirt province suspected of being a PKK member,
 had been tortured and killed by village guards under the
 command of local security forces.
 In August the governor of a province under a legal state of
 emergency expelled eight people from the area for a period of
 up to 3 months. The action was extensively reported and
 criticized in the print media; the regional governor affirmed
 that it is unlikely this power will be invoked again and
 suggested the length of expulsion might be reduced.
 In September the Government opened an investigation into the
 killing of six villagers by security forces near Silopi in
 southeastern Turkey. Villagers claimed that the six were
 innocent and not PKK terrorists as the security forces claimed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Turks are generally free to speak their mind. The press,
 which is in private hands and which reflects a wide spectrum
 of opinion, does not hesitate to criticize the Government.
 There is no government newspaper; all papers reflect
 opposition views to a greater or lesser extent.
 Nonetheless, a number of restrictions on freedom of speech
 exist. The criminal code has longstanding prohibitions on
 speech or writing considered threatening to the democratic and
 secular system of government and the security of the State.
 These proscriptions apply to: advocacy or activities on
 behalf of a government based on class or racial domination
 (e.g., communism or fascism); the establishment of a
 theocratic state (e.g., Islamic fundamentalism); or the
 creation of a separate state on ethnic lines (e.g., Kurdish
 separatism). Violations of these articles may result in the
 death penalty, although in practice no one has been sentenced
 to death in recent years for violating Articles 141, 142, or
 163. A government-sponsored bill in Parliament in September
 proposed that the death penalty no longer apply to such
 offenses.
 While it is permissible to criticize government leaders or
 policies, the criminal code also provides penalties for those
 who "insult the President, the Parliament, and the Army,"
 ranging from a 3-year minimum sentence for insulting the
 President to a 6-year maximum for insulting the other branches
 of government. Judges have generally been rigorous in
 examining the evidence and have dismissed many charges brought
 under these laws, but aggressive application of the law by
 prosecutors has resulted in arrest and long and expensive
 trials in many cases.
 Public prosecutors have used these laws to harass dissidents,
 real or imagined. To cite one example, a 15-year-old high
 school student was detained for 3 months on a charge of having
 spread "Communist propaganda" by Orawing a Soviet flag and
 writing "long live the workers" in his school notebook. The
 
 
 1266
 prosecutor asked for a sentence of 7 1/2 to 15 years. The
 student was acquitted by a court in October, but only after
 missing a year of school.
 Publications must designate a "responsible editor" who is
 legally accountable for a publication's contents. Many have
 faced repeated criminal proceedings. Fatma Yazici, one-time
 responsible editor for the leftist magazine, Toward the Year
 Two Thousand, was sentenced in absentia to 6 years and 3
 months in prison for publishing an article entitled "Decisions
 of the Kurdish Workers Party Conference." Ms. Yazici faces a
 total of 17 1/2 years' imprisonment for four convictions
 related to her editorial activities. She has not surrendered
 for sentencing and is presumed to have gone into hiding. On
 the 'other hand, the Istanbul State Security Court acquitted
 Milliyet reporter Mehmet Ali Birand and responsible editor
 Eren Guvener in April for having published a series of
 interviews in Syria with PKK leaders.
 Obscenity laws have resulted in the confiscation and banning
 of numerous publications and films, among them a Turkish
 reissue of Henry Miller's "Tropic of Capricorn." Libel laws
 have halted newspaper articles critical of government leaders,
 including a series highly critical of then Prime Minister Ozal
 that appeared in the mass-circulation newspaper Sabah in
 April. At the same time, an equally critical book on the then
 Prime Minister has headed the Turkish bestseller list during
 the past year.
 The number of people held under laws restricting speech and
 political activities is difficult to estimate but may total
 5,000 at the current time. Further breakdowns are difficult
 to obtain. Some are held or convicted for their writings or
 ideas; others are held under these laws for being members of
 proscribed organizations or acting upon their ideas in a way
 deemed detrimental to the security of the State. According to
 a newspaper article appearing in February, 26 editors were
 currently serving sentences, and 2,792 writers, translators,
 and journalists had been prosecuted since the Motherland Party
 came to power in 1983. The vast majority of those held under
 these laws are leftist, but a number of rightwingers,
 generally religious conservatives, are being held as well.
 Turkish radio and television (TRT) is a government monopoly.
 Opposition figures and many of their supporters believe that
 TRT's broadcasts and news coverage have a strong progovernment
 bias, despite coverage of opposition leaders and their
 parties. A government commission apportions party access to
 television and radio during election and referendum campaigns
 based on the percentage of parliamentary seats each party
 holds. Works of certain leftist writers and Kurdish
 performers are said to be banned from broadcast on TRT for
 political or cultural reasons.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior approval from the
 authorities. Requests for such assemblies are generally
 granted, but assemblies are restricted to sites chosen by the
 authorities.
 The law on associations reflects concern over the involvement
 of some organizations in the violence which preceded the
 military intervention of 1980. It prohibits associations from
 having ties to political parties or engaging in political
 
 
 1267
 
 TUREY
 activity. Associations must submit their charters for
 government approval before they are allowed to form.
 The Constitution and the law governing political parties
 proscribe student and faculty involvement in political
 activities. Political parties may not form youth branches.
 Students and professors, however, may participate in politics
 and political parties as individuals, and a number of
 academicians have been elected to Parliament.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of-Religion
 Turkey is a secular state. The Constitution provides for
 freedom of belief, freedom of worship (if in a public
 building, the building must be specifically designated for
 this purpose and approved of by the State), and private
 dissemination of one's religious ideas.
 Turkey's population is overwhelmingly Muslim. Although Turkey
 is a secular state, religious instruction, heavily weighted
 toward Islamic prayer rituals, is compulsory for all students,
 Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
 Prosecutors view proselytization and religious activism on the
 part of Islamic fundamentalists and Christian evangelicals
 with suspicion, especially when their activities are seen to
 have political overtones. Islamic fundamentalists have been
 charged with membership in illegal oiganizations or advocating
 a theocratic state. Courts dismissed all charges brought
 against Turkish and foreign evangelical Christians in 1988.
 The police, nevertheless, have on occasion refused to renew
 evangelicals' residence permits or have taken steps to expel
 them from the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Turkish citizens enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey and
 are generally free to travel abroad. The Constitution
 provides that a citizen's freedom to leave may be restricted
 on account of the national economic situation, civic
 obligations (generally military service), or criminal
 investigation or prosecution.
 During the spring and summer of 1989, Turkey generously
 accepted an influx of over 300,000 Bulgarian Turks escaping a
 forcible assimilation policy in Bulgaria that dented them the
 right to use their names, their language, and their cultural
 identity. Turkey has pledged to receive and resettle, over
 time, all such people coming from Bulgaria. At year's end
 about 70,000 had returned to Bulgaria. Some 35,000 Iraqi
 Kurdish refugees who arrived in the late summer of 1988 remain
 in camps in the southeast. Of the 60,000 Iraqi Kurds who
 .originally came, a few thousand have returned to Iraq; over
 20,000 went to Iran; and slightly over 300 have been resettled
 in France. Several hundred thousand Iranians remain in
 Turkey. Turkey serves as a de facto country of first asylum
 and safe haven for many of them; it neither grants them legal
 refugee status nor requires visas.
 
 
 1268
 TURKEY
 Section 3 . Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Turkish citizens have the right and ability to change their
 government peacefully, within certain legal constraints.
 Turkey has a multiparty, presidential parliamentary system.
 Three parties are represented in Parliament: the governing
 Motherland Party, and the opposition Social Democratic
 Populist and the Correct Way parties. The opposition parties
 are vigorous and outspoken. Elections for public office are
 on the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for those over 21
 and a secret ballot.
 Turkey's President is elected by Parliament for a single
 7-year term. Prime Minister Turgut Ozal was elected President
 on October 31, 1989.
 Parliamentary seats are allocated on a weighted proportional
 representation basis. Under a "barrage" system, the Turkish
 election law excludes parties obtaining less than 10 percent
 of the total national vote. This measure is intended to
 prevent political fragmentation and recurrence of the
 parliamentary paralysis of the late 197G's. The law is
 designed to allow a party which obtains a plurality of the
 popular vote to obtain a strong majority in Parliament. In
 the November 1987 parliamentary elections, a 36-percent
 plurality of the popular vote gave Prime Minister Ozalls
 Motherland Party 292 seats (65 percent) in the 450-member
 unicameral Parliarment.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and
 women. -Members of'minorities, Muslim and non-Muslim, face no
 legal limitations on political participation.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions placed, on representatives of private
 organizations who wish to monitor human rights in Turkey.
 They are free to speak with private citizens. The Government
 continues to be ambivalent toward these groups because of its
 belief that their reports are biased. Consequently, access to
 government officials or facilities may be refused or
 restricted. The Government refused to cooperate with a visit
 by Helsinki Watch representatives investigating Turkish prison
 conditions in March, but cooperated with a visit in May by a
 delegation from the New York City Bar Association
 investigating Turkey's'compliance with the U.N. Convention
 Against Torture.
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association, officially
 approved in 1987, has branches in provincial cities and
 organizes discussions, publications, rallies, and petitions.
 The Social Democratic Populist Party, the principal opposition
 party, has a human rights committee and has actively pursued
 human rights issues in Parliament. Members of the main
 rightwing opposition party, the Correct Way Party, as well as
 leading figures in the ruling Motherland Party, have also
 spoken out against human rights abuses.
 Under the European and U.N. Conventions against Torture, which
 Turkey has ratified, committees or rapporteuLs are allowed to
 visit all places of detention at any time, following
 notification to the Government. In August Senators DeConcini
 
 
 1269
 TURKEx
 and Lautenberg of the U.S. Commission of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe visited a prison in Ankara
 and interviewed a number of prisoners.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state,
 regards all Turkish citizens as equal, and prohibits
 discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. The
 Treaty of Lausanne also guarantees the rights of Turkey's
 non-Muslim minorities. Among the non-Muslim religious groups,
 there are some 50,000 Armenians, 20,000 Jews, 20,000 Syriac
 Christians, 18,000 Arab Orthodox, 6,000 Greek Orthodox, and
 several thousand Roman Catholics and Chaldean Christians.
 Members of these minorities are heavily represented in
 business and the professions. These groups operate churches,
 monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious
 foundations, such as hospitals and orphanages, but have faced
 a number of restrictive bureaucratic policies and procedures
 governing their activities and institutions. The expropriation
 of church buildings and church-owned property, largely by
 municipal governments, has been a serious problem for several
 Christian communities in Hatay Province.
 Since the attempted Allied partition of Turkey and a number of
 tribal rebellions in the eastern part of the country during
 and following the First World War, Turkish governments,
 beginning with Ataturk, have sought to assimilate the
 country's various ethnic groups into the mainstream of Turkish
 society. As a result, a variety of Turkish laws and practices
 make it difficult, especially for Muslim ethnic or sectarian
 minorities, to maintain fully distinct or separate identities
 within Turkish society. The Government believes that to
 permit such groups as the Kurds to do so could eventually
 bring the unity of the State into question. For the
 Government, the violent separatist demands of PKK terrorists
 dramatize such a threat.
 Millions of Turkish Kurds have emigrated to industrialized
 cities in the western part of the country and are fully
 integrated into the political, economic, and social life of
 the nation. Most parliamentary representatives from
 southeastern Turkey are ethnic Kurds, whatever their party
 affiliation. So are *a number of ministers, including Interior
 Minister Abdulkadir Aksu and State Minister Kamran Inan.
 While Prime Minister, President Ozal publiciy referred to his
 Kurdish background.
 Nevertheless, the Government's pursuit of full assimiliation
 has led to the proscription of the publication of any book,
 newpaper, or other material in the Kurdish language. Neither
 are materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and
 ethnic identity permitted, and there have been instances of
 the arrest of entertainers for singing songs or performing in
 Kurdish. While some forms of cultural activity are permitted,
 -the foregoing limits on cultural expression are a source of
 genuine discontent to many Turks of Kurdish origin,
 particularly in the economically less developed southeast,
 where they are in the majority.
 There are no restrictions on the private use of Kurdish, and
 the regional governor of the southeast affirmed several times
 during 1989 that the use of Kurdigh does not connote
 "separatism." In 1988 the Government began to permit
 
 
 1270"
 Kurdish-speaking prisoners to converse in Kurdish with their
 lawyers or visitors. However, court proceedings still must be
 conducted in Turkish, and the poor quality of court-provided
 translators sometimes disadvantages Kurdish defendants. The
 opposition Social Democrat Populist Party submitted a bill to
 Parliament that would eliminate restrictions on the use of
 Kurdish, including in publications, but at year's end
 prospects for its passage were poor.
 The Government has long been a leader in promoting and
 protecting women's rights. Turkish women are accorded equal
 econbmi6 opportuhity, and urban middle-class women benefit
 from a strong tradition of work outside the home. At the same
 time, poor women and those living in rural areas are more
 likely to be bound by discrimination based on tradition.
 Their marriage and property rights are guaranteed by laws
 based on the Swiss Civil Code. However, in many parts of
 Turkey, laws requiring civil marriage are ignored, and
 polygamy, under the form of Islamic marriage, is accepted but
 rarely practiced.
 Violence against women, especially wife beating, is not
 uncommon. The police normally do not intervene in domestic
 disputes. Turks of either sex may file civil or criminal
 charges but rarely try to resolve family disputes in court.
 Turkish law makes no discrimination between the sexes in laws
 concerning violence or abuse, and courts make no distinction
 between men and wonien.
 Section 6' Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Most workers have the right to associate freely and form
 representative unions. Exceptions are public school teachers,
 civil servants, the police, and military personnel. The law
 prescribes that unions and confederations may be founded
 without prior authorization on the basis of a petition to the
 governor of the province where the union's headquarters are to
 be located.
 Unions are indeiehdent of the Government and ruling party.
 however, unions, like other organizations, must have
 government permission to hold meetings or rallies. Unions
 must also allow the police to attend conventions and record
 the proceedings. Union officers may serve no more than eight
 consecutive 3-year terms in a given union position. The
 Constitution requires candidates for union office to'have
 worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union. The
 Government protects the person and property of trade unionists.
 The 1988 amendments to the 1983 labor law clarified the right
 of unions and their officers to express views on issues
 directly affecting members' economic and social interests, but
 did not undo constitutional prohibitions on any union role in
 party politics. Unions may not establish organic or financial
 connections with any political party or other association. In
 practice, union leaders and the executive board of the Turkish
 Confederation of Labor (Turk-Is) have been able to convey
 clearly in election and referendum campaigns their support
 for, or opposition to, given political parties without,
 however, citing parties or candidates by name.
 The Government may not summarily dissolve a union.
 Prosecutors may request labor courts to order a trade union or
 
 
 1271
 
 TURKEY
 confederation into liquidation only if the union has violated
 specified legal norms.
 Except in stipulated industries such as public utilities, the
 ,petroleum sector, life and property protective services,
 sanitation services, and national defense, workers have the
 right to strike. Turkish law and the labor court system,
 however, require collective bargaining before a strike. The
 -law specifies a series of steps a union must take before it
 may legally strike and a similar series of steps before an
 employer may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding mediation is the
 last of those steps. In those sectors in which strikes are
 prohibited, binding arbitration is the last step.
 Once a strike is declared, unions are restricted in the
 actions pickets may take as well as the number of pickets they
 may place at each entrance and exit of a strike site. The
 struck employer may respond with a lockout. However, the
 employer is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using
 administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done by
 strikers. Unions are forbidden to engage in secondary
 (solidarity) strikes, wildcat strikes or general strikes.
 In 1989 there were more than 118 strikes in Tgrkey involving
 some 35,000 workers. All were peaceful, and most were
 resolved by wage and benefit settlements approximating or
 exceeding Turkey's inflation rate of about 73.5 percent.
 There were two particularly long strikes, one for 130 days by
 about 10,200 workers against statepapermaking enterprises,
 which was settled in January 1989; and a 137-day strike by
 some 22,000 workers against two state-owned steel mills,
 settled in September. These two long strikes contributed to a
 new Turkish record of over 2,000,000 lost worker-days in 1989.
 Unions may form or join confederations and international
 bodies. The law reqhires governmental approval to do so and
 prohibits affiliations with organs hostile to Turkey or to
 freedom of religion or belief. Turk-Is, the major Turkish
 labor confederation, has 32 affiliates with a total of some
 1.5 million workers. Turk-Is is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 European Trade Union Confederation. There are a number of
 smaller confederations, the most important of which is
 religiously oriented.Hak-Is, comprised of approximately
 170,000 workers in 6 unions in various-fields. Independent -
 unions also exist, for example, that of the steelworkers and
 the still larger automobile workers, union.
 At its 1989 sessions, the Committee on Freedom of Association
 (CFA) of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 extensively reconsidered the several cases filed against the
 Government alleging violations of ILO Convention,87 on Freedom
 of Association. The cases, some of which go back to 1981,
 concern.the dissolution of-the trade union DISK and its
 affiliates and the trial and imprisonment of their leaders;
 certain provisions of the Turkish Constititution and labor
 laws which the CFA contends violate worker rights; and a more
 recent complaint involving pending charges against the
 President of the Turkish Automobile Workers' Union. Noting
 that the Government continues to cooperate in the proceedings,
 the CFA requested, among other things, that the Government
 expedite a decision on the appeals of the DISK defendants;
 modify the offending provisions of the Constititution and
 laws; and provide details of the charges against the
 automobile union president.
 
 
 1272
 MUBEY
 b. The Right to Organize and, Bargain Collectively
 All industrial workers have the right to organize and bargain
 collectively, and most industrial activity and some public
 sector agyicultural activities are organized. The law
 requires that, in order to become a bargaining agent, a union
 must have 10 percent of the workers in a given industry as
 members as well as 50 percent plus one of the workers at a
 given work site. This has the effect of favoring established
 unions. There is no agent election; the union submits its
 membership roll to the Labor Ministry and requests
 certification as. the collective bargaining agent. Once
 certified, the union receives checkoff privileges, and
 compensatory payment from nonunion members. The employer must
 entdr good-faith negotiations with the certified union.
 In June the ILO Conference approved a special paragraph citing
 Turkey for violation of ILO Convention III, which forbids
 discrimination against'any particular class of workers (i.e.,
 teachers). Undei Turkish law, teachers employed by the State
 may not organize.
 Organization and collective bargaining are permitted in newly
 established, duty-free zones at Mersin and Antalya, but
 workers 'in those zones will not be allowed to strike until
 1994 (10 years after the zones were legally established).
 Until that date, settlements not otherwise reached will be
 determined by binding arbitration. Workers in firms within
 these zones are paid in foreign exchange rather than in
 Turkish currency, giving them a hedge against inflation as the
 Turkish currency depreciates.
 In its 1�89 rNport, the ILO Committee of Experts asserted that
 provisions of Turkish law requiring a union to organize a
 certain percentage of workers in order to negotiate an
 agreement, and giving the Government authority to postpone a
 strike and impose compulsory arbitration, are incompatible
 with Convention 98 on collecive bargaining. The Committee
 asked the'Government to indicate what measures had been taken
 to bring-the legislation into compliance.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution and
 statutes, alid it'is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution and labor laws forbid employment of chirdren
 younger than 15 years of age. The Constitution also prohibits
 women and children from engaging in physically demanding jobs,
 such as underground mining, and from working at night. The
 laws are effectively enforced in the organized industrial area.
 In practice, however, many children work in Turkey. Families
 frequently need the supplementary income their children can
 earn. Many young boys shine shoes and peddle sesame rolls and
 sandwiches on city streets. In family-owned businesses such
 as restaurants, boys visibly younger than 15 work long hours,
 for example, as busboys. In addition, there is an informal
 and essentially unsupervised apprentice system in which young
 boys work at low wages, e.g., in auto repair shops, in hopes
 of learning a trade. Girls are rarely seen in public in work
 circumstances, but many are kept out of school to work on
 
 
 1273
 indoor handicrafts, such as rug weaving, especially in rural
 areas.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set minimum wages at
 least every 2 years, through a minimum wage board. The latter
 is a tripartite government-industry-union body. On August 1,
 Turkey's minimum wage was increased to the equivalent of just
 over $100 monthly at the mid-September exchange rate. The
 previous minimum wage was $56 for industrial workers and $52
 for agricultural workers; this year's changes established a
 unified rate for both categories. Minimum wage workers take
 home roughly $64 per month. The minimum wage is effectively
 enforced.
 Without support from other sources, it would be difficult for
 a single worker and impossible for a family to live only on
 the minimum wage. The minimum wage is.generally paid to
 persons new to the work force or providing temporary or part-
 time services. Most workers earn considerably more. It
 should also be noted that workers receive a hot meal daily (or
 a food allowance), transportation to and from work, a fuel
 allowance, and other fringe benefits which, according to the
 Turkish Employers Association, make basic wages alone only
 about 36 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek and mandates
 a right to leisure. Most unions have bargained for fewer
 hours in the workweek, both to increase premium-pay overtime
 and to obtain more leisure time. Labor law limits the number
 of overtime hours a worker may be required to work to 3 hours
 a day for up to 90 days in a year.
 Occupational safety and health regulations are mandated by
 law, but the Government has not carried out an effective
 inspection and enforcement program. In practice, financial
 constraints, limited safety awareness, carelessness, and
 fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to occupational
 safety and health by workers and employers alike.
 
 
 1274
