 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliament (the Turkish
 Grand National Assembly) which elects the President. Suleyman Eemirel was elect-
 ed President in May 1993. The Head of Government is the P-ime Minister. Tansu
 Ciller, chairperson of the center-right True Path Party (DYP), became Turkey's first
 female Prime Minister in July.
 A state .f emergency declared in 1987 continued in 10 southeastern provinces
 where the Government continued to face terrorist violence from the separatist insur-
 gency of the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) (see Section l.g.). A regional governor
 reLains authority over those 10 provinces, as well as 3 adjacent ones. Tha state of
 emergency allows the civilian governor to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers,
 including restrictions on the press and removal from the area of persons whose ac-
 tivities are deemed hostile to public order. The state of emergency decree with its
 stringent security measures was most recently ren.,wed in November.
 The Turkish National Police -re responsible for maintaining public order in the
 cities, a responsibility which the Jandarma (gendarmerie) carries out in the country-
 side. Acknowledging persistent international, and growing domestic, concern ah:wt
 the actions of these security organs, the Ciller Government renewed the previous
 government's promise to establish a state of law based on respect for human rights
 and put an end to the use of torture by security forces. Despite these pledges, inci.
 dents of to-ture and excessivf3 use of force by security personnel persisted through.
 out 1993.
 The economy grew 7 to 8 percent in 1993. State enterprises account for nearly
 40 percent of Turkey's manufacturing sector, but the Ciller administration has ut--
 dertaken a privatization drive aimed at strengthening Turkey's market orientition.
 The economy continues to suffer from chronic inliation-approximatey 71 percent
 in 1993. High inflation and rapidly growing private consumption, as well as the
 growing costs of the war in the southeast, threaten Turkey's recent economic gains.
 'Turkey's primary human rights problems in 1993 continued to be the trture of
 persons in police or security forces custody during periods of ncommnunicado deten-
 tion and interrogation; use of exc~ssive force against noncombatants by security
 forces; restrictions on freedom of expression and assciation; disappearances and
 "mystery killings" that appear to be politically motivated; and terrorist acts by
 armed separatists, Islamic extremists, and unknown persons. Renewed PKK vio-
 lence in May ended a 2-month cease-fire declared by the PKK but never acknowl-
 edged by the Government. Violence in southeast Turkey has since reached unprecQ.
 
 
 1087
 dented levels. Actions by both Turkish authorities and the PKK contributed to the
 overall deterioration of the human rights situation.
 The 1991 Anti-Terror Law, with its broad and ambiguous definition of terrorism,
 was used to detain alleged terrorists and a broad range of people on the charge that
 their acts or ideas promote separatism and "threaten the indivisible unity of the
 State." In late 1993, the Government sought to expand the definition of terrorism
 under the law and to increase the permissible length of pretrial detention; at year's
 end the law remained in committee.
 The Criminal Trials Procedure Law (CMUK), passed in November 1992
 reaffirmed a common criminal suspect's right to immediate access to legal counsel
 and shortened permissible prearraignment detention to between 1 and 4 days, with
 the possibility of judicial extension to 8 days. Its provisions, however, do not apply
 to those detained under the Anti-Terror Law, nor to those detained within the re-
 gion under a state of emergency whose cases fall under the jurisdiction of state secu-
 rity courts. The law is widely believed to have been effective in improving attorney
 access for common criminals.
 The Constitutional Court in August closed down the People's Labor Party (HEP),
 a pro-Kurdish political party, on grounds that it advocated separatism, and at year's
 end was investigating the successor Democracy Party (DEP) on the same charges.
 In July Parliament annulled the article of the Constitution under which the Govern-
 ment had a monopoly on radio and television broadcasting, opening up the way for
 private radio and television stations to operate legally, though regulating legislation
 has not been passed. In September the Ciller Government establshed by decree a
 human rights undersecretariat and a High Council for Human Rights, but the Con-
 stitutional Court declared unconstitutional the law granting the Government decree
 powers. Several weeks later, upon the application of the opposition political parties,
 the Court annulled the human rights decree, a long with several others. The Govern-
 ment promised to introduce a bill into Parliament to establish the High Council but
 had not done so at year's end.
 In December 1992, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture pub-
 licly condemned Turkey for the widespread ractice of torture and severe ill-treat-
 ment ofpersons in police custody. In November 1993, the United Nations Commit-
 tee on Torture called on Turkey to end what it termed as the systematic torture
 of detainees.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political murders and extrajudicial
 killings in 1993, attributed to both government authorities and terrorist groups, con-
 tinued to occur at the relatively high 1992 rates. Deaths attributed to government
 authorities included those in official custody, those that occurred when security
 forces opened fire on demonstrators, those of suspects in houses raided by security
 forces, and other types of civilian deaths in the southeast. The Human Rights Foun-
 dation of Turkey (HRF) claimed that government security forces were responsible
 for 91 extrajudicial killings in the first 9 months of 1993. A substantial number of
 "mystery killings," in which the assailant's identity was unknown, occurred as well.
 Human rights groups, journalists, and other independent observers continued to al-
 lege the complicity" of security forces in a number of these killings.
 Both local and international human rights organizations reported that 20 persons
 died in suspicious circumstances while in official custody, some allegedly as a result
 of torture. Of these, officials claimed that at least three committed suicide.
 Kutbettin Tekin who was detained by the Jandarma on April 20 in the southeastern
 province of Diyarbakir, reportedly upon his refusal to become a state-paid village
 guard (see Section 1.g.), died while in custody. The Government maintains Tekin
 was arrested for PKK membership. Jandarma officials claimed he committed sui-
 cide, but his relatives and the HRF maintain Tekin died during torture. According
 to the Government, the public prosecutor initiated an inquiry into Tekin's death. Po-
 lice detained Vakkas Dost in Istanbul for unruly behavior, interrogated him at a
 nearby police station, and later told his relatives that he had died suddenly. Dost's
 family alleged that the police had tortured him to death and requested a formal in-
 vestigation. Nurettin Ozturk, a policeman, was taken into custody and charged with
 torture in connection with the incident. After the court released Ozturk on his own
 recognizance, he disappeared and an arrest order was issued. The trial continued
 as of the end of the year. The Izmir state security court prosecutor opened an inves-
 tigation into claims that Baki Erdogan, who died on September 22 in the custody
 of the Aydin Security Directorate, had been tortured to death. By law, authorities
 are obliged to investigate all death cases, but prosecutions of security force members
 
 
 1088
 for deaths in custody rarely occur. The case of Yucel Ozen, reported in 1992, is still
 continuing. In the Basalak case, also reported in 1992, a case is under way against
 11 police officers.
 Human rights groups and parliamentarians continued to accuse Turkish security
 forces of carrying out extrejudicial killings during_ raids on alleged terrorist safe
 houses rather than trying to arrest the occupants. During the first 9 months of the
 year, more than 40 people died in house raids, according to human rights groups.
 They noted that, while the authorities announced that the suspects were killed in
 shootouts, eyewitnesses often reported that no shots were fired by the suspects. Sig-
 nificantly, security forces are rarely killed or injured in the raids. Local human
 rights groups cited, for example a March 24 raid on an alleged Dev Sol (Devrimci
 Sol or the Revolutionary Left, a Marxist-Leninist terrorist group) safe house in Is-
 tanbul, in which police killed three suspects, and an April 23 shoot-out with alleged
 Dev Sol terrorists in Tunceli province, where security forces killed 12; A deputy of
 the Socialist Democratic Populist Party (SHP) claimed 6 of the dead were killed
 after they had surrendered.
 Security forces also continued to be charged with using deadly force against un-
 armed civilians participating in peaceful demonstrations. In two separate incidents
 (in Kars and Mus provinces, respectively) during the weekend of August 14-15,
 Turkish security forces took allegedly defensive actions that resulted in the deaths
 of at least 18 civilians and demonstrators, with no security force casualties.
 During the year, a trend was reported in the southeast in which Turkish forces,
 after being attacked by the PKK, retaliated against the closest village or town, ter-
 rorizing or even killing civilians and destroying property and livestock.
 On October 23, after the PKK apparent killed a Jandarma brigadier general in
 Lice, the provincial governor sealed off the town and surrounding area, and the
 Jandarma reportedly retaliated against the village, killing civilians and carrying out
 wholesale property destruction. Human rights organizations estimate that 30 civil-
 ians were killed; the official government figure is 13. Human rights monitors, jour-
 nalists, and the chairman of the Republican People's Party (CHP) were denied ac-
 cess to Lice in the days that followed, and telephone communications with the town
 were cut on October 23. On October 25, the Diyarbakir HRA reported that 28
 wounded persons had been evacuated. Much temporary housing, put in place after
 an earthquake and not yet replaced with permanent housing, was destroyed.
 Another credible allegation of extrajudicial killing concerns six villagers from
 Ozbasoglv reportedly shot by security forces on July 2. Five died, but the sixth sur-
 vived and gave his account of the incident to a Member of Parliament (M.P.) who
 submitted a complaint to the Human Rights Commission of the Turkish Grand Na-
 tional Assembly. As of the end of the year, there has been no response.
 The number of "mystery killings" increased during 1993, with more than 291 civil-
 ians assassinated during the first 9 months of the year. The Turkish Human Rights
 Association (HRA) claimed that 524 people were killed in 1993 by unidentified
 attackers mostly in the eust and southeast of the country. The majority were leaders
 or prominent members of the Kurdish community, including journalists, physicians,
 human rights activists, local politicians, members of the People's Labor Party (HEP)
 and its successor, the Democracy Party (DEP), and others viewed as sympathetic
 to Kurdish causes. Some human rights organizations, religious leaders, Kurdish
 leaders, and local Kurds asserted that the Government acquiesces in, or even carries
 out, the murders of civilians. They cited frequent failures of officials to investigate
 these murders, the fact that some victims' bodies were discovered in "security zones"
 to which only Jandarma or security officials are permitted access, and the fact that
 some victims had previously been detained, abused, or threatened by security forces.
 Human rights groups reported the widespread belief that at least some "mystery
 killings" are carried out by a counterguerrilla group associated with the security
 forces.
 On September 4, unknown persons fatally shot Mehmet Sincar, a DEP M.P. from
 Mardin, and Metin Ozdemir, the local DEP chairman, in the city center of Batman,
 wounded four others, including DEP M.P. Nizamettin Toguc, and escaped. Other
 DEP M.P.'s who were in Batman at the time of the killing reported that they were
 given police security the day before the killing, but the police security presence dis-
 appeared on the morning of the murder. The Government pledged to bring Sincar's
 assassin to justice and immediately arrested a score of suspects, most of whom were
 eventually released. A case was opened against seven suspects alleged to have as-
 sisted in the assassination, but at the end of the year no one had been charged with
 the murder itself. In the past 2 years, at least 54 members of the DEP and its pred-
 ecessor, the HEP, have been assassinated. Amnesty International (AI) states that
 it has received persistent and credible reports of members of security forces threat-
 ening to kill Kurdish activists.
 
 
 1089
 Other mystery killings included Elazig HRA chairman and attorney Metin Can
 and Dr. Hasan Kaya, whose bodies were found in eastern Tunceli province on Feb-
 ruary 27 with their hands tied behind their backs and each with a bullet hole in
 his head. Family and HEP members accused government officials of failing to search
 for the victims once their disappearance had been reported. Kernel Kilic, the Urfa
 representative for the pro-Kurdish daily Ozgur Gundem (Free Agenda) and a found-
 ing member of the Urfa branch of the HRA was shot dead on his way home from
 work. On the day of his death, Kilic had organized a press conference in which he
 denounced the attempts to stop distribution of Ozgur Gundem and the "police's si-
 lence." The body of Ferhat Tepe, 19-year-old Bitlis correspondent for zgur
 Gundem, was identified on August 9 in the Elazig state hospital morgue. Report-
 edly, an anonymous caller told his family after his disappearance on July 28 that
 the so-called Ottoman Turkish Revenge Brigade had kidnaped him. Ozgur Gundem
 and the leftist daily Aydinlik produced witnesses who claimed Tepe had been tor-
 tured to death in the Diyarbakir provincial Jandarma interrogation center. The Gov-
 ernment expressed its condolences on Tepe's death but took no action; it considers
 Tepe's death a mystery murder.
 Iall, five journalists were assassinated in 1993. On January 24 prominent jour-
 nalist and secularist Ugur Mumcu was killed by a bomb that had been placed under
 his car. Three different Islamic groups claimed responsibility for his killing. By
 year's end, none of these murders had been solved.
 On September 21 All Sahap Samk, a teacher in Diyarbakir and member of the
 leftist teachers' union, Egit Sen, was shot and killed by unidentified persons outside
 his home. The Diyarbakir leader of the labor union blamed security forces for the
 murder.
 In most cases, the Government failed to initiate any public inquiry or to press
 charges in connection with these murders. In September the regional governor for
 the southeast asserted that 200 mystery murders which occurred in the region be-
 tween July 1991 and July 1992 had been solved. To date none of the cases has been
 prosecuted, and no evidence has been proferred to back up his claim. In May the
 press reported that the then Interior minister downplayed the 1992 murders of 15
 journalists by claiming that only 4 of the 15 murdered journalists were 'real" jour-
 nalists, and the others were killed as a result of clashes between rival factions in
 the southeast.
 A delegation of the International Federation of Journalists visited Turkey in
 March to investigate the increasing number of unsolved murder cases in the south-
 east; the head of the delegation said PEN believes that Turkey, where 15 journalists
 had been murdered over the last 15 months, posed a major danger to reporters.
 A parliamentary committee investigated the mystery murders in 1993 but had is-
 sued no report by year's end. In early March, an SHP delegation submitted its re-
 port to the Ministry of Justice and suggested assigning a team of public prosecutors
 to Silvan, Batman, Nusaybin, Kiziltepe, and Midyat to investigate the mysterious
 murders. The report said local people had lost their confidence in the current pros-
 ecutors and other officials who have been unable to solve the murders so far. As
 of the end of 1993, the Justice Ministry had issued no public response.
 Political murders carried out by terrorists occurred predominantly in southeast
 Anatolia. Victims of killings almost certainly perpetrated by the PKK included state
 officials (Jandarma, local mayors, and schoolteachers), paramilitary village guards
 (and family members), and persons suspected of supporting rightwing terrorist
 groups. According to Milliyet, a mainstream newspaper, in the period between June
 1992 and June 1993, unidentified assailants murdered 20 teachers in the southeast-
 ern province of Diyarbakir alone. In early January, a gup of alleged PKK mili-
 tants stabbed to death Halis Sisman, an elementary shoolteacher in Yassica vil-
 lage, Bitlis. On September 21, unidentified persons shot and killed primary school-
 teacher Ahmet Arcagok in Diyarbakir. Other victims were found with Turkish lira
 notes stuffed in their mouths, a signal that the person killed was thought to be a
 government collaborator.
 On May 24 the PKK attacked a number of buses killing 33 unarmed recruits in
 civilian clothing, thus ending the PKK's unilateral spring cease-fire. In that action,
 as many as 150 PKK members blocked the Bingol-Elazig highway, stopped buses,
 pulled the recruits from the buses, and executed them. The PKK also targeted state-
 paid village guards. On August 4, for example, the PKK raided a radio relay station
 near Yuksekova in Hakkari province, killing eight soldiers and two village guards.
 Religious officials also were political murder victims. PKK militants on May 4 re-
 portedly kidnaped Abdulselam Eran, imam of Baloglu village, Kulp, from his home
 in Comlekci hamlet, and his body was found near the village a week later. There
 were incidents of religious violence; the worst occurred in Sivas on July 2 when a
 crowd of Islamic fundamentalists set fire to a hotel, killing 37 people. The purported
 
 
 1090
 target of their ire was well-known author and humorist Aziz Nesin, the translator
 of Salman Rushdie's "The Satanic Verses." Nesin escaped, but 37 people perished
 and approximately 100 were injured. The crowd also toppled statues of Ataturk and
 martyred Alawi poet Abdal Pir Sultan. Many criticized the city government and po-
 lice for falling to take adequate security measures in a timely manner, despite prior
 evidence of the potential for such violence.
 Dev Sol, a violent Marxist-Leninist group, though substantially weakened by p-
 lice actions against it in 1991 and 1992, resurfaced in August and September, claim-
 ing responsibility for several shootings including the August 25 assassination of
 Recep Silo, an analyst with the Turkiak National Intelligence Organization, as he
 watched a soccer game at his neighborhood field.
 b. Disappearance.-Disappearances continued to occur in 1993, while, with one ex-
 ception, those reported in 1992 and earlier remained unsolved. Some disappeared
 aer witnesses reported they had been taken into custody by security forces. In
 some of these cases, the person's body was later discovered, as happened in the dis-
 appearance of Ferhat Tepe (see Section L.a.). Ayse Malkac, a correspondent working
 in Ozgur Gundem's Istanbul bureau, disappeared midmorning on August 7 after
 leaving her office and has not been seen since. Eyewitnesses claimed to have seen
 her being detained in the street by plainclothes police officers, but local authorities
 denied taking Malkac into custody. Human rights groups, journalists, and others al-
 leged the complicity of security forces in this and other disappearances.
 PKK terrorists continued their frequent abductions of local villagers, teachers, re-
 ligious figures and officials in the southeast, many of whose bodies were later dis-
 covered. The PK expanded its kidnaping activities to include foreign tourists. Sev-
 eral Western tourists were kidnaped during the summer but eventually released
 unharmed, after periods of captivity ranging from 2 to 5 weeks.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, Turkey's accession to the U.N. and Euro-
 pean Conventions Against Torture, and the public pledges of successive govern-
 ments to do away with torture, the practice continued. Human rights attorneys and
 physicians who treat victims of torture state that most persons charged with, or
 merely suspected of, political crimes suffer torture, usually during periods of incom-
 municado detention in police stations and Jandarma headquarters before they are
 brought before a court.
 Anecdotal evidence suggested that the implementation of the CMUK facilitated
 more immediate attorney access to those arrested for common crimes. However,
 human rights groups have not yet ascertained a related decrease in allegations of
 torture. The U.S.-based Helsinki Watch advised that its reports indicated that tor-
 ture continued to be used in police interrogation centers against about half of ordi-
 nary criminal suspects. CMUK does not apply to those detained under the Anti-Ter-
 ror Law. The HRF reported that there was no indication either of the amelioration
 of treatment of those charged under the Anti-Terror Law or of an overall decrease
 in the incidence of torture in 1993.
 Human rights observers report that the system whereby the arresting police offi-
 cer is also responsible for interrogating the suspect is conducive to torture because
 the officer seeks to obtain a confession that would justify the arrest. According to
 those familiar with Turkish police operations, in petty criminal cases, the arresting
 officer is responsible for following up on the case, whereas in major cases such as
 murder and political or terrorism-related crimes, "desks" responsible for the area in
 question are responsible for the interrogation.
 Credible reports from former detainees and professionals who rehabilitate victims
 state that commonly employed methods of torture include: high-pressure cold water
 hoses, electric shocks, beating of the genitalia, hanging by the arms, blindfolding,
 sleep deprivation, deprivation of clothing, systematic beatings, and vaginal and anal
 rape with truncheons and, in some instances, gun barrels. HRA offices have also re-
 ported the use by police of tiny cells in which detainees are incarcerated for periods
 up to 10 hours to coerce confessions. Within the last 2 months of 1993, the HRF
 received three reports from former detainees who say they have been taken to a de-
 serted construction site and tortured there.
 Nilufer Koc, an interpreter who has lived in Germany for the past 20 years, was
 detained in Sirnak province while accompanyng a German delegation in Turkey.
 She claimed that her torture included being hung by handcuffs from a hook for 2
 hours, repeatedly hosed with cold water while naked, beaten, grabbed by the hair
 and having her head hit against the wall, and a weapon held against her forehead
 and told to make a last wish. Security forces believed her to be involved in PKK
 activities and wanted information about the activities of the PKK in Germany. After
 her release, Koc returned to Germany. The Turkish Government denied there was
 a problem.
 
 
 1091
 Although the Government asserted that medical examinations occur once during
 detention and a second time before either arraignment or release, former detainees
 asserted that some medical examinations took place too long after the event to allow
 any definitive findings, some examinations were cursory, and some were done in the
 presence of police officials. Human rights groups reported that some doctors were
 occasionally under pressure to submit false or misleading medical certificates, deny-
 ing evidence of torture. According to the HRF, practice varies widely; in some cases
 proper examinations are conducted, and in others doctors sign off on papers handed
 to them.
 Authorities do not consistently investigate allegations of such abuses, and per-
 petrators are rarely sanctioned. Credible sources in the human rights and legal com-
 munities estimate that judicial authorities investigate only about one-half of the for-
 mal complaints involving torture and prosecute only a small fraction of those. Law-
 yers report harassment and threats for taking on torture cases, for example, anony-
 mous telephone calls threatening they will suffer the same fate as Metin Can (see
 Section L.a.).
 In one case however, five policemen charged in a 1986 torture case which oc-
 curred in the Sebin Karahisar township of Giresun on the Black Sea coast were sen-
 tenced by the Giresun criminal court to terms ranging from 10 months to 6 years
 and 8 months. Two officers were acquitted. The Court of Appeals upheld the sen-
 tences, leaving the convicted policemen no further legal recourse.
 More typically, if law enforcement officers are convicted of torture, the sentences
 tend to be light, as was the case with three policemen convicted in March by the
 Ankara criminal court. Each received a 3-month prison sentence and was suspended
 from duty for 3 months. In many instances, cases drag on for years. Nazli Top, a
 nurse (pregnant at the time) who alleged she was tortured and raped with a trun-
 cheon during 10 days of detention in April 1992 before police released her without
 charge, filed criminal charges against her alleged torturers, but the case has yet to
 come to trial.
 Under the Anti-Terror Law, officials accused of torture or other mistreatment may
 stay on the job while under investigation and, if convicted, may only be suspended.
 Special provincial administrative boards, rather than regular courts, decide whether
 to prosecute such cases and suspects' legal fees are paid by their employing agen-
 cies. Under the state of' emergency, any lawsuit directed at government authorities
 must be approved by the regional governor, which rarely happens, preventing legal
 pursuit of torture allegations.
 As Turkey has recognized the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human
 Rights, Turks may file applications alleging violations of the European Convention
 on Human Rights with the European Human Rights Commission, and several have
 done so.
 On December 15, 1992, the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of
 Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) issued an un-
 precedented public statement concerning Turkey, noting that torture and other
 forms of severe ill-treatment of persons in police custody remained widespread, that
 such methods were applied to  oth ordinary crimina suspects and persons held
 under antiterrorism provisions, and that torture was a deep-rooted problem. In both
 the Ankara Police Headquarters and the Diyarbakir Police Headquarters, the CPT
 reported finding furniture and equipment consistent with detainees' reports of how
 they were tortured. The CPT recommended several actions it considered necessary
 for the Government to take to deal with the problem and emphasized that legisla-
 tive measures alone would not be sufficient to eradicate the phenomenon of torture.
 On November 19, 1993, the United Nations Committee on Torture called on Tur-
 key to end what it called the systematic torture of prisoners. "The Committee re-
 mains concerned at the number and substance of the allegations of torture received,
 which confirm the existence and systematic character of the practice of torture." The
 Government contested the accuracy of the report and stated that events were taken
 out of context and many examples were unconfirmed.
 The CMUK, which went into effect on December 1, 1992, appeared to improve at-
 torney access to detainees, but its efficacy in decreasing incidents of torture cannot
 yet be ascertained. Human rights groups criticized the CMUK because its allowable,
 maximum, prearraignment detention periods still exceed Council of Europe maxi-
 mums, it codified two different classes of suspects with different rights, and the ar-
 resting officer had the power to determine whether or not the CMUK aplied
 Besides CMUK, the Government did not appear to implement any other major ini-
 tiatives that could contribute to a reduction of abuse. In November the Government
 introduced amendments to the Anti-Terror Law that would, among other things,
 broaden the definition of terrorism and increase the permissible length of incommu-
 
 
 1092
 nicade prearraignment detention. As of the end of the year, the bill was still pend-
 ing in the Parliament's joint Justice-Interior committee.
 As of September 158 applications claiming torture, maltreatment, or arbitrary de-
 tention had been filed with the parliamentary Human Rights Commission (since its
 September 1991 inception), and the Commission had written to the public prosecu-
 tore in the provinces on each case, as well to the governor's office or that of the secu-
 rity directorate general for that province. It is unclear to what extent the Commis-
 sion has followed up on these cases. The HRF's torture rehabilitation centers in An-
 kara, Izmir, and Istanbul reported that, within the first 6 months of 1993 they had
 received a total of 172 applications for treatment.
 Prison conditions-and prison reform-remained an important issue in 1993.
 Prompted by a number of prisoner escapes, as well as hunger strikes by prisoners
 protesting conditions, the Government in February prepared a prison reform bill. As
 of the end of the year, the bill remained with the Justice Ministry and had not yet
 been formally submitted to Parliament.
 Furthermore, while the incidence of torture in prisons has decreased in the last
 few years, there are continued reports of torture.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.-In order to take a person into custody,
 a prosecutor must issue a detention order, except in limited circumstances, as when
 a person is caught in the act of committing a crime. The detention period for those
 charged with common individual crimes is 24 hours. Those detained for common
 collective crimes may be held for 4 days and the detention period may be extended
 for an additional 4 days. Under the CN  K, suspects are entitled to immediate ac-
 cess to an attorney and may meet and confer with the attorney at any time. In prac-
 tice, attorney access under the CMUK improved for detainees charged with common
 crimes.
 Persons detained for individual crimes which fall under the Anti-Terrr Law must
 be brought before a judge within 48 hours, while those charged with crimes of a
 collective, political, or conspiratorial nature may be detained up to 15 days in most
 of the country and up to 30 days in the 10 southeastern provinces under a state
 of emergency. There is no guaranteed attorney access under law. The decision con-
 cerning access to counsel in such cases is left to the independent prosecutor, who
 routinely denies access, usually with the explanation that it would prejudice an on-
 going investigation. The Justice and Interior Ministries generally have not inter-
 vened in prosecutors' decisions or police actions denying access to counsel. Although
 the Constitution specifies the right of detainees to request speedy arraignment and
 trial, judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained indeterminately,
 sometimes for years. While many cases involved persons accused of violent crimes,
 it is not uncommon for those accused of nonviolent political crimes to be kept in cus-
 tody until the conclusion of their trials.
 By law, a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after ar-
 rest. Once formally charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is arraigned by a judge
 and allowed to retain a awyer. After arraignment, the judge may release the ac-
 cused if he presents an appropriate guarantee, such as bail, or order him detained
 if the court determines that he is likely to flee the jurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 The detention of large numbers of people occurred on several occasions in 1993
 including the demonstrations on August 14 and 15 in Digor, Kars province, and
 Malazgirt, Mus province (see Section L.a.). In most such cases, the majority of de-
 tainees are subsequently released without charges being filed.
 In the southeast there were several mass roundups of ethnic Kurds in the wake
 of a crime. For example, after a night watchman was killed in Adana in August,
 within 24 hours, police arrested large numbers of ethnic Kurds (estimates range up
 to 500). Police charged them under the Anti-Terror Law so the CMUK did not apply,
 enabling police to hold them in incommunicado detention for 16 days without access
 to a judge or lawyer (though they were released earlier). Some detainees alleged
 the  were tortured. All were subsequently released without being charged.
 There is no external exile, and Turkey's internal exile law was repealed in 1987.
 In 1990, however under decree 430, the Government granted the southeast regional
 governor the authority to "remove from the region,* for a period not to exceed the
 duration of the state of emergency, citizens under his administration whose activi-
 ties (whether voluntary or forced) "give an impression that they are prone to disturb
 general security and public order." Although there were no known instances of the
 use of this broad authority in 1993, human rights monitors and residents of towns
 in the southeast report credibly that officials continued to rely on "administrative
 transfers" to remove government employees thought liable to "create trouble."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system is composed of general law
 courts, state security courts, and military courts. Three martial law courts also re-
 mained, remnants of the 1980 military coup. Most cases are prosecuted in the gen-
 
 
 1093
 eral law courts, which include the civil, administrative, and criminal courts. Appeals
 are heard either by the High Court of Appeals or the Council of State. There is a
 constitutional court as well. Provincial administrative boards established under the
 Anti-Terror Law decide whether cases in which state officials are accused of mis-
 conduct should be heard in criminal court. Military courts, with their own appeals
 system, hear cases regarding infractions of military law by members of the armed
 forces. In December the Military Court prosecutor ordered the arrest of two tele-
 vision journalists, who hosted a program on military deserters and draft dodgers on
 a private station, arrested for encouraging people to evade compulsory military serv-
 ice. The journalists, who stated that the views they presentd were those of their
 guests, were being tried in military court as of the end of the year. Yhis was the
 first time that civilians have been arrested on the order of a military prosecutor and
 tried in a military court while Turkey was under civilian rule.
 Eight state security courts, composed of five members-two civilian judges, one
 military judge, andtwo prosecutors-try defendants accused of crimes such as ter-
 rrism, dru  smugging, membership in illegal organizations, and espousing or dis-
 seminatingideas prohibited by law as "damaging the indivisible unity of the State."
 Their verdicts may be appealed only to a specialized department of the High Court
 of Appeals dealing with crimes against state security.
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, andpar-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decrees with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war.
 The Constitution requires that judges be independent of the executive in the dis-
 charge of their duties and provides for the security of their tenure. The High Coun-
 cil of Judges and Prosecutors, which is appointed by the President and includes the
 Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts and is re-
 sponsible for oversight of those in the lower courts. The Constitution also prohibits
 state authorities from issuing orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of
 judicial power. In practice, the courts generally act independently of the executive.
 Defendants normally have the right to a public trial, and, under the Constitution,
 can only be proven guilty by a court of law. 'By law, the bar association must provide
 free counsel to indigents who make such a request to the court. Costs are borne by
 the association, although the bar association complained in 1993 that the funds
 promised them by the State for the increased workload resulting from the CMUK's
 implementation had not been forthcoming. There is no jury system; all cases are de-
 cided by a judge or panel of judges.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independent prosecutor's files after
 arraignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving viola-
 tions of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the President or
 "defaming Turkish citizenship," defense attorneys may he denied access to files
 which the State claims deal with national intelligence or security matters.
 In 1993 state security courts predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror
 Law. The State claims these courts were established to try efficiently those sus-
 pected of certain crimes. In fact, however, the law provides that those accused of
 crimes falling under the jurisdiction of these courts may be detained twice as Iong
 before arraignment as other defendants. These courts may hold closed hearings an
 may admit testimony obtained during police interrogation in the absence of counsel.
 According to government figures, 3,792 people were detained under the Anti-Terror
 Law, and 811 eople are serving sentences or violations of its provisions.
 The Constitutional Court, upon examination of the constitutionality of several
 provisions of the Anti-Terror Law, (1) streamlined rocedures and reduced the aver-
 age fines imposed on the press from billions of  trkish lira to millions (approxi-
 mately T.L. 14.000 to $1); (2) returned the assets and properties of the Turkish Con-
 federation of Revolutionary Workers Unions (DISK) on January 27, 1993; (3) struck
 down a provision which had permitted the monitoring of meetings between pris-
 onern involved in acts of violence and their lawyers; and (4) annulled a provision
 which limited to three the number of lawyers permitted to follow a given case in
 the state security court. In September the court struck down the law under which
 the Government. was entitled to issue certain decisions by decree. Shortly thereafter,
 upn application of opposition parties, the Court annulled several government de-
 crees, including one promulgated several weeks earlier to set up a human rights
 undersecretariat. In July the court closed the HEP on the charge that it advocated
 separatism (see Section 2.a).
 At the start of 1993, three Martial Law Courts remained of those established after
 the 1980 coup. They were engaged in completing old cases. On December 27, Par-
 liament passed a bill which ended the Martial Law Courts and transferred their re-
 maining cases to civilian courts. Figures provided by the Government indicate that
 22 cases continued in the three martial law courts as of the end of September.
 
 
 1094
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against either mi-
 norities or women, with the following two caveats: (1) as legal proceedings are con-
 ducted solely in Turkish, and the quality of interpreters varies, some Kurdish-
 speaking defendants may be disadvantaged; and (2) although women receive equal
 treatment in a court of law, some rarely enforced laws remain on the books. For
 example, the husband determines the legal domicile of the family, and a married
 woman needs her husband's consent to be a legal partner in a company. Draft civil
 rights legislation which would have eliminated all existing legal inequalities be-
 tween men and women currently on the books fell victim to interparty wrangling
 and failed to pass in 1993.
 The authorities construe a wide range of political activity, including speeches, pe-
 titions, and demonstrations, as "separatist" in nature, which may lead a politician
 or a political party to be charged under the relevant provisions of the Anti-Terror
 Law. Former deputy speaker of Parliament Fehmi Isiklar was the target of such a
 suit (and in fact lost his seat in Parliament), as was the People's Labor Party (HEP),
 ordered closed by the Constitutional Court in July on just such charges (see Section
 2.a.).
 Because of daily fluctuations in the number of detainees, human rights monitors
 hesitate to offer figures on the number of persons in custody who might reasonably
 be considered political prisoners. They can only estimate that "thousands" have been
 detained. In a January 1993 report, the HRF quoted Ministry of Justice statistics
 released in 1992 as stating that the number of political detainees (those detained
 for political activities, demonstrations, speeches, etc.) in 1991 was approximately
 8,000 persons. Many of them were charged for attempting peacefully to exercise
 their ight of freedom of speech, association, or some other internationally recog-
 nized human right.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile and the privacy of
 correspondence and communication. Government officials may enter a private resi-
 dence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon issuance of a judicial
 warrant. These provisions are generally respected in practice; however, in 1993
 there were several complaints about violations of the privacy of correspondence, spe-
 cifically, the delay in the arrival, or the nonarrival, of printed materials sent from
 abroad.
 In the 10 provinces under a state of emergency, the governor (or regional gov-
 ernor) may empower authorities to search without a warrant residences or the
 premises of political parties, businesses, associations, and other organizations. It
 does not appear that police generally need a document to enter a house. Authorities
 in these provinces may also search, hold, or seize without warrant persons, letters,
 telegrams, and documents, a practice which the HRF states is unconstitutional.
 Roadblocks are commonplace in the southeast, and security officials regularly search
 vehicles and travelers.
 There have been credible reports of forced evacuation and the burning of villages
 in the southeast by security forces allegedly seeking to prevent villagers from giving
 aid and comfort to the PNKK (see Section 1.g.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violatio;ns of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.--Since 1984 the separatist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) has waged an in-
 creasingly violent insurgency that has claimed over 10,000 lives, as many as one-
 third of them during 1993. The PKK's campaign of violence in southeast Turkey is
 directed against both security forces and civilians who the PKK believws cooperate
 with the State. The actions of security forces and PKK terrorists, besides causing
 mutual casuailties, resulted in the deaths of at least several hundred noncombatants
 (as of September 30). The HRF estimates that around 10 to 12 noncombatants are
 killed per day. (See Iraq report for information on the effect- of Turkish raids on
 the PKK in northern Iraq)
 As in past years, PKK terroists attacked rural Jandarma posts, inflicting casual-
 tics, and conducted sporadic nighttime rocket attacks against Turkish towns, aimed
 ostensibly at security establishments, but in fact causing death, injury, and damage
 in surrounding neighborhoods. They continued to burn down schools and kill or
 threaten to kill tea  ers in many districts. A January 1993 report noted that, of' a
 total of 17,000 teachers assigned to schools in the region, 6,000 had not reported
 because of their fear of terrorism and the lack of security. Regional officials con-
 ceded that some teachers had resigned rather than accept their assignments.
 Schools in 1,395 villages were unable to open their doors for the 1992-93 academic
 year, leaving some 500,000 children without primsry school education. At least 600
 schools--100 of which had been burned by the PKK-failed to open for the 1993-
 94 school yeer in southeastern Turkey. In November the PKK issued a threat
 
 
 1095
 against teachers in the southeast. In some instances, the Government ordered that
 schools destroyed by the PKK not be rebuilt.
 There were a series of PKK attacks on oil exploration sites and storage facilities
 during 1992 and continued harassment of oil com pany employees in 1993. Mobil Oil
 ceased production in the southeast after PKK killings an kidnapings of their per-
 sonnel.
 Government security forces on many occasions fired on the homes of villagers sus-
 pected of harboring PICK terrorists, causing an unknown number of casualties and
 destroying villagers' prperty, including livestock. Villagers and human rights
 us complained that the actions of Jandarma and security team searches for
 terrorists and evidence of local support for them resulted in expulsions, beat-
 ings, torture, and the arbitrary killing of innocent civilians. In April Sirnak HEP
 deputy Selim Sadak submitted an interrogatry motion to the office of the speaker
 of Parliament, demanding that the Interior Minister investigate allegations by the
 people of Ormanici, a   age n Sirnak's Guclukonak township, that security forces
 had burned down the village, killed a 5-year-old child, and taken into custody and
 tortured for prolonged periods 43 villagers, one of whom, Ibrahim Ekinci, allegedly
 died under police torture. Villagers were reportedly kept in a construction site near
 Jandarma headquarters for 12 days without shoes or adequate clothing and stripped
 naked for interrogations in subzero temperatures while they were subjected to var-
 ious forms of torture. After having been subjected to falaka (beating on the soles
 of their feet), they were allegedly forced to stand barefoot for days on wet concrete
 in subzero temperatures. Many suffered severe frostbite that subsequently became
 gangrenous, requiring some cases of amputation of toes or feet. Villagers claimed
 they were hosed with cold water, raped with truncheons and bottles, that in some
 cases toenails and fingernails were pulled out with pliers, and that excrement was
 mixed with their food. The people of Ormanici referred their case to the European
 Commission of Human Rights which reportedly decided the case warranted inves-
 tigation. The Government view is that any abuses of the sort alleged must be seen
 against the background of conflict between security forces and PKK terrorists. The
 Eruh public prosecutor is investigating the deaths of a 7-year-old child and of
 Ibrahim Ekinci, as well as the death of another village child and the wounding of
 a third, when a munition dump exploded two days after the incident.
 There were credible reports that government security forces forcibly evacuated
 and burned down villages allegedly to prevent their inhabitants from providing aid
 and comfort to PKK guerrillas. Credible reports also note that security forces, after
 being attacked by the PKK, at times retaliated by attacking nearby villages. In Feb-
 ruary the daily Hurriyet reported that the state of emergency coordination commit-
 tee had decided on several new measures, including evacuation of small, remote set-
 tlements, which the Government claimed had been used by the PKK as shelters or
 bases, and resettlement of the villagers to more centralized places. Other purported
 reasons for the evacuations included the difficulty in protecting the villages against
 terrorist attacks; the inhabitants' fear of being caught in the cross-fire; and the re-
 fusal of village men to participate in the paramilitary village guard system. In Feb-
 ruary the state minister responsible for human rights categorically denied allega-
 tions that security forces were following a scorched earth policy in order to force in-
 habitants to leave their homes. He stated that no villages in the area had been evac-
 uated by force and that villagers left only by "force of circumstances."
 The English-language Turkish Daily News reported that, as of September 17, ap-
 proximately 70 villages and hamlets had been evacuated or burned in 1993. The ar-
 ticle stated that, alt ough the number of torchings had declined after mid-August,
 complaints continued. or example, Kurdish activists claimed that, on September
 12, security forces torched 12 houses and the village mosque in Diyarbakir's Eloxuso
 (Kurdish name) hamlet. The article also reported that President Demirel had or-
 dered a stop to the torching of villages. The HRA estimated that about 400 villages
 had been abandoned in the southeast through March.
 Turkish security authorities have been charged with driving 200 Syriac Christians
 from the village of Hassana in Mardin province in November. According to reports
 from villagers, the order came to evacuate the village because of a statement by a
 local tribal leader that it was an Armenian village, and Turkish officials often ac-
 cuse Armenians of supporting the PKK. The villagers were reportedly moved to a
 neighboring village, to Midyat, and to the city of Mardin. In a separate incident,
 village guards investigating an arson attack on an electricity station in Alagoz vil-
 lage in Mardin province allegedly seized seven Syriac Christian shepherds. The
 seven were released after a night in detention. A resident who saw them after their
 release claimed the shepards had been tortured and one had a cross burnt into his
 chest with molten plastic.
 
 
 1096
 The Government organizes, arms and pays for a civil defense force in the south-
 east known as the vilage guards. Participation in the paramilitary militia by local
 villagers is theoretically voluntary, but villagers are in effect caught between the
 two sides. If the villagers agree to serve, the PKK may target them and their vil-
 lage. If the villagers refuse to participate, government security forces may retaliate
 against them and their village. On June 21, several hundred Jandarma reportedly
 entered the village of Ortasar, Diyarbakir province, where the villagers had refused
 to join the village guard militia rounded up all the inhabitants, male and female,
 and began beating them with their rifle butts. Some villagers were given electric
 shocks and burned with cigarettes. Several were detained, two of whom returned
 the following day "in an unrecognizable state" due to ill-treatment. On June 25, the
 Jandarma returned to the village and threatened to kill any villagers who com-
 plained to newspapers or the local human rights organizations.
 There were also unsubstantiated claims of government forces preventing injured
 villagers or PKK members from seeking medical help, as well as instances of physi-
 cians who were prosecuted for giving medical care to alleged PKK terrorists, a prac-
 tice that could deter other physicians from extending such aid. For example, Dr.
 Ilhan Diken was tried at Diyarbakir state security court for treating a wounded
 PKK militant, an offense for which the court demanded a 5-year sentence. As of the
 end of the year, the case has not concluded.
 Throughout 1993 there were reports of an undeclared food embargo on the towns
 of Uludere and Guclukonak in Sirnak province. Initially, HEP deputies charged that
 security forces had imposed the embargo to intimidate the populace. When a Moth-
 erland Party delegation visited the head of the Siirt HRA branch in February, he
 claimed the embargo had been imposed because state-paid village guards refused to
 continue to serve. As of August, the villages were reported by the mainstream press
 to be suffering a food embargo at the hands of the PKK, which accused their inhab-
 itants of collaborating with the State.
 In mid-March the PKK declared a unilateral cease-fire; it claimed it no longer in-
 sisted on an independent Kurdish state and wanted to pursue its objectives through
 the democratic channels available in Turkey. For the most part, the PKK suspended
 its hostile operations, although it did not withdraw its guerrillas. The Government
 refused to open discussions with the terrorist PKK. Not recognizing the cease-fire,
 the Government continued its military operations against alleged PKK targets. On
 May 24, the same day the Government had approved a partial amnesty, the PKK
 abruptly terminated its own cease-fire with an ambush on a convoy of soldiers (see
 Section L.a.). Although the PKK leadership later publicly expressed regret about the
 incident, the ambush signaled renewed hostilities, which were accompanied by a
 sharp increase in reports of human rights abuses by both sides in 1993.
 On June 8, the Government put into effect a limited amnesty for PKK members.
 Under the terms of the amnesty, "those who are not members of an armed organiza-
 tion, but who are in the organization for another reason, will not be prosecuted if
 they have not committed any crime and if they give themselves up voluntarily." "For
 another reason" appears to mean that persons who were kidnaped, pressured into
 cooperation, or otherwise involuntarily involved in the PKK's activities will not be
 prosecuted. The burden of proof, however, appears to lie with those who surrender
 to the State. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 95 persons took advantage
 of the limited amnesty offer.
 Government state of emergency decree 430, codified in 1990 and most recently re-
 newed in November, imposes stringent security measures in the southeast. The re-
 gional governor may censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal exile
 (see Section 1.d.). The decree also provides for doubling the sentences of those con-
 victed of cooperating with separatists. Informants and convicted persons who cooper-
 ate with the State are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences. Provisions in the
 decree that specifically prohibited court challenges to the regional governor's admin-
 istrative decisions were amended in 1992 to permit limited judicial review.
 In November the Government introduced amendments to the Anti-Terror Law
 that would broaden the definitions of terrorism and collaboration, place more strin-
 gent restrictions on the press, and increase the permissible length of incommunicado
 prearraigment detention. As of the end of the year, the bill was still pending in
 Parliament's joint Justice/Interior Committee.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Despite constitutional provisions for freedom of
 speech and press, there were significant limitations on these freedoms, which came
 under increasing pressure in 1993.
 The Anti-Terror Law and Penal Code provisions that make it a crime to insult
 Kemal Ataturk, secularism, Islam, the security forces, and the President, are used
 
 
 1097
 to restrict free expression. In some cases, the laws provide for increased punishment
 if the offense is committed in a publication. The press law permits prosecutors to
 halt distribution of a newspaper or magazine without a court order and requires
 that each publication's "responsible editors" bear legal responsibility for the publica-
 tion's content.
 After the leftwing daily newspaper Aydinlik announced on May 23 that it would
 publish excerpts from Salman Rushdie's book, "The Satanic Verses," its offices, ven-
 dors, and distributors were attacked several times in the following week. Report-
 edly, the newspaper asked for police protection but did not receive it. The Govern-
 ment confiscated all 12 issues of Aydinlik which printed the excerpts and brought
 the paper and its chief editor to trial under the Penal Code for insulting Islam. (See
 also Section L.a.)
 The unsolved murders of five journalists (see Section L.a.) and the failure of the
 Government to charge a single suspect, even in a high-profile case such as that of
 Ugur Mumcu, led populace, officials, and international organizations alike to de-
 nounce government inaction. The International Federation oT Journalists sent a del-
 egation to Turkey to investigate the increasing number of unsolved murder cases
 affecting members of the press.
 Several organized panel discussions were banned in 1993, including a symposium
 on the Kurdish issue, organized jointly by the HRA and a number of Turkish intel-
 lectuals, which was to be held in Ankara on June 25-27. President Demirel, the act-
 ing Prime Minister, and other political party leaders were to have delivered speech-
 es on the Kurdish issue at the symposium. In a letter sent to the HRA, the Ankara
 deputy governor wrote that the symposium had been banned on the grounds that
 it could have "grave consequences in the light of the latest developments in the
 country." (See also Section 2.b.)
 Throughout the year, state security court prosecutors ordered the confiscation of
 numerous issues of leftist and pro-Kurdish periodicals, including Yeni Ulke, Newroz
 magazine, Ozgur Gundem, and Azadi. Many editions of Kurdish-oriented periodicals
 were seized before they could be distributed nationally to newsstands. Court pro-
 ceedings were instituted against several editors and publishers. PEN reported that
 as of mid-September more than 70 court cases were pending against Ozgur
 Gundem. Its editor in chief Davut Karadag was arrested at the behest of the Istan-
 bul state security ourt on July 15 on chages of spreading subversive Kurdish prop-
 aganda in 30 news items in the daily's July 12, 13, 14, and 15 issues. Karadag was
 released from custody on September 17. No decision has yet been reached in that
 case, but in another case, Karadag was given a 5-month sentence.
 The Anti-Terror Law, which provides that "written and oral propaganda. . . aim-
 ing at damaging the indivisible unity of the State of the Turkish Republic . . . (is)
 foridden, regardless of the method, intention and ideas behind it," severely re-
 stricts freedom of speech. It had a chilling effect against writers, journalists, pub-
 lishers, politicians, musicians, and students and has been used against them. A
 number of prominent, generally center-left and pro-Kurdish politicians were de-
 tained under, or otherwise affected by, the Anti-Terrr Law in 1993 for speeches
 made both within Turkey and beyond the country's borders. The HEP and its suc-
 cessor, the DEP, representing Kurdish interests, are particularly targeted. For ex-
 amp  , DEP chairman and Ozgur Gundem owner Yasar Kaya was ordered arrested
 in September by the Ankara state security court prosecutor for "separatist" lan-
 guage he had allegedly used in an August speech at a political party congress in
 Erbil, northern Iraq. This case was subsequently combined with another case
 against him for a speech he made in Bonn, Germany.
 In July the Constitutional Court ruled that then SHP deputy and deputy speaker
 of Parliament Fehmi Isiklar be deprived of his seat in Parliament in connection with
 allegedly separatist speeches he had made in his role as HEP chairman in the
 runup to the October 1991 elections. Parliament permitted the ruling to take effect
 November 11. DEP parliamentarian Leyla Zana is reportedly under investigation for
 statements she made before the Congressional Helsinki Commission while visiting
 the United States in the spring. The Constitutional Court ordered the closing of the
 HEP on the grounds that it defended the national existence, identity, and rights
 of the Kurdish people." Its members subsequently formed the DEP and were soon
 subjected to similar investigations. On November 8, 15 DEP executives were for-
 mally charged with spreading separatist propaganda. The Court has asked Par-
 liament to lift the immunity of several DEP parliamentarians so they may be tried
 in the state security court.
 Prosecutions against authors, publications, and publishers continued under the
 brevisions of the Anti-Terror Law, under which both significant sentences andpro-
 ibitively expensive fines can be, and in practice are, imposed. For example, in Jan-
 uary the Ankara state security court fined Fikret Ontal T.L. 1.5 billion ($107,000)
 
 
 1098
 for publishing Kahraman Demirkapi's book, "Developments in the World and in our
 Country." The book was condemned for "spreading subversive propaganda." The
 poseutor in the same court brought a case against author Edip Polat, a  ady serv-
 ing time in an Ankara prison for prior writings, for his biology-book entitled "Kurds
 and Kurdistan in Scientific Language," which claimed that the Turkish names of
 83 plants and 9 animals are actualy Kurdish. The charge again was "spreading
 subversive propaganda." The prosecutor demanded a sentence of from 2 to 5 years
 and a fine of T.L. 50 mllion ($3,570). According to Unsal Ozturk, owner of the Yurt
 publishing house, the same court demanded aT.L. 26 billion ($1.8 million) fine for
 the printing of allegedly pro-Kurdish books by author Ismail Besikci. Ozturk was
 sentenced to 2 years and 4 months, but the sentence was converted to a fine of T.L.
 4,390,000 ($313). In September the Istanbul state security court sentenced journal-
 ist Selami Ince to 2 years' imprisonment and fined him T.L. 100 million ($7,140)
 for violating the Anti-Terror Law by publishing an interview with Besikci entitled
 "Kurds must Establish their own National Assembly" in the leftwing monthly
 Demokrat in December 1992. The court also imposed a 6-month prison term on the
 magazine's editor in chief and fined him T.L. 50 million ($3,570); the magazine's
 owner was fined T.L. 100 million ($7,140) as well.
 Ismail Besikci himself served 10 years in prison between 1971 and 1987 because
 of his publications on the Kurdish question in Turkey. On May 28, he was again
 brought to trial at Ankara state security court under the Anti-Terror Law for dis-
 seminating separatist propaganda in his book "The Imperialist Repartition Struggle
 in Kurdistan 1915-1925. In a separate case in November, the Appeals Court
 upheld sentences of 20 months each and fines of T.L. 42 million each for his books
 "CIP Program 1931 - The Kurdish Problem" and "Thoughts on the PKK." On July
 15, Besikci's book about his 1991 trial, "The Way Opened by Courts." was con-
 fiscated by the Istanbul state security court on the grounds that it disseminated
 separatist propaganda. For the year 1993, as of June 30, some 307 magazines and
 newspapers and 28 books had been confiscated by court decision.
 Legislative reforms in 1991 partially removed the ban on the use of the Kurdish
 language. Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects contin-
 ued to be available although suppression continued as well. The Diyarbakir gover-
 norship, for example, banned the production and sale of 23 Kurdish cassettes in a
 271-page decree. One Kurdish-language newspaper, Welat, is publishing currently.
 Several others publish in a combination of Turkish and Kurdish. There is anecdotal
 evidence that potential consumers are afraid to purchase Kurdish-language mate-
 rials for fear that possession of such items may be seen as evidence of PKK sym-
 pathies. Kurdish-language broadcasts are still illegal. The Government monitors the
 Kurdish broadcasts of the Voice of America but has not attempted to jam the fre-
 quencies.
 Journalists sometimes face harassment and mistreatment by police and other au-
 thorities. In May, for example, the Istanbul-based Press Council lodged a protest
 with the Istanbul governor regarding the Istanbul police's beating of seven reporters
 in three separate incidents in the city. Correspondents in the southeast, especially
 those for the pro-Kurdish press, were harassed and alleged that they were beaten
 and tortured in police stations during periods of detention. Police attacked the office
 of Ozgur Gundem in Van, destroyed the furniture, and detained two correspondents,
 two workers, and one visitor. Two days earlier, security forces had detained the dai-
 ly's Van representative Yusuf Cacim. The newspaper has been harassed consistently
 since its April 1992 inception and was forced to close from January through April
 1993, reportedly because of a shortage of funds due in part to numerous court cases
 and fines levied against it. In November the Istanbul state security court ordered
 Ozgur Gundem to suspend publication for 15 days for promoting separatism and
 printing the views of the banned PKK, an order that was still under appeal at year's
 end. Both the publisher and editor in chief were fined, and the latter was sentenced
 to 5 months in jail. Ozgur Gundem was unable to publish for three days after police
 raided its Istanbul office December 10 and detained all people present. All but 18
 were released within the next 72 hours. Charges against Ozgur Gundem in various
 cases included "separatist propaganda," "portraying Turkish citizens as Kurds," and
 "using the words Kurd' and Kurdistan' in a way that breaches the Constitution in
 which Turkey is defined as a unitary state."
 On September 30, the Istanbul state security court ruled to suspend the publica-
 tion of Newroz magazine for a month for publishing articles deemed to be separatist
 propaganda. The court sentenced editor in chief Dogan Karakuzu to 6 months in
 prison and a fine of T.L. 50 million (approximately $3,570). At the end of the year,
 the case was on appeal, and the magazine was still publishing. As of October, all
 but two issues of the magazine had been the subject of prosecution. Eight court
 cases had been concluded, and 24 cases were still being tried.
 
 
 1099
 Two foreign journalists were detained, one of whom was tried and sentenced, and
 both were released in 1993. On January 22, the Diyarbakir state security court con-
 victed and sentenced German journalist Stefan Waldberg to 3 years and 9 months
 in prison for acting as a courier for the PKK. Waldberg accused the Turkish police
 of mistreating him in custody. On April 28, the High Appeals Court upheld the
 Diyarbakir court's decision, thereby exhausting Waldberg's appeals. The case, which
 attracted considerable attention amon international journalist groups, was raised
 both during German Chancellor Kohls May visit to Turkey, and Prime Minister
 Ciller's September trip to Germany. At the end of 1993, at the suggestion of a joint
 German-Turkish juridical experts meeting, Waldberg applied for presidential par-
 don, which was granted December 23. In a separate case, the police detained British
 journalist Andrew Norman Penny as he entered Turkey from northern Iraq on May
 17 on suspicion of being a PKK courier and for allegedly possessing illegal Kurdish
 documents and videotapes. Once international journalist organizations certified that
 Penny was, indeed, a journalist, the authorities dropped c arges, returned Penny's
 materials, and allowed him to leave Turkey.
 Nezahat Ozen, an Ozgur Gundem correspondent, was arrested on July 17 for a
 report she had prepared on a 17-year-old girl allegedly raped by the police. Ozen,
 who was detained until her formal arrest on a court order on July 21, was not al-
 lowed to see her lawyer or relatives during her initial detention period. She was re-
 leased from custody on September 14.
 The public prosecutors' aggressive application of the law also affected the content
 of Turkey's press. Publications must designate a "responsible editor" who is legally
 accountable for a publication's contents. Many have faced repeated criminal proceed-
 ings. Ozgnr Gundem editor in chief Davut Karadag, for example, was conined for
 over 2 months in 1993. In September the Istanbul public prosecutor, claiming press
 reporting on the "Iski" waterworks scandal was prejudicial to the ongoing criminal
 investigation, placed a gag order on continued press coverage and threatened to
 bring charges against those who failed to comply. At year's end an estimated 55
 journalists were in custody.
 Turkish press coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be unreliable,
 underreporting in some instances and grossly sensationalizing in others. Govern-
 ment decree 430 requires self-censorship of all news reporting from or about the
 southeast, and, upon the request of the regional governor, gives the Interior Min-
 istry the authority to ban distribution of any news viewed as misrepresenting events
 in the region. In the event such a government warning is not obeyed, the decree
 provides for a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days for
 subsequent offenses.
 In general, the mainstream Turkish-langage press demonstrated its fidelity to
 self-censorship strictures by limiting its independent reporting of southeast-related
 news. Aside from Ozgur Gundem correspondents' access to the southeast and report-
 ing in the English-language Turkish Daily News, most papers relied on official re-
 ports. Because of the security threat, some journalists are afraid to go to the south-
 east, and others know their editors will sanitize their reports. During a July 11
 press briefing at the headquarters of the Turkish armed forces, the media were in-
 vited to support the Government and security forces by reporting events with a
 u~nity of voice." Human rights groups expressed fears that this may involve a
 disinformation campaign. For instance, after 26 Kurdish nomads, including 14 chil-
 dren and 8 women, had been killed on July 18, the mainstream press immediately
 reported that their killers were PKK guerrillas. One of the papers later reported
 that survivors stated that the attackers spoke oar Kurdish and only began shooting
 after learning that this particular settlement mad not joined the village guard sys-
 tem. In August the Government called in representatives of the mainstream news-
 papers, except Ozgur Gundem, and asked them to help the Government in the fight
 against the P  k.
 In October the PKK placed a ban on press reporting from the southeast and
 threatened to retaliate against those journalists who did not comply. The ban was
 reportedly lifted a month later.
 The Criminal Code provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the
 Parliament, and the army," ranging from a 3-year minimum senentce for insulting
 the President to a 6-year maximum for insulting other branches of government. Al-
 though judges generally examine evidence rigorously and dismiss many charges
 brought under these laws, police still detain people and prosecutors still charge
 them, oten resulting in long and expensive trials, For example, on March 2, an An-
 kara civil court rejected a T.L. 100 million ($7,140) libel suit fied by then President
 Turgut Ozal against Turkish Daily News editor in chief Ilnur Cevik. Ozal had
 claimed he was personally insulted in two of Cevik's editorials.
 
 
 1100
 
 Until mid-1993 Turkish Radio and Television (TRT) had a legal monopoly on
 broadcasting. Opposition figures asserted TRT broadcasts have a progovernment
 bias, despite coverage of opposition leaders and their parties. A government commis-
 sion generally apportions party access to television and radio during election and
 referendum campaigns on the basis of the proportion of parliamentary seats that
 each party holds. With the increasing availability of satellite dishes and cable, many
 Turkish viewers may now watch foreign broadcasts, including several Turkish-lan-
 guag private channels.
 Private radio stations began operating in Turkey in 1991. On January 22, the
 Ministry of the Interior issued a directive banning all private television and radio
 stations, which resulted in the closure of a few hundred radio stations and several
 television stations. On February 2, the Interior Minister issued a new directive per-
 mitting broadcasting via satellite from abroad. On March 31, the Government again
 ordered all privately owned radio and television stations to cease broadcasting. A
 few hundred radio stations and about 50 local television stations closed down. On
 July 8, however, Parliament voted to repeal article 133 of the Constitution, thereby
 eliminating the State's monopoly and permitting the establishment of private radio
 and television stations. At the end of I993, 44 private radio stations were operating
 in Ankara and approximately 50 in Istanbul. The stations currently operate in a
 form of legal no-man's land as, at the end of 1993, no regulating legislation had
 been enacted.
 While the Culture Minister lifted bans against all formerly prohibited books at
 the end of 1991, the Education Ministry continued to make recommendations on the
 "utility" of books proposed for school curriculums or libraries. Books declared "with-
 out utility" are not allowed. On October 1, the film 'Yol," which had been banned
 for years, was permitted to be shown for the first time.
 Academic freedom is also severely restricted in practice by the provisions of the
 Anti-Terror Law. For example, professors have been sentenced for books they have
 written. The Constitution and the law governing political parties proscribe student
 and faculty involvement in political activities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Peaceful assemblies are per-
 mitted upon prior notification to government authorities, who may restrict them to
 designated sites. Authorities may deny permission if they believe the gathering is
 likey to disrupt public order. For example, in the aftermath of the July 2 events
 in Sivas (see  etion 2..), local authorities across Turkey prevented a number of
 demonstrations, including the laying of a black wreath in Antakya and a demonstra-
 tion in Izmir province. In September the Ankara governorship refused to permnit the
 DEP to conduct the funeral of assassinated DEP Deputy Mehmet Sincar as planne.
 Through stepped-up security measures, officials stpped groups of would-be mourn-
 ers from entering Ankara, and security officials in Istanbul prevented some DEPJ
 supporters from even departing that city for Ankara. A serious instance of police
 overraction also occurred in connection with Sincar's death when, in a clash in
 f'rnt of DEP's Ankara headquarters, police severely beat several demonstrators who
 had come to pay their last respects to Sincar, a scene aired across the country via
 private television.
 Associations and labor unions are prohibited by law from having ties to political
 parties or engaging in political activities. Police raided a number of associations and
 organizations in 1993 and harassed some of their members. For example, police
 closed temporarily in May, and indefinitely in July, the Mersin office of the HRA
 on the grounds that it had sponsored an event at which allegedly separatist songs
 were sung. Earlier in January, the Adana H-RA branch was allowed to reopen after
 a 2-month closure, although its president believes it is still under surveillance (see
 Section 4). In July the Istanbul governor's office closed the Istanbul-based Marmara
 Freedoms and Rights Association on the grounds that the organization "engaged in
 activity outside the scope of activities it was entitled to by law."
 A gay and lesbian pride conference scheduled for July 2-6 in Istanbul was banned
 at the last minute by the governor of Istanbul on July 2, apparently on the grounds
 that it would be contrary to Turkey's "tradition and moral values and that it might
 disturb the peace. He allegedly sent men to many hotels in Istanbul, instructing
 them not to provide lodgings for participants. The next day, Turkish authorities ar-
 rested 28 foreign delegates, most of them while they were on their way to partici-
 pate in a press conference in protest of the ban. They were detained for over 5
 ours threatened with possible strip searches and human immunodeficiency virus
 (RIV) tests, and deported on a Turkish airline to Germany. The organizers had pre-
 viously received approval of the event from the Interior Ministry.
 Associations must submit their charters for government approval, a lengthy and
 cumbersome process.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1101
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and private dissemination
 of one's religious ideas. Turkey's population is 99 percent Muslim. Under Turkish
 law, religious services may take place only in des'gated places of worship. In
 Adana, Turkey's fourth largest city, the only approved sites are mosques, one Jew-
 ish synagogue, and one Roman Catholic church. A Protestant expatriate group peti-
 tioned to have a house of worship designated for its use. The petition has been
 under consideration in Ankara since at least 1992.
 Although Turkey is a secular state, religious instruction in state schools is com-
 pulsoiy for Muslims. Upon written verification of their non-Muslim background,
 non-Muslims are exempted by law from Muslim religious instruction, although stu-
 dents who wish to attend may do so with parental consent.
 The Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam) has expressed interest
 in Alawi religious instruction in schools. Some Alawis allege informal discrimina-
 tion, in the form of failure to include any Alawi doctrines or beliefs in religious in-
 struction classes and limits on university entrance and professional advancement.
 Although the majority of Turkey's Alawi population-estimated to be at least 12
 million-is Kurdish, there are no government-paid Alawi religious leaders in the
 southeast. No Religious Affairs Directorate funds go to the Alawi community. In
 Tunceli province, which is almost 100-percent Alawi and Kurdish, the Government
 built a cavernous mosque in the center of the city of Tunceli which is used solely
 by the Sunni employees of the central government working in Tunceli. Alawis are
 disgruntled by the Sunni bias in the Religious Affairs Directorate and the Direc-
 torate's tendency to view the Alawis as a cultural group, as opposed to a religious
 sect.
 Many prosecutors regard proselytizing and religious activism on the part of either
 islamic extremists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they
 deem such activities to have political overtones. Since there is no law prohibiting
 proselytizing, Islamic extremists and evangelical Christians are sometimes arrested
 for distuiring the peace. Courts usually dismiss such charges. The Kayseri state se-
 curity coeurtthowever, indicted members of an extremist organization called "Mus-
 lims for attacking and setting on fire a hotel in Sivas in which satirist Aziz Nesin,
 translator of Salman Rushdies a 'Te Satanic Verses , was staying, causing a death
 toll of 37. The case's venue was later transferred to Ankara.
 Police also continued their surveillance and detention of evangelical Christians.
 In July prosecutors urged an Istanbul court to send 14 Spanish members of a
 Protestant sect to prison for singing hymns and handing out Christian pamphlets
 outside a mosque during Muslim prayers. They were charged with disturbing the
 peace. The court released them on bail in late August and ordered them to stand
 trial.
 Turkey's non-Muslim religious groups include some 50,000 Armenian Apostolic
 Christians 25,000 Jews, 20,000 Syriac Christians 18 000 Arab Orthodox, less than
 5,000 Greek 6rthodox, and 5,000 to 6,000 Roman Catholics and Chaldean Chris-
 tians. Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul, and the number of
 Christians in the south has been declining as the younger generation leaves Turkey
 for Europe and North America. Also there have been reports of intimidation of non-
 Muslims living in the southeast (see Section 1.g.). The number of Assyrian Chris-
 tians in the Midyat-Mardin area has dropped from some 50,000 a decade ago to
 about 5,000 now. The status of only three minorities-Armenians, Jews, and
 Greeks-was recognized under the Lausanne Treaty. Other religions may not ac-
 quire property for churches. The Catholic Church in Ankara, for example is con-
 fmed to diplomatic property. The State must approve the operation of churches,
 monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations, such as hos-
 pitals and orphanages.
 Turkey'sJewish community is well integrated into Turkish society, although, it
 fears the possibility of rising Islamic extremism. Aside from occasional stones lobbed
 at synagogue windows and petty thefts, the Jewish community reported no problems
 in 1993.
 The activities of Armenian and Greek Orthodox churches and their affiliated oper-
 ations are carefully monitored. The Ministry of Education tightly controls the cur-
 riculums in their schools. Since the Turks in western Thrace in Greece cannot pro-
 vide their own schoolteachers and must bring them from Turkey, the Government
 is reportedly beginning to question whether teachers from Greece ought to be
 brought in to teach the few Greek residents here. The Greek Patriarchate (Istanbul
 is the see of the ecumenical Patriarchate of the Eastern Orthodox faith), whose sem-
 inary on the island of Halki in the Sea of Marmara has been closed since the 1970's
 when the State nationalized all private institutions of higher learning, has consist-
 ently expressed interest in reopening the seminary. Turkish officials, however, have
 
 
 1102
 used a variety of excuses to keep it closed, claiming most recently that the Greek
 community in Turkey is "too small" to justify a seminary. Armenian church officials
 complain of petty harassment from local officials (such as delays or refusals in re-
 ceiving buil ng permits) and growing encroachment by certain Muslim extremist
 rups on lands belonging to the Armenian community, especially on the Princes Is-
 lands in the Sea of Marmara near Istanbul.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Ankara's sole remaining synagogue, for example, is sorely in
 need of renovation, a project currently under negotiation between the community
 and the Ministry of Culture because the community cannot afford meticulously to
 replicate the original interior decoration. Under Turkish law, religious buildings
 that become "extinct" (because of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff
 local religious councils) revert to government possession. &Wme non-Muslim minori-
 ties particularly the Greek Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, shrinking Armenian
 Orthodox and Jewish communities, are faced with the danger of losing their houses
 of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Turkish citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey
 and the freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom
 to leave may be restricted only by the national economic situation, civic obligations
 (e.g., military service), or criminal investigation or prosecution. Each Turkish citizen
 (except those regularly working abroad) must pay a departure tax of $100 for every
 departure from the country. Travel in the southeast sometimes is restricted for secu-
 rity reasons. There have been allegations that security forces on occasion closed off
 villages and surrounding regions to hide evidence of government human rights
 abuses (see Section 1.a.). Roadblocks, set up by both Turkish security forces and the
 PCK, seriously impede travel in the rei on.
 Although Turkey is a signatory of the U.N. Convention on Refugees, it officially
 accords refugee status only to claimants from Eastern Europe. Asylum seekers from
 elsewhere are referred to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) for third-country resettlement.
 Turkey still hosts approximately 6,000 Iraqi refugees who are awaiting resettle-
 ment or who simply refuse to return to Iraq. Sme 2,000 refugees remain in a camp
 near the Iraqi border, with another 4,000 living with temporary residence permits
 elsewhere. Other Iraqis, who entered Turkey aftr October 1991, are considered to
 e ileally iTurkey and are subject to deportation to northern Iraq, although few
 are a    eua  deporteesandt.
 Turkey also hoats a large and revolving population of Iranians, whose presence
 is generally tolerated. Those seeking refugee status are referred to UNHCRand re-
 settled in third countries. In addition, at least 15,000 Bosnians have found tem-
 porary refuge in Turkey, with the ma*ority living with friends and relatives and an-
 other 3,000 in camps established by the Turkish government with UNHCR support.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Turkish citizens have the right and ability to change their government peacefully.
 Turkey has a multiparty parlamentary system, in which elections are held at least
 every 5 years on the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for all citizens aged 20
 and over. There are no restrictions in law or practice against women or minorities
 voting or participating in politics, with the notable exception of the harassment of
 the Kurdish and it successor, the DEP. Fifty-four party administrators of
 REP and DEP have been killed in the past 2 years. Hundreds of DEP members
 have been detained in recent months on various charges of disseminating separatist
 propaganda and supporting the PKK. Party buildings in Erzurum, Bursa, Van, Agri,
 Siverek, and Hakkari were attacked. The DEP also alleges that mayors who are
 members of the DEP are attacked and their towns and municipal building raided
 by security forces. Several parliamentarians who represent the DEP are threatened
 with losing their parliamentary immunity to prseution (see also Sections l.a. and
 2.a.).
 As of October, 25 political parties were operating in Turkey, 10 of which were rep-
 resented in Parliament. Several political parties banned after the 1980 military
 takeover benefited from a 1992 parliamentary decision permitting them to reorga-
 nize and resume custody of buildings and assets that had belonged to them before
 their closure, a process that was completed by Janua r 1993.
 The Turkish United Communist Party, decriminarzed in 1991, was outlawed in
 1992 along with the Socialist Party on grounds that they violated article 14 of the
 Constitution which prohibits "establishing the hegemony of one social class over oth-
 ers." As of the end of the year, the Constitutionsal Court had ruled for the closure
 
 
 1103
 of HEP (see Section 2.a.) and its interim successor OZDEP and was considering
 whether or not to ban HEP's successor, DEP.
 The Grand National Assembly (Parliament) elects the President as Head of State
 every 7 years or when the President becomes incapacitated or dies, as occurred in
 April when Turgt Ozal died and Suleyman Demirel was elected to succeed him.
 The 1991 pariamentary elections gave the True Path Party (DYP) a plurality of 27
 mercent of the vote and 178 seats in the 450-member unicameral Parliament. The
 YP formed a coalition with the Social Democratic Populist Party (SHP) to achieve
 a parliamentary majority. In June, after Demirel's election as President, the DYP
 chose Tansu Ciler as its new chairperson, after which the President appointed her
 Turkey's rwst female Prime Minister.
 To prevent political fragmentation, seats are allocated on a weighted proportional
 representation basis in which parties that poll less than 10 percent of the total na-
 tional vote are excluded. The 1991 elections brought 5 parties into Parliament; how-
 ever, party alignments have since changed, and 10 parties are now represented,
 alongside almost two dozen independent deputies, who resigned from the parties
 under whose banners they won election.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and women- however,
 only eight women, representing three parties, were elected to the Parliament in
 1991. In addition to Prime Minister Ciller, there is one female Cabinet minister. Po-
 litical parties now recruit female delegates for their party conferences and electoral
 lists. Women's committees are active within political party organizations.
 In November the Turkish General Staff (TGS) urged the mainstream parties to
 field united slates for the March 1994 local elections in the southeast, lest PKK-sup-
 ported candidates win as a result of divided opposition. The Government disavowed
 the army's intrusion into the political process, and the TGS said its statement had
 been a suggestion.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A nongovernmental human rights association (HRA), officially approved in 1987,
 has branches in 50 provincial capitals, including a branch in Mersin, which at year's
 end was closed indefinitely pending a court case against it. It claims a membership
 of about 20,000. In 1990 the HIRA established its companion Human Rights Founda-
 tion (HRF) which, in addition to operating torture rehabilitation centers in Ankara,
 Izmir, and Istanbul, serves as a clearinghouse for human rights information.
 Human rights activists, including lawyers and doctors, are routinely threatened.
 There are credible reports of the involvement of security forces in these threats,
 which appear to be related to their human rights activities documenting human
 rights violations allegedly perpetrated by government forces.
 Some government officls, including me   e prosecutors and police, punitively
 apply various laws to restrict HRA activities. For example, officials ordered various
 branches of the LRA closed for periods of weeks or months generally on charges
 that they had published allegedly separatist material or sponsored a speech that
 was allegedly separatist in nature. Police raided HR  branches in Mersin and else-
 where and confiscated written materials. An HRA president in southern Turkey said
 he and his board remained under surveillance, any HRA branch officers spent
 time in detention or under arrest (see Section 2.b.), and one-Kemal Kilic, Urfa
 HRA steeiing committee member and former Ozgur Gundem reporter-was killed
 by unidentified assailants on the Urfa-Akcakale highway in February (see Section
 l.a.). Reliable eyewitnesses observed the surveillance and harassment of one HRA
 branch office in the southeast and watched as security police entered another HRA
 office in the region uninvited and began, withot~t permission, to make telephone
 calls. The president of the HRA office in Diyarbakir, Fevzi Veznedaroglu, who re-
 ported receiving death threats from plainclothes police officers, and the HRA Van
 [ eiet never returned from their 1992 "trips to Europe." The president of the
 iitHAwas arrested on February 26, 1993, and detained for 3 months on charges
 of giving aid and comfort to the PIK. The HRA representative in the town of Derik,
 Mardin province, was detained six separate times in 1993. Many of these investiga-
 tions and prosecutions, a  e    a    arrests of human rights monitors, stemmed
 from alleged violations of the law on associations or the holding of illegal dem-
 onstrations. Surveillance and harassment of HRA members in the southeast appears
 to have become increasingly common.
 In operation since 1991, Parliament's multiparty Human Rights Commission in
 February completed its report on allegations of widespread torture in Turkey. The
 report conceded that the practice of torture had continued since the DYPrSHP coali-
 tion came to power btdenied allegations that torture was an official government
 policy. It sent a delegation to Diyarbakir to monitor the 1993 Kurdish new year cele-
 
 
 1104
 
 bration launched an investigation into the Sivas incident (Section 2.c.) and is inves-
 tigating the incidents at Lice (Section L.a.). The Commission is authorized to oversee
 Turkey's compliance with the human rights provisions of Turkish law and inter-
 national agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, investigate alleged abuses, and
 prepare reports.
 While representatives of diplomatic missions or foreign private organizations who
 wish to monitor the state of human rights in Turkey are free to speak with private
 citizens, official visitors to the southeast may be watched by security police, and the
 presence of security officials may have an intimidating effect upon those inter-
 viewed. Access to government officials or facilities at times has been restricted, al-
 though, in 1992 for the very first time, Helsinki Watch visitors obtained every ap-
 pointment they requested, including access to detention facilities.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all Turkish citi-
 zens as equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds.
 The Government officially recognizes only those religious minorities mentioned in
 the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), which guarantees the rights of non-Muslim Greek
 Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, and Jewish adherents. Despite constitutional provi-
 sions, discrimination remains a problem in several areas.
 Women.-Women are improving their situation in Turkish society, including the
 professions, business, and civil service, although, they continue to face discrimina-
 tion to varying degrees. While traditional values continued to discourage women
 from entering some career fields, there are numerous female judges, doctors, and
 engineers. Women comprise about 36 percent of the paid Turkish work force and
 generally receive equal pay for equal work. The Constitution prohibits women from
 engaging in physically demanding jobs and from night work, and applicable laws are
 effively enforced. In the past there has been an arbitrary barrier to women be-
 coming governor's and subgovernors (government appointed positions). Women may
 now take the examination necessary to become a subgovernor and several have been
 ap  inted. There is also one female governor.
 'Taditional family values in rural Turkey place a greater emphasis on advanced
 education for sons than for daughters. In principle, primary education reached all
 children in 1993, but far fewer girls than boys continued their education after pri-
 mary school. In 1992 Parliament passed a law increasing universal mandatory edu-
 cation from 5 to 8 years. The law will be implemented gradually throughout the
 country. For the 1993-94 school year, it was put into effect in several pilot regions.
 A delegation of some 50 women representing the Women's Studies Center of Istan-
 bul University and numerous other private organizations presented a petition to
 Parliament on February 17 calling for legislation to abolish the special position of
 husbands as head of family. As noted in Section i.e., there are some seldom en-
 forced laws that discriminate against women.
 Spousal abuse is still considered an extremely private matter, although it is a
 widespread problem, interest in which is growing. Few women go to the police, who
 in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic disputes. Turks of either sex may
 file civil or criminal charges but rarely do. Turkish law and courts make no dis-
 crimination between the sexes in laws concerning violence or abuse. In July 1992,
 the Purple Roof Foundation (for battered women) opened a "hello shelter" telephone
 line; it attracted 3,300 callers in its first 3 months, even under Transportation Min-
 istry regulations restricting its operating hours to weekdays. The Purple Roof has
 since expanded its service to two lines, one of which focuses on helping battered
 women, and the other of which deals with a variety of other subjects. The Govern-
 ment also has opened shelters in major cities for abused women and their children
 who have left their homes.
 Independent women's and women's rights associations exist, but the concept of
 lobbying for women's rights has not gained great currency.
 Children.-The Government is committed to furthering children's welfare and is
 working to expand opportunities in education and health, including further reduc-
 tion of the infant mortality rate.
 Turkey's children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in southeastern
 Anatolia. School closings and the decision by many families to move westward, be
 it for economic reasons or to escape the violence, have uprooted children to cities
 which are hard pressed to find the resources to extend basic, mandatory services,
 such as schooling. The Government is exploring the possibility of establishing re-
 gional boarding schools to help combat this problem. Although primary schooling is
 mandatory, many young children, ages 9 to 12, can be seen on the streets hawking
 goods or shining shoes (see Section 6.d.).
 
 
 1105
 Nationall Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic and religious minorities face various
 forms of societal discrimination. The minority of Turkish Kurds who were long-term
 residents in industrialized cities in western Turkey have been, for the most part,
 assimilated into the political, economic, and social life of the nation. Kurds who are
 currently migrating westward (including those displaced by the conflict between the
 Government and the PKK), bring with them their Kurdish cultural and village iden-
 tity from the east. Most parliamentary representatives from southeastern Turkey
 are ethnic Kurds, but representatives of Kurdish ethnic origin have been elected
 from districts far removed from the southeast. Several cabinet ministers, as well as
 other government officials, claim an ethnic Kurdish background.
 The increasing violence of the fighting in the southeast is polarizing ethnic Turks
 and Kurds and creating a climate of intolerance. Particularly, in cities such as
 Adana and Mersin, which have witnessed a large influx of Kurds fleeing the vio-
 lence in the southeast, tensions are rising. For example, three friends in Adana
 were stopped by a policeman demanding to see their identification papers. The man
 from Sivas, a predominantly Turkish province, was allowed to proceed; the two
 friends from Mardin, a predominantly Kurdish province, were detained and taken
 to the local police station for questioning. Tensions have also begun to spread west-
 ward, for example, in a fight between a Kurdish construction worker and a grocer
 in the Aegean province of Kutahya, local inhabitants hurled stones at a cottage in-
 habited by eight Kurdish workers and shouted anti-PKK slogans.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communication in Kurdish
 legalized some spoken and printed Kurdish communications. However, under the
 political parties [aw, all discussion which takes place at political meetings must be
 in Turkish. Kurdish may only be spoken in "nonpolitical communication." Court pro-
 ceedings (and all government functions, including public education) continued to be
 conducted in Turkish, disadvantaging those Kurdish-speaking defendants who had
 to rely on court-provided translators. Moreover, materials dealing with Kurdish his-
 tory, culture, and ethnic identity continued to be subject to confiscation and prosecu-
 tion under the "indivisible unity of the State" provisions of the Anti-Terror Law.
 The Gypsy population is extremely small, and no reported incidents of public or
 government harassment directed against Gypsies occurred during 1993. In January
 a Democratic Left Party deputy announced he had prepared a draft bill proposing
 the adoption of Turkey's Gypsies as Turkish citizens, but the legislation made no
 headway.
 The Greek o      uty complained of petty harassment by police, restrictions on
 freedom of expression and reliion, discrimination in education involving teachers,
 books, and curriculum, limitations on the right to control their charitable institu-
 tions, and the denial of their ethnic identity. The Government approves teacher can-
 didates and new textbooks in ste p with reciprocal approvals by the Greek Govern-
 ment for the Turkish minority in Thrace. (See also Section 2.c.)
 People with Disabilities.-Parliament established a commission to look into the
 problems of the disabled, but to date legislation dealing with the disabled is piece-
 meal, and there is little legislation regarding accessibility for the disabled. Certain
 categories of employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent of their
 employee pool, although there is no penalty for failure to comply. One M.P., himself
 disabled, is working on a draft law which would fold all current provisions regarding
 the disabled into one piece of legislation. The draft reportedly will include edu-
 cational provisions (currently there are special schools for the blind, deaf and men-
 tally handicapped), provisions to educate the general public, a provision that munici-
 palities not issue building permits unless the plans for the building provide for ac-
 cess for the disabled, and provide for an easing of customs regulations to allow for
 easier importation of special equipment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Most workers have the right to associate freely and
 form representative unions. Exceptions are schoolteachers (both public and private),
 civil servants, the police and military personnel. Upon taking office in November
 1991, the Government of Prime Minister Demirel declared, as part of its pledge to
 bring Turkish labor legislation into conformity with the standards of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO), its intention to grant trade union rights to civil
 servants. Implementation requires a three-step process: parliamentary ratification
 of ILO Conventions 87 on freedom of association and 151 on freedom of association
 in the public sector, amendment of the relevant article of the Constitution; and revi-
 sion of the law on trade unions. In 1992 the Government began the process by rati-
 fying seven ILO Conventions, including Conventions 87 and 151.
 Permission for civil servants to form trade unions and for unions to engage in po-
 litical activity will require amendments to the Constitution-a procedure further
 
 
 1106
 
 complicated by the need to gain support among the opposition parties in order to
 secure the requisite two-thirds majority. The Government told the ILO's Committee
 on the Application of Standards in June that, with ratification of Convention 87
 new legislative measures with regard to the right of civil servants to organize could
 be expected. At year's end, the Government finished its consultations with civil serv-
 ant representatives and stated it planned to submit draft legislation that would le-
 galize civil servant union organization to the Council of Ministers for review in early
 1994.
 The law states that unions and confederations may be founded without prior au-
 thorization based on a petition to the governor of the province where the union's
 headquarters are to be located. Although unions are independent of the Government
 and political parties they must have government permission to hold meetings or
 rallies and must allow police to attend conventions and record the proceedings.
 Union officers may serve no more than eight consecutive 3-year terms in a given
 union position. The Constitution requires candidates for union office to have worked
 10 years in the industry represented by the union.
 Unions and their officers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly
 affecting members' economic and social interests, but the Constitution prohibits any
 union role in party politics (such as organic or financial connections with any politi-
 cal party or other association). In practice, unions have been able to convey clearly
 in election and referendum campaigns their support for, or opposition to, given polit-
 ical parties and government policies. Prosecutors may request labor courts to order
 a trade union or confederation into liquidation based on alleged violation of specific
 legal norms. The Government however, may not summarily dissolve a union. The
 ILO's Committee on Standards noted in June that public servants who had been
 dismissed under martial law were being reinstated as a result of the Fight Against
 Terrorism Act of 1991, but expressed concern that the Act's broad definition of ter-
 rorism and propaganda could lead to workers' being deprived of employment on the
 basis of politica dscrimination.
 During 1993, the assets and property of the Turkish Confederation of Revolution-
 ary Workers Unions (DISK), which had been seized when DISK was banned after
 the 1980 military coup, were returned.
 The right to strike, while guaranteed in the Constitution, is partially restricted.
 For example, workers engaged in the protection of life and property and those in
 the mining and petroleum industries, sanitation services, national defense and edu-
 cation do not have the right to strike. Collective bargaining is required before a
 strike. The law specifies the series of steps a union must take before it may strike
 or an employer may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding mediation is the- last of those
 steps. In sectors in which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through bind-
 ing arbitration. A party that fails to comply with these steps forfeits its rights. The
 struck employer may respond with a lockout but is prohibited from hiring strike-
 breakers or using administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done by strik-
 ers. Unions are forbidden to engage in secondary (solidarity), wildcat, or general
 strikes. The Government also has the statutory power to suspend strikes for 60 days
 for reasons of national security or public health and safety. Unions may petition the
 Council of State to lift such a suspension, but if this appeal fails the strike is subject
 to compulsory arbitration at the end of the 60-day period.
 Some 45 strikes, involving about 6,900 workers, took place in the first 10 months
 of the year. All were peaceful, and most resulted in sizable wage and benefit settle-
 ments. The Government suspended 1 strike in 1993. This involved a strike by work-
 ers at a printing facility at the Prime Ministry which produces Turkey's official ga-
 zette. The Government invoked compulsory arbitration to end this strike and ad-
 justed the wages of the workers to make them comparable to those of workers who
 had similar jobs in other establishments.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bodies, as long as these organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) approved DISK as an affiliate in December 1992. Turk-Is is a long-
 standing member. Hak-Is, the Islamic union confederation, applied for ICFTU affili-
 ation in 1993. In its December 1993 meeting, the ICFTU postponed consideration
 of HAK-IS' application, pending further consultations with the European Free Trade
 Union Confe eration and the ICFT~s Turkish affiliates.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial activity and some
 public sector agricultural activities are organized. The law requires that, in order
 to become a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one
 of the employees at agiven work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in that
 particular industry. This 10-percent barrier has the effect of favoring established
 
 
 1107
 unions, and particularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that rep-
 resents nearly 80 percent of organized labor in Turkey. The ILO has called on Tur-
 key to rescind this 10-percent rule, and the recently relegalized DISK, which is seri-
 ously disadvantaged by it, raised the issue with the ILO in 1992. Both Turk-Is and
 the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule, however, and the
 Government is not pursuing a change. Antiunion discrimination by employers is
 prohibited by law. An effective means for resolving complaints of such discrimina-
 tion exists within the system of labor courts.
 Union organizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the duty-free export
 processing zones at Antalya, Istanbul, Izmir, and Mersin. Workers in those zones,
 however, are not allowed to strike during the first 10 years of operation. Until then,
 settlements not otherwise reached will be determined by binding arbitration.
 In its 1993 report, the ILO Committee of Experts on the application of conven-
 tions noted that it has expressed its concern over the years regarding legislative in-
 fringement of free collective bargaining, compulsory arbitration in cases of disputes
 other than those relating to essential services, and denial to civil servants of the
 right to bargain collectively.
  c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 the Constitution and statutes and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution and labor laws
 forbid employment of children younger than 15, with the exception that those aged
 13 and 14 may- engage in light part-time, work if enrolled in -school or vocational
 training. The Constitution also prohibits children from engaging in physically de-
 manding jobs, such as underground mining, and from working at night. The Min-
 istry of Labor effectively enforces these laws only in the organized industrial sector.
 In practice, many children work because families frequently need the supple-
 mentary income. An informal and essentially unsupervised apprenticeship system
 provides work for young boys at low wages, e.g., in auto repair shops. Girls are rare-
 y seen working in public, but many are kept out of school to work in indoor handi-
 crafts, especially in rural areas.
 Turkey is participating in the ILO's international program on the elimination of
 child labor (PEC). In 1992, with technical assistance from the ILO, the Government
 established a child labor unit within the Ministry of Labor tasked with training
 labor inspectors for better enforcement of child labor laws. According to the Ministry
 of Labor, in 1993 the number of trained assistant inspectors for child labor had in-
 creased from 160 to 700. The ministry has held training seminars and workshops
 on the problems of child labor. The workshops have included representatives from
 the Turk-Is Labor Confederation and from employers. Turk-Is itself has established
 a child labor office within the confederation. A center in Ankara has also been
 opened to help children found working in the streets.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. In recent years it has done so annually. On July
 23, the minimum wage was increased by 70 percent over the year before. The
 monthly minimum wage rate (after taxes), effective August 1, is $138 (T.L.
 1,563,000) for workers older than 16 and $99 (T.L. 1,116,000) for workers under 16.
 Without support from other sources, it would be difficult for a single worker, and
 impossible for a family, to live on the minimum wage. Most workers earn consider-
 ably more. In addition to wages, workers covered by the labor law, who constitute
 about one-third of the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or food allowance
 daily; transportation to and from work; a fuel allowance; and other fringe benefits
 which, according to the Turkish employers' organization, makes basic wages alone
 only about 37 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek, although most unions have
 bargained for fewer hours in the workweek. Labor law limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. The labor inspectorate of
 the Ministry of Labor in the unionized industrial, service, and government sectors
 effectively enforces wage and hour provisions.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement program. In prac-
 tice, financial constraints, limited safety awareness, carelessness, and fatalistic atti-
 tudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and health by workers and em-
 ployers alike.
 
 
 1108
