TURKEY
The 1988 report on Turkey is somewhat more balanced than earlier reports but continues to minimize human rights abuses. Citing Turkey's ratification of both the United Nations and European conventions against torture, the report states: "Turkey continued to make progress in the observance of human rights in 1988." The report fails, however, to discuss the extent of on-going violations: the systematic torture of the vast majority of suspects detained for questioning, the continuing incarceration of thousands of political prisoners, the increased harassment of the press and the mistreatment of the Kurdish minority in southeast Turkey.
In its discussion of torture, the report says that there were "fewer allegations of torture in 1988." But it does not mention reports that almost all political prisoners are subjected to torture in the political sections of police stations throughout Turkey. Although the numbers of torture victims may have declined, the percentage of political detainees tortured contmues to be well over 90 percent, according to defense lawyers and human rights activists. To their credit, however, the authors of the report include for the first time eight alleged incidents of torture, including the names of several victims. The report also rightly emphasizes the problems arising from "lengthy incommunicado pretrial detention," although use of the term "pretrial" obsciu-es the fact that most torture takes place before a detained suspect has even been formally arrested. The report has also finally dropped assertions that appeared in previous reports explaining torture as "police brutality" caused by improperly trained police officers. The report mentions that "a number of officials were convicted of ha^^ng tortured people in their custody." It does not, however, give the exact number or indicate that convictions have occurred in only a tiny percentage of torture cases.
Writing on prison conditions, the report says: "Tiu-kish prison conditions suffer in comparison with those in many richer countries." Evidently be-
189
Critique
cause it would contradict this tadt economic justification for Turkish prison conditions, the report does not discuss the many prison problems that could be addressed without additional funds, for example: the practice of chaining prisoners together with their hands behind their backs for long periods of time when en route to courts or hospitals; restrictive visiting and mail regulations; inadequate provisions for exerdse and fresh air; and reprisals against prisoners who reveal prison conditions to outsiders.
The report refers to the hunger strikes that took place in 13 prisons between August and December 1988 over "stringent new prison regulations," but it does not state that over 2,iX)0 prisoners were involved, some of whom were hospitalized as a result. The report properly aedits the government with a new policy of permitting family members who do not speak Turkish to converse with prisoners in Kurdish. Whether this will be carried out in practice remains to be seen.
In discussing arbitrary arrest and detention, the report observes: Judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained while their cases progress, sometimes for a period of years. While many of these cases involved persons accused of violent crimes, others involved membership in illegal organizations.
The report does not say that political prisoners number in the thousands. The Turkish Human Rights Association estimates the number as at least 5,000. Prime Minister Turgut Ozal himself reported the figure in December 1988 as 3,800. Among these prisoners are hundreds who have never been charged with violent acts or even with belonging to a group that advocated violence.
Discussing exile, the report rightly refers to the denial of passports ~ really the deprivation of citizenship - to 14,000 Turks living abroad in voluntary exile. It also correctly observes that some expatriate Turks who have attempted to return to Turkey have been turned back or, in some cases, detained by the police.
In the section on the denial of fair public trials, the report does not state that lawyers have been harassed, investigated and tried for actions taken in representing clients.
190
Turkey
The report describes some cases in which jomnalists and others have been tried for their writings, but it seriously imderstates limits on freedom of expression in Turkey. In fact, freedom of the press deteriorated markedly during 1988.
After first stating that "the Turkish press is lively and vigorous," the report lists provisions in the Penal Code that limit free expression. It states that these la^ are "sometimes" used to harass newspapers and then describes several cases of restrictions on freedom of expression, including the case of Fatma Yazici, the "responsible editor" of the journal 2000'e Doffu, who is a defendant in approximately 30 cases. (Under Turkish law, every publication must designate a "responsible editor," and that person is prosecuted when the contents of a publication are alleged to violate Turkey's Penal Code.) It also discusses the case in which a writer and an editor of Milliyet are on trial for a series of interviews they attempted to publish with the leader of the Kurdish Workers Party, which is waging a guerrilla war in southeast Turkey, the report also describes the seizii^ of that edition of the newspaper before it reached newsstands. And the report mentions the destruction of Muzaffer Ilhan Erdost's book on Kurdish life, which was published legally in 1966 but banned in 1988 when it was re-published.
By listing these examples of restrictions on freedom of expression, the report implicitly suggests that the situation has worsened, but it does not say so. Nor does it discuss the continuous harassment, intimidation, detention and trials of those associated with small socialist journals, and the confiscation, sometimes before distribution, of many of their issues. The report asserts that the courts dismiss most charges against the press, but this is true only for the mainstream press, not for left-wing and small socialist journals. In addition, frequent charges, even if later dismissed, have an intimidating effect on the press which the report should have noted. The report does not reveal that at least 41 Turkish journalists are now in prison for what they have written. Nor does it state that over 2,000journalists and editors have been tried in the five years since the end of military rule in 1983.
In discussing radio and television, the report accurately states that opposition parties claim that the government-controlled radio and television
191
Critique
newscasts have a strong pro-government bias. It does not state that many Turks believe opposition parties do not have adequate access to television and radio. The report properly states that "works of certain leftist and Kurdish performers are said to be banned from broadcast on Turkish Radio and Television for political or cultural reasons."
The section on freedom of assodation correctly states that the Law on Associations prohibits associations from having ties to political parties or engaging in political activity, and that the government "closely monitors association activity." It does not state that the government harasses many associations with interrogations, sometimes including detentions of their officers and members, as well as with charges and trials \^cb sometimes end in acquittals and sometimes in fmes. It also does not indicate that regional governors can and sometimes do order the dosing of brandies, for example, of the Turkish Human Rights Association. Nor does it refer to the banning of some associations -- for example, a doctors' association that favored abolishing the death penalty.
The section on freedom of religion is well done. It describes the detention of 50 Christians, some of whom are Evangelical Protestants, and the expulsion from the country of some of them without providing consular access.
In discussing freedom of movement within the country, the report sa)^ "Turks are generally free to travel abroad." It also cites recent changes in the passport law and conflicting opinions as to whether these changes are helpful to people wanting to travel outside Turkey. It does not cite reliable estimates indicating that as many as 300,000 Turkish dtizens have been denied passports since the military coup of 1980.
The portion of the report dealing with respect for political rights correctly lists the prohibitions against forming parties that advocate communism, Marxism, Fascism, Islamic Fundamentalism or a Kurdish state. It also discusses the cases of Haydar Kutlu and Nihat Sargin, who were arrested on their return to Turkey when they announced that they would form a new communist party.
With regard to human rights monitoring, the report correctly states: The Government's attitude toward private organizations monitoring human rights situations is ambivalent. Their rep-
192
Turkey
resentatíves are free to come, but the degree of official cooperation extended to them varies and reflects, at times, clear resentment over what the Government perceives as "unfair" reporting by such groups following visits to Turkey.
The section of the report addressing the problems of the Kurdish minority contains no discussion of the abuses suffered by the Kurdish people in southeast Turkey at the hands of both the armed guerrillas and the Turkish security forces. Other than that, the treatment of the Kurdish issue in the report is accurate. It continues the full discussion of efforts to destroy the Kurdish ethnic identity which was presented for the first time in the 1987 report, including mention of efforts to prohibit books, magazines and other publications in Kurdish as well as materials on Kurdish history, culture and ethnic identity. The report rightly observes that the Kurdish issue remains extremely sensitive in Turkey. Indeed, the Turkish government was very critical of the State Department for addressing this issue in the 1987 country report. Thus, it is especially important that the State Department did not back off the issue this year.
193





âidaMiLoàL Jtttl WW
^^pvfii^nM^l«»- sntf'euMiScsÍRe cipúQos» to «riKite'tbeite uc jfâj^	»Uli^^lBlgypclatfófiifc tn^cy. H " -----
wLcatiné llw M WiW
-tiiice '»ff ^iOtíp «i

- Tibe ¡KirtKm<|grtei»p8>t #»ii^
hafxiiiiCl'Wte. fffiMtansol^m <if «Kurct^ statt. It «bS^^ccttt-M» ù» cms »f Haçfdftf Stfüai ükí S*rÀ ^^ ftrretl^d on ústís itlntoTMMFItlWtU^aaiçaiK^ ^pwty.	_ _
^-'^^ÊSÊy^ ^ bttSMB SKM^oc^ ^ f opoft contctj^ Itile«! imrn OvmmmCt ¿Ànd« i<mmú pri^Éa 4ii|wptetikwi
sOttüoQ» b	TM
