Turkey
Turkey’s human rights record continued to improve during 2004, albeit
slowly and unevenly, as the country attempted to recover from the legacy
of gross violations committed by state forces and armed opposition
groups fighting in the countryside and cities in the early 1990s. The
reduction in political violence since 1999 has encouraged reform. It was
therefore disappointing when Kongra-Gel (Kurdistan People’s
Congress, formerly known as the Kurdistan Workers’ Party [PKK])
resumed attacks in the mountainous southeast of the country, and state
forces responded with heavy-handed security operations affecting civilians
in rural areas.
Reform has taken one step back for every two steps forward as police,
governors, prosecutors, and government institutions tend to interpret
legislation as restrictively as possible. Nevertheless, there have been significant
turning points: on June 9, 2004, for example, four Kurdish former
deputies imprisoned for their non-violent activities since 1994 were
released, and the state broadcasting channel gave its first program in the
Kurdish language.
Progress in extending basic freedoms has been frustratingly slow, but
continues a consistent trend of improvement as over previous years.
Achievements in combatting torture remaine fragile, with a risk of backsliding
into old habits as anti-terror operations resume. The government
has once again failed to established an effective framework for the
return of the hundreds of thousands of Kurds forcibly displaced from
the southeast during the early 1990s.
Events reflect the interplay of four strong forces: pressure for reform
coming from Turkish civil society, impatient with longstanding restrictions
and ingrained institutional abuses; the incentive provided by the
European Union through Turkey’s candidacy for membership; resistance
to change presented by the powerful sectors within the military, security forces and the state apparatus; and the destructive effects of
political violence.
Freedom of Expression
These tensions have produced a very mixed picture for freedom of
expression. Journalists and politicians who in earlier years would have
received prison sentences for their statements have been acquitted, but
prosecutors continue to indict people for their non-violent expression,
and several writers served prison sentences during 2004. For example,
in May, Hakan Albayrak (Milli Gazete) began a fifteen-month sentence
at Kalecik prison near Ankara under the Law on Crimes against Atatürk
for writing that prayers were not said at the funeral of Mustafa Kemal
Atatürk, the founder of the Turkish Republic. Nevin Berktafl is now
serving a three and a half year sentence under article 169 (supporting an
armed organization) of the Turkish criminal code for writing a book
critical of isolation in F-type prisons.
State security courts, commonly used to prosecute and imprison people
for their non-violent opinions, were abolished in June 2004, but laws
used to stifle free speech such as articles 159 of the criminal code
(insulting state institutions) and 312 (incitement to racial hatred) remain
in place, and were copied into the new criminal code that was adopted
in October.
In June 2004 Turkey’s longest-standing prisoners of opinion, the four
Kurdish former deputies Leyla Zana, Orhan Do¤an, Hatip Dicle, and
Selim Sadak, were released pending retrial, after ten years at Ankara
Central Closed Prison. They had been convicted in 1994 for their nonviolent
activities as parliamentary deputies in an unfair trial under the
Anti-Terror Law.
In June 2004 state television began broadcasts in Kurdish, Bosnak,
Circassian, Arabic, and Zaza. The programs were short with uninspiring content, but represented a significant change in official attitudes to
minority languages. Private radio stations in southeastern Turkey
applied to the High Council for Radio and Television for permission to
broadcast in Kurdish, but had not received permission by the end of
2004.
Torture and IIl-treatment
There were fewer cases of torture and ill-treatment in 2004, largely due
to safeguards imposed in recent years, and by the government’s frequent
assertions of zero-tolerance for such abuses. Nevertheless, detainees
from all parts of the country report that police and gendarmes beat
them in police custody. In some cases, detainees still complain that they
have been subjected to electric shocks, sexual assault, hosing with cold
water, and death threats. The persistence of these violations is a consequence
of poor supervision of police stations, which permits security
forces to ignore detainees’ rights – and most importantly, the right to
legal counsel. Human Rights Watch has urged the government to
impose measures to improve internal monitoring of police stations by
provincial governors and prosecutors, to permit independent monitoring
by members of bar and medical associations, and to launch ministry-
level investigations of all allegations of torture.
Internal Displacement
More than a quarter of a million villagers, mainly Kurdish, remain
unable to return to their homes in the southeast, after having been
forced out of their homes by security forces in brutal operations accompanied
by torture and “disappearance” during the conflict between
security forces and the PKK during the 1990s. In most cases, communities
were forcibly evacuated if they refused to join the paramilitary “village
guards,” a brutal and corrupt force that was armed and paid by the
government to fight the PKK.
Government projects for return did not provide the displaced with adequate
resources to re-establish their lives in their former homes or
establish conditions which would enable them to return in safety. Those
villagers who attempted to return were in some cases turned back by
local gendarmes because they refused to join the village guards, or were
at risk of attack by village guards. In September a village guard allegedly
shot and killed Mustafa Koyun and wounded Mehmet Kaya in the village
of Tellikaya of Diyarbakir. The villagers who were attacked had
been forced to leave Tellikaya in the early 1990s after they refused to
join the village guard
Those who attempted to draw attention to the plight of the displaced
risk official persecution. In January 2004, fiefika Gürbüz, president of
the Migrants’ Association for Social Cooperation and Culture (Göç-
Der), was convicted of “incitement to racial hatred” for preparing a
study of the difficulties faced by displaced Kurds. Gürbüz received a
ten-month prison sentence converted to a fine.
Key International Actors
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), which
had imposed human rights monitoring on Turkey in 1996, lifted the
mechanism in June 2004. This was an appropriate move, in view of the
general improvement in the intervening nine years, but it is crucial that
Turkey and the Assembly do not lose site of the wide-ranging recommendations
that accompanied the decision. Other Council of Europe
bodies continued their long-standing and close engagement with
Turkey. In June the Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT)
published a report on its September 2003 visit to Turkey. The CPT
noted a general improvement, with lawyers, human rights organizations,
and even detainees themselves noting a sharp decline in “heavy
torture.” On the other hand, there were consistent reports of electric
shocks used in one custody unit, and medical evidence consistent with
beatings in three others. The CPT found that in southeastern Turkey the “great majority” of those detained by the police or gendarmerie
were unable to gain access to a lawyer, and that there were “major deficiencies”
in the system for medical examinations.
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) issued further judgements
against the Turkish government on issues ranging from freedom
of expression to torture and extrajudicial execution. In February 2004
the court found the Turkish government responsible for the deaths of
Ikram and Servet Ipek, who “disappeared” after being taken into custody
by soldiers who were destroying houses in southeastern Turkey in
1994.
The ECtHR ruled in June 2004 that the ban on wearing the headscarf
in universities was not a breach of the right to freedom of religion.
Leyla Sahin had been denied access to university because she wore a
headscarf. The court echoed the Turkish government’s arguments that
the ban is justified in order to preserve the secular public order and to
protect the rights of other non-Muslim students and students who
choose not to wear the headscarf. Human Rights Watch believes that
the ban is discriminatory and breaches the rights to freedom of religion
and expression.
International and domestic attention has been firmly fixed on the E.U.’s
dealings with Turkey. 2004 was the fifth year of close monitoring to
establish whether or not Turkey had met the Copenhagen Criteria: “the
stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human
rights and respect for and protection of minorities.” This was seen as a
make-or-break moment, since a decision in December to open negotiations
for membership would strengthen the government and those
within the government who have pushed for reform, while a refusal or
postponement was likely to be regarded as a sign that the E.U. intended
to pull out of the process unilaterally in spite of the substantial human
rights improvements. 
In October 2004 Hina Jilani, the special representative of the United
Nations Secretary-General on Human Rights Defenders visited Turkey
to examine the pressures still faced by civil society. In a statement at the
end of her visit she noted “genuine steps toward change” but urged that
the growing human rights movement should no longer be treated with
suspicion by security forces. In November the government issued a circular
recognizing the legitimate role of human rights defenders and
requiring security forces to treat them accordingly.
Also in October 2004, the European Commission recommended that
Turkey’s candidacy should move forward to the next step, with the
opening of membership negotiations in 2005. The recommendation
included extra monitoring measures, including a “brake clause” that
would suspend the candidacy process if respect for human rights are put
under threat. In December the Brussels European Council will give a
final decision on the opening of negotiations.