 TURKEY
 Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty Parliament, the Grand Na-
 tional Assembly, which elects the President. In 1993 it elected Suleyman Demirel
 President. In November Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz, leader of the Motherland
 Party (ANAP), resigned after 17 months in office following -a no-confidence vote in
 Parliament concerning corruption allegations. In January 1999, President Demirel
 asked Prime Minister-designate Bulent Ecevit, leader of the Democratic Left Party
 (DSP), to form a new government The military exercises substantial but indirect
 influence over politics in the belief that they are the constitutional protectors of the
 
 
 1545
 state. The Government respects the Constitution's provisions for an independent ju-
 diciary.
 For over a decade, Turkey has engaged in armed conflict with the terrorist
 Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), whose goal is a separate state of Kurdistan in
 southeastern Turkey. A state of emergency, declared in 1987, continues in six south-
 eastern provinces that face substantial PKK terrorist violence. A regional governor
 for the state of emergency has authority over the regular governors in the six prov-
 inces, and six adjacent ones, for security matters. The state of emergency allows the
 regional governor to exercise certain quasi-martial law powers, including restric-
 tions on the press and removal from the area of persons whose activities are deemed
 detrimental to public order. The state of emergency decree was renewed for 4
 months in November.
 The Turkish National Police (TNP) have primary responsibility for security in
 urban areas, while the Jandarma (gendarmerie) carry out this function in the coun-
 tryside. The armed forces continued to combat the PKK in the state of emergency
 region, thereby taking on an internal security function. Although civilian and mili-
 tary authorities remain publicly committed to the rule of law and respect for human
 rights and continued education for law enforcement personnel in these subjects,
 members of the security forces, particularly police "special teams," Jandarma, vil-
 lage guards, and TNP personnel, committed serious human rights abuses.
 Export-led growth continued to fuel the country's market economy. Trade with the
 European Union constitutes 60 percent of overall foreign trade. Leading exports
 were textiles, iron, and steel, but exports of electronics equipment, consumer goods,
 food, and auto parts continued to grow. The Government made progress toward
 agreement on an east-west energy corridor to bring Caspian Basin oil and natural
 gas to world markets through pipelines across Turkey. However, despite market re-
 silience, overall economic growth slowed sharply during the year due to an outflow
 of foreign capital in the wake of the Russian financial crisis and budget expenditure
 control and skillful monetary and exchange-rate policy. The Yilmaz-led Government
 lowered wholesale inflation from 91 percent in 1997 to 54 percent in 1998. Yet infla-
 tion continued at a level that exacerbated income disparities: per capita Gross Na-
 tional Product (GNP) of $3,100 did not reflect wide differences in income. The Gov-
 ernment's inability to pass most of its structural reform package or to remove lin-
 gering barriers to foreign direct investment acted as a further drag on economic per-
 formance, as did large off-budget expenditures by the military. Financial corruption
 continued to undermine popular faith in the central government.
 Despite Prime Minister Yilmaz's stated commitment that human rights would be
 his government's highest priority in 1998, serious human rights abuses continued.
 There is a general recognition, including by the Government, that the country's
 human rights performance is inadequate and needs to be brought in line, not only
 with its international obligations and commitments, but also with popular aspira-
 tions and demands and the Government's own policies.
 Extrajudicial killings, including deaths in detention from the excessive use of
 force, "mystery killings," and disappearances continued. Torture remained wide-
 spread. Police and Jandarma antiterror personnel often abused detainees and em-
 ployed torture during incommunicado detention and interrogation. The implementa-
 tion of reforms to address these problems was uneven. Protracted investigations and
 trials of officials suspected of abuses continued to be a problem. Important cases
 dating back several years continued without resolution, including: 48 police officers
 charged with the 1996 death of journalist Metin Goktepe; 10 police officers from
 Manisa charged with torturing 16 persons in 1995-mostly teenagers accused of ties
 to a leftist terrorist organization; and police and security personnel charged with
 beating to death 10 prisoners during a prison disturbance in Diyarbakir in 1996.
 Despite an increase in prosecutions through October, the rarity of convictions and
 the light sentences imposed on police and other security officials for killings and tor-
 ture fostered a climate of impunity that probably remains the single largest obstacle
 to reducing human rights abuses. The lack of universal and immediate access to an
 attorney by those detained for political crimes is also a major factor in the commis-
 sion of torture by police and other security forces.
 Prison conditions are poor. Numerous small-scale disturbances and hunger strikes
 erupted throughout the year. Security forces continued to use arbitrary arrest and
 detention. Prolonged pretrial detention and lengthy trials continued to be problems.
 The Government infringed on citizens' privacy rights.
 Limits on freedom of speech and of the press remained another serious problem.
 For example, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) reported that 25 journal-
 ists were imprisoned at year's end. Authorities banned or confiscated numerous pub-
 lications and raided newspaper offices, encouraging self-censorship on reporting on
 the southeast.
 
 
 1546
 The Government continued to use the 1991 Anti-Terror Law, with its broad and
 ambiguous definition of terrorism, to detain both alleged terrorists and others on the
 charge that their acts, words, or ideas constituted dissemination of separatist propa-
 ganda. Prosecutors also used Article 312 of the Criminal Code (incitement to racial
 or -ethnic enmity), Article 159 (insulting the Parliament, army, republic, or judici-
 ary), the law to protect Ataturk (no. 5816), and Article 16 of the Press Law to limit
 freedom of expression.
 A campaign against "reactionaries" (Islamists) and "separatists" (pro-Kurdish ac-
 tivists)-groups that the military publicly identified as the principal threats to Tur-
 key's national security--continued throughout the year and broadened to include
 mainstream secular journalists, nonviolent leaders of human rights groups, some de-
 vout politicians in mainline conservative parties, and religiously observant Muslim
 businessmen. Members of the legal pro-Kurdish People's Democracy Party (HADEP)
 were sometimes the object of arbitrary arrests and often were harassed in the south-
 east for their legal political activities. The campaign against pro-Kurdish activists
 intensified after the November arrest in Italy of PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan, when
 some HADEP members expressed support for Ocalan. Authorities detained a large
 number of HADEP members, and party leaders allege that many were tortured or
 beaten. An 18-year-old party member died in police custody, allegedly from beatings
 during interrogation. At year's end the party faced closure by the authorities for al-
 leged anticonstitutional activities. (Two of HADEP's predecessors, HEP and DEP,
 were closed on similar grounds.)
 In January as part of the intense private and public campaign of pressure led by
 the military and the judiciary, with broad support from several segments of society
 that view 'fundamentalism" to be a threat to the secular republic, the Constitu-
 tional Court ordered the Islamist Refah Party closed and banned several of its lead-
 ers, including former Prime Minister Erbakan, from political activity for 5 years.
 The National Security Council continued to warn against Islamist activities.
 Istanbul mayor and prominent Islamist political leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan's 10-
 month sentence in April on charges of promoting separatism and threatening the
 unity of the state was upheld in September. The sentence carries a lifetime ban
 from politics.
 Kurdish-language broadcasts were not allowed. Printed material in Kurdish,
 while legal, was limited. Private channel television programs and print media con-
 tinued to debate human rights and other issues of freedom of speech and the press,
 but the Government periodically closed down stations that aired programs in Kurd-
 ish or on Kurdish issues. Kurdish music recordings reportedly were widely available
 in the southeast.
 The Government and the law impose limits on freedom of assembly and associa-
 tion. Starting in May police with increasing frequency and force broke up public
 .gatherings of the SaturdayMothers, a group that has held weekly vigils in Istanbul
 for more than 3 years to protest the disappearances of their relatives.
 Government officials continued to harass, intimidate, indict, and imprison human
 rights monitors, journalists, and lawyers for ideas that they expressed in public fo-
 rums. The Diyarbakir and Sanliurfa branches of the Human Rights Association
 (HRA), which were shut down in 1997, remained closed. In December a third
 branch, in Mardin, was closed. In October the Court of Appeals affirmed the 1997
 conviction of Akin Birdal, HRA's president, on charges of inciting hatred and en-
 mity,,for statements he made about the Kurdish problem and torture. Other HRA
 organizers. also faced charges of promoting separatism or inciting ethnic hatred
 based on speeches. In May Birdal was wounded seriously in a murder attempt. A
 Jandarma sergeant and 10 other suspects were put on trial in connection with the
 attack.
 The Government continued to impose some restrictions on religious minorities.
 Discrimination against women persisted. Spousal abuse remains a serious problem,
 and the-Parliament passed legislation making it illegal. Some abuse of children, dis-
 crimination against minorities, and child labor remained serious problems. Non-
 governmental organizations led a public awareness campaign to call attention to
 child labor.
 The situation in the southeast remained a serious concern. The Government has
 long denied the Kurdish population, located largely in the southeast, basic political,
 cultural, and linguistic rights. As part of its fight against the PKK, the Government
 forcibly displaced noncombatants, failed to resolve extrajudicial killings, tortured ci-
 vilians, and abridged freedom of expression. The number of villagers forcibly evacu-
 ated from their homes since the conflict began is credibly estimated to be approxi-
 mately 560,000.
 The State Minister for Human Rights, who also is the coordinator for the High
 Council for Human Rights, led the Governmenfs effort to implement legislative and
 
 
 1547
 administrative reforms. The Government introduced draft legislation that would
 ease some restrictions on freedom of expression and facilitate the prosecution of civil
 servants, but Parliament took no action on the legislation by year's end. The Gov-
 ernment further refined its human rights training for the police and military. The
 military continued to emphasize human rights training for its officers and non-
 commissioned officers, which human rights groups reported led to a reduction in
 human rights violations. Human rights education in primary schools is mandatory;
 it is an elective in high schools.
 The PKK committed widespread abuses as part of its terrorism against the Gov-
 ernment and civilians, mostly Kurds. PKK terrorists frequently killed noncombat-
 ants, targeting village officials, village guards, teachers, and other perceived rep-
 resentatives of the state. The PKK campaign of violence effectively restricts the
 public's freedom to travel after dark in certain regions. PKK terrorists also commit-
 ted random killings, including in tourist areas, in their effort to intimidate the popu-
 lace. Late in the year, after its leader Abdullah Ocalan was detained in Italy, the
 PKK intensified its campaign of suicide bombings that caused several deaths and-
 many injuries. The PKK briefly declared and then suspended a cease-fire in Septem-
 ber, following the pattern of previous unilateral cease-fires, all of which ended with
 renewed PKK violence.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Credible reports of political and
 extrajudicial killings by government authorities continued, although accurate fig-
 ures were unavailable. The Documentation Center of the Human Rights Foundation
 (HRF) reported a number of deaths of detainees under suspicious circumstances,
 some as an apparent result of torture. Human rights monitors also credibly reported
 that government forces used excessive force, sometimes resulting in deaths, during
 some raids on alleged terrorist and militant safe houses.
 Human rights monitors remain greatly concerned about the 1996 Provincial Au-
 thority Law, which authorizes security forces to shoot to kill when challenging a
 suspect and grants provincial governors the power to declare a "state of emergency"
 and to call in security forces. In January the Constitutional Court ruled that au-
 thorities may not fire at suspected terrorists without providing appropriate warning
 and ordered the Government to revise the law.
 In January journalists Mehmet Topaloglu, Selahatin Akinci, and Bulent Dil were
 killed in a police raid on an alleged militants' house in Adana. According to the
 HRF, the evidence and witnesses did not support the police version of the events.
 An autopsy on Topaloglu found 11 bullets and a broken shoulder. Cigarette burns,
 drill marks, multiple fractures, and traces of strangulation were noted on Dil's body.
 Human Rights Watch (HRW) noted that 10 persons were killed during house raids
 in Adana and Istanbul. Witnesses and human rights monitors did not support the
 police version of the events. In March an 18-year-old theft suspect died in police cus-
 tody in Adana. In November 18-year-old Hamit Cakir, arrested in a po ice sweep
 against HADEP, died in police custody in Diyarbakir, allegedly from beatings during
 interrogation. A criminal suspect also died in November in detention in Gaziantep.
 The Government undertook serious investigations of most alleged extrajudicial
 killings.
 The HRA and other human rights groups recorded several mystery killings in
 which the assailant's identity was unknown. Most of the reports pertain to the
 southeast, where security force complicity is widely alleged, and some of the victims
 were leaders or prominent members of the Kurdish community, local politicians,
 journalists, or members of HADEP.
 A Government report that came to light in January and a 1997 parliamentary re-
 port revealed ties between the authorities and illegal gangs-ultranationalists and
 members of organized crime-in the wake of the 1996 Susurluk incident, a car acci-
 dent that provided evidence of such associations. These links raised serious concerns
 about corruption and the abuse of power in the security forces. The Government
 publicly committed to investigate corruption but was criticized for its slow progress.
 In April trials began of former Interior Minister Mehmet Agar, who was linked to
 the Susurluk victims, and Member of Parliament (M.P.) Sedat Bucak. Separately,
 in September State Minister Eyup Asik resigned amidst allegations of links to orga-
 nized crime leader Alaattin Cakici, who was apprehended abroad with a diplomatic
 passport. These same allegations of corruption led to a November vote of no-con-
 fidence in Parliament for the Government of Prime Minister Yilmaz.
 Although arrests of police and other law enforcement personnel increased in cases
 of extrajudicial killings, the number of arrests and prosecutions remained low, and
 
 
 1548
 punishment for those persons convicted remained insufficient. In November a police
 supervisor in Adana's antitheft unit, Murat Guldas, was released for time served
 after being convicted in the March death of 18-year-old Mehmet Yavuz, who was
 killed by blows to the abdomen while in police custody; 10 other police officers were
 acquitted in the case. Yavuz's spouse and mother also claimed that the police beat
 them.
 Six Aydin police officers were convicted of involuntary manslaughter and sen-
 tenced in April to 52 years' imprisonment for the killing of student Bald Erdogan,
 who was beaten to death while in police custody in 1993; the police officers appealed
 the verdict. According to HRW, the defendants and approximately 60 plainclothes
 police officers brutally beat Erdogan's sister and lawyer in the courtroom after the
 sentencing. The Mersin Penal Court in May sentenced police officer Suat Tunc to
 2 years for the 1996 killing of 14-year-old Cetin Karakoyun, who died in police cus-
 tody, but the sentence was converted to a small fine. In June the Istanbul Penal
 Court sentenced police officer Nurettin Ozturk to 6 years and 8 months' imprison-
 ment for involuntary manslaughter in the 1993 death in detention of Vakkas Dost.
 The 1997 acquittal of 11 police officers in the 1992 killing of Remzi Basalak while
 in detention in Adana was upheld by the Court of Appeals.
 Little progress occurred in the trial of 48 police officers, including 3 senior officers
 and a deputy commissioner, for the 1996 killing of Metin Goktepe, a correspondent
 for Evrensel newspaper who died from wounds inflicted while in detention in
 Istanbul. Police initially denied that he was detained, then later said that he died
 from a fall. Following large public demonstrations and parliamentary criticism over
 the circumstances of his death, an investigation led to the arrest of the officers. In
 1997 the courts decided to try separately 11 of the police officers for premeditated
 murder. In March five were convicted of manslaughter, while the remaining six
 were acquitted. However, the Court of Appeals in August overturned both the con-
 victions and the acquittals. In December the Afyon Penal Court released the five
 officers pending the outcome of a new trial. The other officers had returned to duty
 pending the outcome of the trial. One officer, Murat Polat, who was the subject of
 an outstanding arrest warrant, reportedly turned himself in to the Bitlis public
 prosecutor and remains under arrest. No progress was made in the trial of the other
 37, who were charged with excessive use of force in controlling the demonstration.
 The trial continued of 29 Jandarma soldiers and 36 antiterror police officers
 charged with manslaughter in the 1996 beating deaths of 10 prisoners while quell-
 ing a prison disturbance in Diyarbakir (see Section 1.c.).
 Investigation continues in the case of the death in custody in December 1997 of
 university student Burhanett AkdogU in Ankara. There were no developments in
 the case of eight p olice officers charged in the 1995 death of Sinan Demirtas, who
 died while inpolice custody, or in the case of police officer Abdullah Bozkurt,
 charged with the 1994 killing of Vedat Han Gulsenoglu. Bozkurt was reassigued
 back to Istanbul. The following cases also remain unresolved: the 1994 killing of
 HEP party official Faik Candan; the 1993 killing of journalist Ugur Mumcu; and
 the 1992 case ofdYcel Ozen.
 The PKK continued to commit politically motivated extrajudicial killings, pri-
 marily in rural southeast Anatolia. Victims included state officials (Jandarma, local
 mayors, imams, and schoolteachers), state-paid paramilitary village guards and
 their family members, young villagers who refused to be recruited, and PKK guerril-
 las-turned-informants. According to a press report in Yeni Yuzyil, the police re-
 ported that in 1998 approximately 243 soldiers and Jandarma, 10 police officers,
 114 village guards, and 132 civilians died in terrorist incidents. In June suspected
 PKK terrorists stopped a minibus near Tunceli. Nine passengers were murdered,
 and two were wounded.
 Turkish Hizbullah, an Islamist Turkish terrorist group (not related to Lebanese
 Hizbullah), continued to target civilians in the southeast. Trials continued in the
 cases of 89 Hizbullah members charged with a total of 113 murders. While some
 human rights monitors in the southeast believe that Turkish Hizbullah was founded
 by the Government in the 1980's to target the PKK and its sympathizers, there are
 more recent indications that Hizbullh operates alone.
 Far-left armed groups, such as Revolutionary Left (Dev So!/DHKP-C) and the
 Turkish Workers' and Peasants' Liberation Army (TIKKO), continued to commit
 abusive, violent acts. According to press reports, the Islamic Great Eastern Raiders'
 Front was suspected in a June bomb attack in Istanbul that injured 12 people, and
 TIKKO members disguised in Turkish military uniforms in June attacked a village
 near Tasova and assassinated a local official who had assisted antiterror operations
 in the area. According to the HRF and Amnesty International (eA), in May Tacettin
 Asci, treasurer of the HRA's Bursa Branch Association, and Alhmet Aydin were ab-
 ducted and killed, apparently by the Marxist-Leninist Communist Party, MLKP.
 
 
 1549
 b. Disappearance.-Accurate statistics on disappearances of those previously
 under detention are hard to confirm; nonetheless, HRA figures indicate that such
 disappearances continued to decline, from 66 disappearances in 1997 to 29 in 1998.
 Some persons disappeared after witnesses reported that security forces or law en-
 forcement officials took them into custody. Sometime after March 31 Neslihan Uslu,
 Hasan Aydogan, Metin Andac, and Mehmet Mandal disappeared from Izmir, accord-
 ing to A. Uslu, editor of the journal Devrimci Genclik, was detained frequently and
 threatened by police. Aydogan was wanted for assisting the DHKP/C, and Andac
 previously had been convicted of providing assistance to the same organization. The
 case was reported to the United Nations Working Group on Enforced and Involun-
 tary Disappearance.
 There was no resolution of the 1997 disappearances of Ilyas Eren, Burhan Aktas,
 and 73-year-old Fikri Ozgen, all of whom were believed to be taken into custody by
 plainclothes police, nor in the 1996 case in which at least five bodies were found
 near Baharli.
 For more than 3 years the "Saturday Mothers," a group primarily of women, has
 gathered weekly on a major Istanbul street to protest the disappearance of their rel-
 atives (see Section 2.b.). Beginning in May, the police often broke up the meetings,
 sometimes beating and detaining participants, among whom police said were mem-
 bers of other groups.
 The Government made an effort to investigate and explain some reported cases
 of disappearance. The Ministry of Interior operates a Missing Persons Bureau,
 which is open 24 hours a day. Most families of persons who disappeared hold the
 Government and security forces responsible and consequently avoided contact with
 the government office. Al criticizes the Bureau's findings for falling short of the
 thorough and impartial investigations called for by the United Nations Declaration
 on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. The Ankara police
 operate a telephone number through which the public can obtain information about
 detainees, gun registration, and other police-related matters. A delegation from the
 U.N. Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances visited Turkey in
 September.
 The Government, human rights organizations, and the media report that the PKK
 routinely kidnaps young men or threatens their families as part of its recruiting ef-
 fort. PKK terrorists continued their abductions of local villagers, teachers, journal-
 ists, and officials in the southeast.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Despite the Constitution's ban on torture, the Government's cooperation with un-
 scheduled foreign inspection teams, and public pledges by successive governments
 to end the practice, torture continued to be widespread. The HRF's torture rehabili-
 tation centers in Ankara, Izmir, Istanbul, and Adana had not completed compiling
 statistics on the number of credible applications for treatment during the year, but
 the HRF estimated the number to be over 600. Human rights attorneys and physi-
 cians who treat victims of torture state that most persons detained for or suspected
 of political crimes usually suffer some torture during periods of incommunicado de-
 tention in police and Jandarma stations before they are brought before a court. Or-
 dinary criminal suspects also report torture and mistreatment by police, according
 to HRW and the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.
 Government officials admit that torture occurs. Although they deny that torture
 is systematic, they explain its occurrence by stating that it is closely tied to the fight
 against terrorism. However, many cases of torture occur in western Turkey, outside
 the zone of conflict. Complaints of torture or mistreatment in eight cases were filed
 with the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission during the year.
 In April the Istanbul Chamber of Doctors certified that 21/2-year-old Azat Tokmak
 showed physical and psychological signs of torture after detention at an Istanbul
 branch of the antiterror police. Azat's mother Fatma Tokmak was detained in De-
 cember 1996 on suspicion of PKK membership. The child was burned with cigarettes
 and kicked in an effort to make the mother confess. The child is living with other
 family members while his mother remains incarcerated. In Diyarbakir local police
 beat Sadik Kelekcier and his 11-year-old grandson when they raided their house
 seeking to locate the boy's father. The grandfather reportedly was beaten again
 while in police custody for-a 3-day period. The grandson was not detained.
 According to the HRF, in March 23-year-old Cihan Altinbas was detained along
 with 13 other persons during an Istanbul demonstration. They were subjected to
 beatings, including on the soles of the feet, forced prolonged standing, loud music,
 threats, and insults. In May a group of 20 individuals, including women, was de-
 tained at the Diyarbakir security directorate in connection with Newroz Kurdish
 New Year celebrations. Witnesses reported that they were stripped, beaten, and
 subjected to electric shock and a high-pressure cold water spray. In January univer-
 
 
 1550
 sity student Ahmet Birge Uzuner received a medical certificate from the Forensic
 Medical Institute that confirmed that he showed physical signs consistent with
 being beaten. Uzuner claimed that he was beaten by four Izmir antiterror police and
 forced to inform. In April Ali Kartal, who is deaf and mute, was accused by Izmir
 police of aidingthe PKK, subjected to electric shock, and beaten, apparently because
 Re could not respond to his interrogators. In late November, leaders of the pro-Kurd-
 ish party HADEP said that many of their party members were beaten and tortured
 during the Government's crackdown on HADEP, which was precipitated by expres-
 sions for support for PKK leader Ocalan after his arrest in Italy. On several occa-
 sions police beat women (including elderly women) who held vigils on behalf of rel-
 atives who disappeared (see Section 2.b.). Police also violently broke up demonstra-
 tions and beat persons (see Sections 2.b., 4, 5, and 6.a.).
 Human rights observers report that because the arresting officer is also respon-
 sible for interrogating the suspect, some officers may resort to torture to obtain a
 confession that would justify the arrest. Many detainees state that prosecutors ig-
 nore their claims of abuse during interrogation. Commonly employed methods of tor-
 ture alleged by the HRF's treatment centers include: High-pressure cold water
 hoses; electric shocks; systematic beatings, including on the soles of the feet and
 genitalia; blindfolding; hanging by the arms; sleep deprivation; vaginal and anal
 rape with truncheons and, in some instances, gun barrels; and other forms of sexual
 abuse. Other forms of torture were submersion of detainees in cold water, hanging
 sandbags on their necks, making them stand on one foot, releasing drops of water
 on their heads, sitting on their laps, riding on their shoulders, depriving them of
 oxygen, and withholding food.
 The Government maintains that medical examinations occur once during deten-
 tion and a second time before either arraignment or release. However, former de-
 tainees assert that some medical examinations take place too long after the event
 to reveal any definitive findings of torture. Members of security and police forces
 often stay in the examination room when physicians are examining detainees, re-
 sulting in the intimidation of both the detainee and the physician. Some physicians
 responded to the coercion by refraining from examining detainees, performing cur-
 sory examinations and not reporting findings, or reporting physical findings but not
 drawing reasonable medical inferences that torture occurred. In March an Aydin
 court acquitted a local physician who was charged with misuse of her office when
 she reported several instances of torture by local Jandarma personnel. The physi-
 cian refused to be intimated by the Jandarma, ordered them out of the examination
 room, and found that four of the six robbery suspects under detention showed signs
 of mistreatment. In September four of the Jandarma officers were charged with at-
 tempting to manipulate the results of a medical examination and later convicted
 and given a small fine.
 Credible sources in the" human rights and legal communities estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate very few of the formal complaints involving torture and pros-
 ecute only a fraction of those investigated. Security personnel accused of violating
 human rights are held to a different standard than other citizens. The Anti-Terror
 Law provides that officials accused of torture or other mistreatment may continue
 to work while under investigation. Under the administrative adjudication law, an
 administrative investigation into an alleged torture case is conducted to determine
 if there is enough evidence tu bring a law enforcement officer to trial. Special pro-
 vincial administrative boards rather than regular courts decide whether to prosecute
 such cases. Suspects' legal fees are paid by their employing agencies. Under the
 state of emergency, any lawsuit directed at government authorities must be ap-
 proved by the state of emergency governor. Approval is rare. These constraints con-
 tribute to the low number of convictions for torture.
 In February the Government issued a circular and regulations designed to pre-
 vent human rights violations. The measures provided for regular, uninterruptedin-
 spections of police stations by public prosecutors, gave inspectors the authority to
 implement corrective measures, and provided for the monitoring of police and
 Jandarma radio frequencies and interrogations by public prosecutors. However,
 these measures were superceded by October regulations on apprehension, policy cus-
 tody, and interrogation. The October measures include strict and detailed regula-
 tions on detention and arrest procedures and proper interrogation techniques, in-
 cluding training, for all law enfrcement personnel. However, they do not provide
 for monitoring and allow inspections by public prosecutors only during the investiga-
 tion process. Legal and human rights experts maintain that torture usually occurs
 before the period when public prosecutors are able to open an investigation.
 Under the Criminal Procedures Law (CMUK), prosecutors are empowered to iiti-
 ate investigations of police or Jandarma officers suspected of torturing or mistreat-
 ing suspects. In cases where township security directors or Jandarma commanders
 
 
 1551
 
 are accused of torture, the prosecutor must obtain permission to initiate an inves-
 tigation from the Ministry of Justice, because these officials are deemed to have a
 status equal to that of judges.
 The 1997 CMUK reforms granted immediate access by attorneys to those arrested
 for common crimes and after 4 days of detention for those persons detained under
 the Anti-Terror Law. Private attorneys and human rights monitors continued to re-
 port uneven implementation of the reforms.
 In October the Court of Appeals overturned the March acquittal of 10 police offi-
 cers, including 2 superintendents, accused of torturing 16 teenagers from Manisa
 (western Turkey) and sent the case back for retrial. The Appeals Court ruled that
 the students had exhibited evidence of physical and psychological torture while
 under detention. The 10 officers, including 2 superintendents, remained free pend-
 ing their new trial. The students' case also was being retried, in Izmir State Secu-
 rity Court. The Court of Appeals also overturned the January 1997 convictions of
 10 of the students on charges of belonging to an illegal leftist organization; 4 other
 students were acquitted originally.
 The following torture cases remain unresolved. Two police officers were appealing
 their 1-year suspended sentences for torturing Songul Yildiz, whom they had ques-
 tioned on suspicion of PKK membership after a March 1997 demonstration; the two
 men were allowed to remain on the police force. Five Istanbul antiterror police were
 indicted in 1997 on charges of torturing Gulderen Baran and four other detainees
 in 1995 during an interrogation about their alleged membership in a terrorist orga-
 nization. Baran is appealing her 1997 conviction. The 1997 case of journalist Hatun
 Temizalp remains unresolved. According to human rights monitors, Temizalp was
 subjected to torture and abuse at the Istanbul antiterror police headquarters and
 also was denied access to a lawyer. In a State Security Court she complained of tor-
 ture, despite police attempts to dissuade her through intimidation.
 The UnitedNations Special Rapporteur on Torture visited Turkey, at the invita-
 tion of the Government, during November.
 Prison conditions remain poor. Juveniles and adults are incarcerated together and
 most prisons lack adequate medical care for routine treatment or even medical
 emergencies. Families often must supplement the poor quality food. Prisons are run
 on the ward system. Prisoners, often those of the same ideological bent, are incar-
 cerated together and indoctrinate and punish their own. Government efforts to re-
 form prisons by adopting a cell system were criticized by prisoners, attorneys, and
 human rights groups ale, who view the ward system as a more humane form of
 incarceration Prisons are plagued by overcrowding, underfunding, and very poor ad-
 ministration.
 The Parliament's Human Rights Committee investigated conditions in a variety
 of prisons and confirmed the use of torture.
 Small-scale hunger strikes occurred to protest prison conditions, the proposed
 transfer to a cell system, and poor treatment by guards at many institutions. Late
 in the year, to protest the arrest of PKK leader Ocalan, several prisoners convicted
 of offenses related to the PKK went on temporary hunger strikes and endured se-
 vere self-inflicted injuries, including self-immolation.
 Several monitoring groups, both domestic and international, carried out prison
 visits. The Government was in regular dialog with the Council of Europe's Commit-
 tee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) and accepted unannounced visits by the
 CPT.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remained
 problems. To take a person into custody, a prosecutor must issue a detention order,
 except in limited circumstances such as when someone is caught committing a
 crime. The maximum detention period for those charged with individual common
 crimes is 24 hours. A judge may extend the detention period for a maximum of 7
 days. Under the CMUK, those detained for individual common crimes are entitled
 to immediate access to an attorney and may meet and confer with an attorney at
 any time. However, private attorneys and human rights monitors report that the
 authorities do not always respect these provisions.
 No immediate access to an attorney is provided under the law for persons whose
 cases fall under the jurisdiction of the State Security Courts: these cases include
 persons charged with smuggling and with crimes under the Anti-Terror Law. The
 lack of early access to an attorney is a major factor in the use of torture by police
 and security forces. The decision concerning early access to counsel in such cases
 is left to the public prosecutor, who often denies access on the grounds that it would
 prejudice an ongoing investigation. Although the Constitution specifies the right of
 detainees to request speedy arraignment and trial, judges have -ordered that a sig-
 nificant number of suspects be detained indefinitely, sometimes for years. Many
 cases involve persons accused of violent crimes, but it is not uncommon for those
 
 
 1552
 
 accused of nonviolent political crimes to be kept -in custody until the conclusion of
 their trials.
 Under a 1997 law that reduced detentions, persons detained for individual crimes
 that fall under the Anti-Terror Law must be brought before a judge within 48 hours,
 -while those charged with crimes of a collective, political, or conspiratorial nature
 may be detained for an initial period of 48 hours, extended for up to 4 days at a
 prosecutor's discretion and, with a judge's permission, for up to 7 days in most of
 the country and up to 10 days in the southeastern provinces under the state of
 emergency. Attorneys are allowed access only after the first 4 days. Private attor-
 neys and human rights monitors reported uneven implementation of these reforms.
 By law a detainee's next of kin must be notified "in the shortest time" after arrest,
 a requirement observed in practice in criminal and civil cases. Once formally
 charged by the prosecutor, a detainee is arraigned by a judge and allowed to retain
 a lawyer. After arraignment the judge may release the accused upon receipt of an
 appropriate assurance, such as bail, or order him detained if the court determines
 that he is likely to flee the jurisdiction or destroy evidence.
 On several occasions police officers beat and detained women (including elderly
 women) who held vigils for relatives who had disappeared. Police also beat and de-
 tained demonstrators (see Sections 1.c., 2.b.  4, 5, and 6.a.).
 The Government does not- use forced external exile, but the Government retains
 -the authority to authorize internal exile (see Section 2.d.).
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and in practice the courts generally act independently of the executive and
 legislative branches. The Constitution stipulates that judges be independent of the
 executive in the discharge of their duties and provides for security of tenure. The
 High Council of Judges and Prosecutors, which is appointed by the President and
 includes the Minister of Justice, selects judges and prosecutors for the higher courts
 and is responsible for oversight of those in the lower courts. The Constitution also
 prohibits state authorities from issuing orders or recommendations concerning the
 exercise ofjudicial power.
 The judicial system is composed, of general law courts, State Security Courts, and
 military courts. There is also a Constitutional -Court, the nation's highest court.
 Most cases are prosecuted in the general law courts, which include the civil, admin-
 istrative, and criminal courts. Either the, High Court of Appeals or the Council of
 State hears appeals. Provincial administrative boards established under the Anti-
 Terror Law decide whether cases in which government officials are accused of mis-
 conduct should be heard in criminal court. Military courts, with their own appeals
 system, hear cases involving military law and members of the armed forces and
 cases in which civilians 'are alleged to have impugned the honor of the armed forces
 or undermined compliance with the draft. In July a military court convicted Yasar
 Kaplan and Murat Balibey, journalist and editor in chief, respectively, of the radical
 Islamist newspaper Akit, to 14 months' imprisonment for an article they published
 reportedly "insulting the military."
 The Constitutional Court examines the constitutionality of laws, decrees, andpar-
 liamentary procedural rules. However, it may not consider "decrees with the force
 of law" issued under a state of emergency, martial law, or in time of war.
 State Security Courts (SSC's) sit in eight cities. They are composed of panels of
 five members-two civilian judges, one military judge, and two prosecutors-and try
 defendants accused of crimes such as terrorism, drug smuggling, membership in ille-
 gal organizations, and espousing or disseminating ideas prohibited by law such as
 "damaging the indivisible unity of the state." SSC verdicts may be appealed only
 to a specialized department of the High Court of Appeals dealing with crimes
 against state security. Senior civil servants and parliamentarians are routinely pro-
 vided public housing. According to a human rights monitor, housing prosecutors and
 judges responsible for SSC cases in military-barracks in the southeast subjects them
 to significant pressure in reviewing cases. The law gives prosecutors far-reaching
 authority to supervise the police during an investigation. However, according to
 HRW, prosecutors make little use of this power, especially in cases of security de-
 tainees.
 The European Court of Human Rights ruled in October that the presence of a
 military justice on the SSC's was inconsistent with relevant European conventions.
 While the Government continues to comply with the Court's decisions, including
 payment of all fines and penalties, some attorneys working on human rights issues
 announced that they would boycott SSC trials. In September a senior Ministry of
 Justice official also voiced concern about the presence of military justices on the
 SSC's and recommended that Turkey review the composition of the SSC's.
 During the year, the SSC's predominantly handled cases under the Anti-Terror
 Law and Section 312 of the Criminal Code. The Government claims that these
 
 
 1553
 
 courts were established to try efficiently those suspected of certain crimes. These
 courts may hold closed hearings and may admit testimony obtained during police
 interrogation in the absence of counsel. The trial of 25 Diyarbakir lawyers charged
 in 1993 and 1994 for aiding and abetting the PKK, and in a few cases, with mem-
 bership in a terrorist organization, continues at the Diyarbakir SSC. The defend-
 ants, 16 of whom complained of torture and mistreatment while held in incommuni-
 cado detention after their arrests, are free pending trial. Human rights monitors be-
 lieve that their prosecution is intended to punish them for representing clients un-
 popular with the Government and for calling attention to human rights violations
 in the southeast.
 Under the Constitution, defendants have the right to a public trial in a court of
 law. By law, the Bar Association must provide free counsel to indigents who make
 a request to the court, except for crimes falling under the scope of the SSC's. Bar
 Associations in large cities, such as Istanbul, have attorneys on call 24 hours a day.
 Costs are borne by the Association. There is no jury system; all cases are decided
 by a judge or a panel of judges. Trials may last for months or years, with one or
 two hearings scheduled each month.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the public prosecutor's files after ar-
 raignment and prior to trial (a period of several weeks). In cases involving violations
 of the Anti-Terror Law and a few others, such as insulting the president or "defam-
 ing Turkish citizenship," defense attorneys may be denied access to files that the
 state asserts deal with national intelligence or security matters. Attorneys defend-
 ing controversial cases occasionally face legal harassment. The case continues of
 Hasan Dogan, a respected Malatya attorney who frequently defends suspects in SSC
 cases. He was charged in 1997 for             in an illegal organization on the
 basis of testimony from a convicted prisoner who hoped to receive favorable treat-
 ment. Dogan is free pending trial. Many lawyers who practice before the SSC's con-
 tend that cases in which testimony provided by informers is used are difficult to
 challenge.
 In law and in practice, the legal system does not discriminate against minorities.
 However, since legal proceedings are conducted solely in Turkish, and the quality
 of interpreters varies, some defendant whose native language is not Turkish may
 be disadvantaged seriously. In June the Constitutional Court annulled Article 440
 of the Penal Code, which allowed for the punishment of women found guilty of infi-
 delity. Men did not face such restrictions.
 Turkey recognizes the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights and
 the European Commission of Human Rights. In September the Court found that
 Turkish authorities had not conducted an effective investigation into the 1993 at-
 tack on Esref Yasa and the murder of his uncle Hasim Yasa, who ran a newspaper
 kiosk in Diyarbakir but also ruled that it had not been established that security
 forces carried out the attacks, as alleged. In a separate judgment in September, the
 Court ruled that Turkey had violatedits obligation under European conventions to
 bring detainees promptly before a judge in 1993 when it held Huseyin Demir and
 Sukr Susin in incommunicado detention for at least 23 days and Faik Kaplan for
 at least 16 days.
 There is no reliable estimate of the number of political prisoners. The Government
 claims that most alleged political prisoners are in fact security detainees, convicted
 of being members of, or assisting, the PKK or other terrorist organizations.
 f. Arbitrary Intererence With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's domicile andthe privacy of
 correspondence and communication. With some exceptions, government officials may
 enter a private residence or intercept or monitor private correspondence only after
 issuance of a judicial warrant. These provisions generally are respected in practice
 outside the state of emergency region. A judge must issue a search warrant for a
 residence. If delay may cause harm to the case, prosecutors may authorize a search.
 Searches of private premises may not be carried out at night, unless the delay
 would be damaging to the case or the search is expected to result in the capture
 of a prisoner at large. Other exceptions include persons under special observation
 by the Security Directorate General, places anyone can enter at night, places where
 criminals gather, places where materials obtained through the commission of crimes
 are kept, gambling establishments, and brothels.
 In the six provinces under emergency rule, the regional state of emergency gov-
 ernor empowers security authorities to search without a warrant residences or the
 premises of political parties, businesses, associations, or other organizations. The
 Bar Association asserts that it is not constitutional for security authorities in these
 provinces to search, hold, or seize without warrant persons or documents. A total
 of six provinces remain under "adjacent province" status, which authorizes the
 Jandarma to retain security responsibility for municipalities as well as rural areas
 
 
 1554
 
 and grants the provincial governor several extraordinary powers. Due to an im-
 proved security situation,the use of roadblocks in the southeast decreased; security
 officials still search vehicles and travelers periodically.
 Because so many villages already were evacuated, village evacuations by security
 forces substantially decreased. In the past, there were thousands of such evacu-
 ations in the southeast to prevent villagers from giving aid and comfort to the PKK
 (see Section .g.).
 Several human rights monitors corplained that the Government interfered with
 citizens' choice of clothing and enforced a ban on the wearing of religious head gar-
 ments in government offices and other state-run facilities (see Section 2.c.).
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.--Since 1984 the separatist PKCK has waged a violent terrorist insurgency in
 southeast Turkey, directed against both security forces and civilians, mainly Kurds
 whom the PKCK accuses of cooperating with the state. The TNP, the Jandarma, vil-
 lage guards, and the armed forces, in turn, have waged an intense campaign to sup-
 press PKCK terrorism, targeting active PKK units as well as persons they believe
 support or sympathize with the PKK. In the process, both government forces and
 PKCK terrorists committed human rights abuses against each other and against non-
 combatants. According to a December speech by President Demnirel, since 1984,
 23,638 PKK members, 5,555 security force members, and 5,302 civilians lost their
 lives in the fighting.
 In an effort to deny the PdK logistical support, the Government rationed food and
 other essentials in the provinces of Tunceli and parts of Diyarbakir and Bingol prov-
 inces, causing severe s      and hardship among the population. Other than in
 Tunceli where the rationing has been ongoing for some time, implementation of food
 rationing elsewhere is sporadic or localized. Government security forces have re-
 turned to evacuated vllages and burned homes, to deny them  rro the PiK
 Because so many villages already have been evacuated and because the fighting
 has now moved to mountains, government security forces evacuated and destroyed
 fewer villages than in previous years. The Governments stated purposes for the
 evacuations were to protect civilians or prevent PICK guerrillas from obtaining
 logistical support from the inhabitants. Some villagers alleged  cat the security
 forces evacuated them for refusing to participate in the paramilitary village guard
 system.
 The exact number of persons forcibly displaced from villages in the southeast
 since 1984 is unknown. Most estimates agree that 2,600 to 3,000 villages and ham-
 lets have been depopulated. A few nongovernmental organizations N0's) put the
 number of persons forcibly displaerd as high as 2 million. On the low end, the Gov-
 enent reported that through 1997 the total number of evacuees was 336,717. A
 figure given by a former M.P. from the region--560,000--appears to be the most
 credible estimate of those forcibly evacuated. A parliamentary committee inves-
 tigated the situation in the southeast and concluded in June that, among other
 things, the State was partly responsible for the displacements and that it had failed
 to adequately compensate villagers who had lost their homes and lands in the re-
 gion. The European Court of Human Rights often ruled in favor of villagers who
 sued over forcible evacuations, and the Government continued to pay assessed dam-
 ages..
 Government programs to deal with and compensate the forcibly evacuated villag-
 ers remain inadequate, as is assistance to those who have resettled in urban areas.
 Many migrants continue to live in overcrowded, unhealthful conditions with little
 opportunity for employment. Local and provincial officials made some efforts to ad-
 dress the basic needs of migrants. In severalprovinces, officials provided looms for
 use by unemployed women. The rugs producedwere then purchased by the Govern-
 ment for resale on the open market. The governors of Siirt and Sirnak provinces
 initiated similar assistance and training programs fr women. One such program is
 a highly successful program called 'Multipurpose Community Center," or Catom,"
 with branches in over 10 cities in the southeast. Using revenues from the Southeast
 Anatolian Project (a multibillion dollar economic development program focusing on
 a series of hydroelectric power and agil ura irrigation projects), the Centers pro-
 vided literacy, child care, basic family health care, and vocational traing classes
 for women. Officials overseeing some of these programs acknowledge that funding
 is inadequate and that much more needs to be done.
 The Government noted that some displaced persons chose to resettle in urban
 areas and are receivingis sistance there. The Government initiated in 1996 an
 "emergency support program" to expedite resettlement in the southeast. The funds
 are used for resuilding houses and roads, as well as for animal husbandry and bee-
 keeping programs. Human rights monitors criticize government efforts as inad-
 equate in relation to the number of forcibly displaced persons.
 
 
 1555
 There were credible allegations that serious abuses by security forces during the
 course of operations against the PKK continued. The Government organizes, arms,
 and pays a civil defense force in the region known as the village guards. Local vil-
 lagers' participation in this paramilitary militia is theoretically voluntary, but they
 are sometimes caught between the two sides. If the villagers agree to serve, the
 PKK may target them and their villages. If the villagers refuse to participate, gov-
 ernment security forces may retaliate against them and forcibly evacuate their vil-
 lages, or not allow them to return to their villages after evacuations. The village
 guards have a reputation for being the least trained and disciplined of the Govern-
 ment's security forces and have been accused repeatedly of corruption, common
 crimes, and human rights abuses. Several village guards stood trial during the year
 for crime such as the execution of civilians and rape, according to HRW. In addition
 to the village guards, the Jandarma and police "special teams" are viewed as those
 most responsible for abuses.
 The Government's state of emergency, renewed for 4 months in November, im-
 poses stringent security measures in six provinces in the southeast. The regional
 governor for the state of emergency may censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and
 impose internal exile. The decree also provides for doubling the sentences of those
 convicted of cooperating with separatists. Informants and convicted persons who co-
 operate with the state are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences. Only limited
 judicial review of the state of emergency governor's administrative decisions is per-
 mitted.
 Although schools have remained open in most urban centers in the southeast,
 rapid migration has led to severe overcrowding of city schools and chronic teacher
 shortages. The PKCK policy of murdering teachers exacerbated the situation (see Sec-
 tion l.a.). Government officials claim that a significant effort is being made both to
 reopen schools and to build new schools in regions faced with acute overcrowding.
 According to government figures, 1,726 primary and secondary schools and 2 high
 schools remain closed in 11 provinces in the east and southeast for security reasons
 or because of a teacher shortage. Although the Government continues to build
 boarding schools in the region's larger towns, these new schools have failed to fill
 the gap. A total of 88 boarding schools were completed as of 1997 with a capacity
 of 49,614 students; 38 additional boarding schools are under construction. Some eth-
 nic Kurdish leaders expressed concern that the Government favored building board-
 ing schools, rather than rebuilding local schools, as a way to accelerate the process
 of Kurdish assimilation.
 Turkish ground forces with air support conducted several operations during the
 year in northern Iraq against the PKK. The Turkish Government maintained that
 it targeted only the PKK in northern Iraq, not any other groups or civilians. The
 Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) cooperated with the Turkish Government in
 shutting down PKK facilities in northern Iraq.
 The PKK suffered severe setbacks during the year, especially following the March
 arrest of its second-in-command Semden Sakik, and the November detention of its
 leader Abdullah Ocalan in Italy. PKK attacks against civilians, military, and law
 enforcement personnel in the southeast continued. In June suspected PKK terrorists
 stopped a minibus near Tunceli. Nine passengers were murdered, and two were
 wounded. Reportedly seven of the nine killed were village guards. In July a bomb
 at the spice bazaar in Istanbul, a well-known tourist area, killed at least six persons
 and injured over 65 others; the bomb was reportedly planted by the PKK. Also in
 July, the PKK stopped 40 vehicles in Hakkari and kidnaped 5 persons. In August
 the police thwarted a PKK suicide bomb attack with the arrest of a female would-
 be bomber in Adana. In November and December, three young women in separate
 incidents carried out suicide bomb attacks in public areas. The PKK is believed to
 be responsible for these attacks, which led to several deaths and many injuries.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government continued to limit these freedoms. The
 Criminal Code provides penalties for those who "insult the President, the Par-
 liament, and the army." Numerous other provisions in various laws restrict freedom
 of expression to one degree or another; those most frequently employed include Arti-
 cle 8 of the Anti-Terror Law and Article 312 of the Criminal Code. Judges in general
 examine evidence rigorously and dismiss many charges brought under these laws.
 Domestic and foreign periodicals that provide a broad spectrum of views and opin-
 ions are widely available. Government censorship of foreign periodicals is very rare.
 While overall readership of the local press is not large for a country of 62 million
 inhabitants, the newspaper business is intensely competitive.
 
 
 1556
 Electronic media reach nearly every adult, and their influence is correspondingly
 great. Radio and television experienced explosive growth in the 7 years since pri-
 vately owned broadcasting was allowed. In a December speech President Demirel
 said that 230 local, 15 regional, and 16 national television stations-the majority
 private-were registered, along with 1,055 local, 108 regional, and 36 national radio
 stations. Other television and radio stations broadcast without an official license. In
 1994 Parliament passed regulatory legislation making it illegal for broadcasters to
 threaten the country's unity or national security and limiting the private broadcast
 of television programs in languages other than Turkish. The increasing availability
 of satellite dishes and cable television allows access to foreign broadcasts, including
 several Turkish-language private channels. Internet use is growing and faces no
 government restrictions.
 Despite the Government's restrictions, the media criticize government leaders and
 policies daily. Media coverage of the situation in the southeast tended to be unreli-
 -able, underreporting it in some instances and sensationalizing it in others. Govern-
 ment Decree 430 gives the Interior Ministry upon the request of the regional gov-
 ernor the authority to ban distribution of any news viewed as misrepresenting
 events in the region, which led to self-censorship of news reporting across the coun-
 try. In the event that a government warning is not obeyed, the decree provides for
 a 10-day suspension of operations for a first offense and 30 days for subsequent of-
 fenses.
 SSC prosecutors ordered the confiscation of numerous issues of leftist, Kurdish
 nationalist, and pro-PKK periodicals. According to HRW, numerous journals were
 closed down during the year, and the Ulkede Gundem newspaper was fined approxi-
 mately $12,000 (TL 40 billion) and closed by court, order for 312 days. The police
 frequently raid offices of small leftist publications.
 Other restrictions on freedom of expression continued to be problems: Journalists,
 cultural figures, and politicians were harassed and prosecuted for expressing their
 ideas. Individuals and publications sympathetic to Kurdish, Islamist, and leftist
 viewpoints were particularly hard hit, as the Government continued its crackdown
 against fundamentalism and suspected PKCK members and sympathizers. In Feb-
 ruary the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) unsuccessfully appealed for the
 release of 12 imprisoned journalists. Ismail Besikci has been in prison since 1993
 on a variety of new charges based upon his ongoing articles on Kurdish issues.
 In January an Istanbul SSC sentenced journalist Haluk Gerger to 20 months in
 prison for an article he wrote on the southeast. The Court of Appeals upheld the
 verdict in May. In March poet Can Yucel was sentenced to 1 year and 2 months'
 imprisonment for insulting the President. In July editorial cartoonist Dogan Guzel
 was sentenced to 3 years in prison-later reduced to 16 months-"for insulting the
 state and armed forces" for four cartoons critical of the state.
 In January the Constitutional Court closed the Islamist Refah Party and banned
 six Refah leaders, including former Prime Minister Erbakan, from political activity
 for 5 years (see Section 3). The Court found the Party guilty of attempting to under-
 mine the secular nature of the state based in part on public statements made by
 Refah leaders. Party members joined a new Islamist party named the Virtue Party
 (Fazilet). According to HRW, in-February 128 members of the Aczmendi sect were
 sentenced to 24 months to 6-years in prison for "insulting Ataturk and disobeying
 security forces."
 In February Sanar Yurdatapan, a well-known musician and spokesman for free-
 dom of expression, and two other members of a "Peace Working Group" were each
 sentenced to 10 months in prison for insulting the Turkish General Staff (TGS),
 under Article 159 of the Penal Code. The group alleged that the military was re-
 sponsible for a January 1996 attack on a minibus in Guclukonak (southeast) in
 which 11 people were killed. Authorities blamed the PKK for the attack, as several
 of the victims were village guards. Yurdatapan's separate trial for harboring two re-
 ported PKK members and possession of false passports continues.
 In March the deputy chief of staff of the armed forces banned mainstream col-
 umnists Mehmet Ali Birand and Yalcin Dogan and reporter Muharrem Sarikaya
 from entering military sites, interviewing military personnel, and reporting any
 news about the military. The ban was lifted 3 days later.
 In April a Diyarbakir SSC convicted Istanbul Mayor Recep Tayyip Erdogan for
 a speech that he made in 1997 that was deemed to have "incited ethnic, racial, reli-
 gious enmity," based on Article 312 of the Penal Code. He was sentenced to 10
 months in prison, but remained free pending the outcome of his appeal. In Septem-
 ber the Supreme Court of Appeals upheld Erdogan's conviction, which he is appeal-
 ing. The sentence also carries a lifetime ban from politics, including expulsion from
 the Virtue Party, of which Erdogan was a prominent member. Three other Islamist
 
 
 1557
 
 mayors from the Virtue Party also were removed from office by court action. They
 were from Kayseri, Agri, and the Ankara district of Sincan.
 In May following unsubstantiated allegations by a captured PKK leader, allegedly
 leaked by the military, that two prominent journalists, Mehmet Ali Birand and
 Cengiz Candar, collaborated with the PKK, their publishers imposed sanctions on
 them.
 In June Esber Yagmurdereli, a blind human rights activist and respected lawyer,
 was rearrested for failing to obtain a medical certificate detailing his poor health,
 a condition of his conditional release in November 1997. Yagmurdereli was convicted
 in May 1997 of promoting Kurdish separatism on the basis of public assertions that
 the ethnic Kurdish minority is oppressed. In October 1997, he was remanded into
 custody to begin serving a 22-year sentence. Also in June, journalist Ragip Duran
 surrendered to authorities in Istanbul to begin serving a 10-month sentence for an
 article that he wrote in the defunct newspaper Ozgur Gundem in 1994, in conjunc-
 tion with an interview that he had conducted earlier with PKK leader Abudlah
 Ocalan. He is expected to serve a total of 71/2 months in prison. However, in an un-
 related case journalist Namik Durukan, a Milliyet reporter accused of pro-PKK ac-
 tivities by a captured PKK terrorist, was acquitted by a Diyarbakir SSC in June.
 In June the Court of Appeals overturned a guilty verdict by an Ankara SSC
 against members of the pro-Kurdish HADEP, including party chairman Murat
 Bozlak. The case centered on an incident at the party's 1996 convention in Ankara,
 during which the Turkish flag was torn down and replaced by a PKK banner. In
 1997 an SSC sentenced Faysal Akcan, who reportedly took down the flag, to 222
 years in prison; Bozlak and party convention chairman Hikmet Fidan each were
 sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment, while 29 other officials and party members re-
 ceived 6/2-month sentences. The SSC also found evidence linking HADEP to the
 PKK_
 In September 17 persons, mostly HADEP members, were sentenced to prison
 terms ranging from 1 to 2 years and fined various amounts for writing articles in
 a 1997 edition of the HADEP Bulletin that supposedly incited "racial, ethnic and
 religious enmity." Prominent among those on trial were imprisoned former DEP
 M.P. Leyla Zana and HADEP Chairman Murat Bozlak. Zana, who already is serving
 a 15-year term in an unrelated case, was sentenced an additional 2 years; she
 planned to appeal. Bozlak was acquitted. In a separate case in September an
 Istanbul SSC sentenced former DEP Chairman Hatip Dicle (a fellow prisoner with
 Leyla Zana), to 35 additional months in prison and a fine for an article he wrote
 in a pro-Kurdish daily newspaper. However, the Court suspended the prison sen-
 tence. His attorney planned to appeal the case.
 In August playwright Mehmet Vahi Yazar was sentenced to 24 years in prison
 plus a fine "for insulting the military" based on Article 312 of the Penal Code for
 a play portraying the state as opposed to religion. The four actors who performed
 in the play were sentenced to 16 years' imprisonment plus fines. They remain incar-
 cerated pending the outcome of their own trial.
 In October former political science professor Yalcin Kucuk was arrested at the
 Edirne border after returning from self-imposed exile in France following convictions
 for writing a pro-Kurdish article and conducting interviews with PKK leader
 Abdullah Ocalan. Kucuk faces 2 years' imprisonment.
 An Ankara SSC in May charged Erol Yarar, chairman of the Association of Inde-
 pendent Industrialists and Businessmen (MUSIAD), an Islamist businessmen's as-
 sociation, with promoting racial, ethnic, and religious enmity (Article 312 of the
 Penal Code) for a speech he made in October 1997.
 HRA Chairman Akin Birdal and several colleagues were involved in a number of
 high-profile court cases involving freedom of speech issues in 1997 and 1998 (see
 Section 4).
 In May the European Court of Human Rights ruled against Turkey for dissolving
 the Socialist Party on the basis of statements that its leader Dogu Perincek made
 during the 1991 general election campaign. In July the Turkish Court of Appeals
 upheld Perincek's 1996 conviction for acting "against the principle of national unity
 and territorial integrity of the state" for 1991 televised campaign statements in
 which he reportedly accused the state of terrorism. The Court ordered that he be
 stricken from the membership of the small Workers' Party (IP), which he heads (see
 Section 3.). He also faces charges of illegal possession of classified state documents,
 assisting a terrorist organization (the PKK), and possession of unlicensed firearms.
 Kurdish-language cassettes and publications on Kurdish subjects continued to be
 available, although periodic suppression of the media continued. The Kurdish-lan-
 guage weekly, Azadiya Welate, and some 10 other publications were available only
 on an infrequent basis. Potential customers are afraid to purchase Kurdish-language
 
 
 1558
 materials because the possession of such items may be interpreted as evidence of
 PKK sympathies. Kurdish-language broadcasts are not allowed.
 The High Council for Radio and Televison (RTUK) penalized a number of private
 radio and television stations for alleged violations of broadcast regulations, includ-
 ing use of offensive language, libel, obscenity, instigating separatist propaganda, or
 airing programs in Kurdish. Several local broadcasting channels were ordered off
 the air for temporary periods. According to HRW, many RTUK decision were en-
 forced even when courts overturned thedecisions. Pro-PKK Med-TV, based in Bel-
 gium and the United Kingdom, broadcasts via satellite dish and can be received in
 e southeast.
 No new developments occurred in the case of a publisher and translator for
 Pencere Publishing, who were appealing a suspended sentence and fine for publish-
 ing a Turkish translation of a German book, and in the suspended case of 1,080
 writers who supported novelist Yasar Kemal, who also was appealinga case.
 A. group of Turkish and Kurdish academics, politicia and intellectuals contin-
 ued to hold a series of nationwide panel discussions on the situation of the Kurds
 and possible solutions to their probems. Despite minor police attention, the group
 explored explicitly nonviolent solutions within a democratic context, especially in
 the larely Kurdish southeast. Academics continued to publish articles and papers
 on the Kurdish issue without government interference. The Mesopotamian Cultural
 Center, a corporation established to promote Kurdish language and culture, contin-
 ued to operate despite a lack of official permission and despite official belief that
 the organization is linked to the PKK. However, for this reason their centers in
 Istanbul and the southeast periodically were harassed and shut down.
 In May an Istanbul court acquitted Yilmaz Camlibel, resident of the Kurdish
 Culture and Research Foundation (Kurt-Kay), and one of his assistants on charges
 of illegally promoting the Kurdish language. Despite the presidend~s acquittal, Kurt-
 Kay was not allowedto resume Kurdish language classes. Academic freedom is oth-
 erwise respected.
 b. Freeom of Peaceful Assembly and Assoclation.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but authorities may deny permission if they believe that a
 gathering is likely to disrupt public order. Prior notification of gatherings is re-
 quired, and the authorities may restrict meetings to designated sites.
 Starting in May police increasingly and forcibly broke up gatherings of the "Satur-
 day Mothers," a group primarily of women who gathered every Saturday for more
 than 3 years on a major Istanbul street to hold a vigil for relatives who inexplicably
 disappeared. Each time they meet, the Saturday Mothers read a press announce-
 ment detailing the case of someone who has disappeared. The reading of a press
 release in a public place does not require authorization under the law, although
 demonstrations require permits. The police response to the vigiu increased over the
 weeks, with a number of women and their supporters being detained. On multiple
 occasions police wielded truncheons and beat detainees, including elderly women. In
 September the police beat approximately 30 detainees inside a police bus and
 sprayed pepper gas into the bus before ciosing its doors. The Government alleges
 that the crackdown occurred in response to the infiltration of the Saturday Mothers
 by member of illegal organizations who voiced political slogans that could incite ha-
 In March police used fore (wateri cannons and tear gas) to break up a demonstra-
 tion organized by women's groups in honor of International Women's Day, but which
 had turned violent because of ofutside provocation in a separate event in March po-
 lice used water cannons, tear gas, and truncheons to break up violently a dem-
 onstration of the public employees' confederation, KESK (see Section 6.a.); approxi-
 mately 30 workers were hospitalized. On the following day, police arrested many
 members of the BTS transport union. In September Istanbul police forcibly dis-
 Sersed participants in "World Peace Day" events and prevented them from boarding
 uses bound for Diyarbakir. More than 100 persons were beaten or detained briefly
 in Istanbul, while others were detained in Diyarbakir and Mardin (see Section 4).
 In February HRF President Yavuz Onen, BRA President Akin Birdal, Ufuk Uras
 of the left-of-center Freedom and Democracy Party, and Ahmet Turk from HADEP
 were acquitted on charges of holding an unauthorized demonstration. They were
 protesting the Susurluk incident, which revealed links between state officials and
 underworld criminal figures (see Section l.a.).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but associations and founda-
 tions must submit their charters for government approval, a lengthy and cum-
 bersome process.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution establishes Turkey as a secular state
 and provides for freedom of belief, freedom of worship, and private dissemination
 of religious ideas, and the Government generally observed these prvisions in prac-
 
 
 1559
 
 tice. However, it imposed some restrictions on religious minorities. About 99 percent
 of the population is Muslim. Under the law, religious services may take place only
 in designated places of worship. Although Turkey is a secular state, religious in-
 struction in state schools is compulsory for Muslims. Upon written verification of
 their non-Muslim background, minorities considered by the Government to be cov-
 ered by the Lausanne Treaty (Greek, Armenian, and Jewish) are exempted by law
 from Muslim religious instruction, although students who wish to attend may do so
 with parental consent. Syriac Christians are not exempt because the Government
 does not consider them to be an official Lausanne Treaty minority.
 Tarikats and other mystical Sunni Islamic orders were banned in the 1920's but
 largely were tolerated until recently. However, in 1997 the National Security Coun-
 cil , a half-military, half-civilian body entrusted in part with responsibility "for pro-
 tecting the state against any foreign or domestic threat to its interests," called for
 strict enforcement of the ban against Tarikats as part of its campaign against Is-
 lamic fundamentalism. Some Tarikats, like members of the Aczimendi Brotherhood,
 faced legal action in previous years for their vocal public demonstrations.
 In accordance with a 1997 law, which made 8 years of secular education compul-
 sory, new enrollments in the first 8 years of the Islamic imam-Hatip schools (in ex-
 istence since 1950) were stopped, although children already in those classes were
 allowed to finish their grades. The imam-Hatip schools were very popular among
 conservative and Islamist Turks as an alternative to secular public education.
 Under the law, students may pursue study at the imam-Hatip schools upon comple-
 tion of 8 years in the secular public schools. Students who complete 5 years of pri-
 mary school may enroll in Koran classes on weekends and summer vacations.
 Turkey's Alawi Muslim minority (an offshoot of Shi'ite Islam) is estimated to
 number at least 12 million persons. However, there are no government-salaried
 Alawi religious leaders, in contrast to Sunni religious leaders. Nonetheless, in De-
 cember 1997 the Government allocated $15 million (TL 3 trillion) to the Alawi com-
 munity. Some Alawis allege discrimination in the form of failure to include any
 Alawi doctrines or beliefs in religious instruction classes. Alawis charge a Sunni
 bias in the Religious Affairs Directorate, and claim that the Directorate tends to
 view the Alawis as a cultural rather than a religious group. However, Sunni Islamic
 political activists charge that the secularist state favors, and is under the influence
 of, the Alawis.
 Many prosecutors regard proselytizing and religious activism on the part of either
 Islamists or evangelical Christians with suspicion, especially when they deem such
 activities to have political overtones. There is no law that explicitly prohibits pros-
 elytizing, but police sometimes arrest proselytizers for disturbing the peace. Courts
 usually dismiss such charges. If the proselytizers are foreigners, they may be de-
 ported, but generally they are able to reenter the country easily.
 Several human rights monitors complained that the Government increasingly en-
 forced a 50-year-old ban on the wearing of religious head garments in government
 offices and other state-run facilities. According to these groups, some women who
 wear head coverings have lost their jobs in the public sector as nurses and teachers.
 Others were not alowed to register for fall semester classes at universities, and
 some professors and university administratrs were dismissed for wearing or sup-
 porting the wearing of head garments. The Turkish military dismissed from the
 service individuals whose official files reflect participation in Islamist fundamental-
 ist activities.
 Most religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. The number of Christians
 in the southeast has been declining as the younger Syriac generation leaves for Eu-
 rope and North America. Minority religions not recognized under the Lausanne
 Treaty may not acquire additional property for churches. The Roman Catholic
 Church in Ankara, or example, is confined to diplomatic property. The Office of
 Foundations (Vakiflar Genel Mudurlugu) must approve the operation of churches,
 monasteries, synagogues, schools, and charitable religious foundations, such as hos-
 pitals and orphanages. Restoration or construction also may be carried out in build-
 ings and monuments considered to be "ancienf' with authorization by the Regional
 Board on the Protection of Cultural and National Wealth. In October 1997 the Ar-
 menian Orthodox Church was granted permission to restore properties and open a
 new church in the Diyarbakir region. However the Syriac Church was ordered to
 halt restoration efforts to its monasteries in the southeast in September 1997 and
 to terminate its Aramaic language classes in October 1997 on the grounds that it
 lacked proper authorization from the Regional Board, the Education Ministry, and
 the Office of Foundations. The Church and government authorities are working to
 resolve these issues.
 The authorities monitor the activities of Eastern Orthodox Churches and their af-
 filiated operations. The Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul consistently has ex-
 
 
 1560
 
 pressed interest in reopening the seminary on the Island of Halki in the Sea of
 Marmara. The seminary has been closed since 1971 when the State 'nationalized
 most private institutions of higher learning. Under current restrictions, including a
 citizenship requirement, religious communities remain unable to train new clergy
 for eventual leadership. Following the death of the Armenian Patriarch, Karekin II,
 in March, regional authorities and Istanbul police officials responsible for "minori-
 ties" delayed and unsuccessfully sought to influence the outcome of the elections for
 a new Patriarch. The Armenian community elected a new Patriarch in November.
 Bureaucratic procedures relating to historic preservation impede repairs to some
 religious facilities. Under the law, religious buildings that become "extinct" (because
 of prolonged absence of clergy or lay persons to staff local religious councils or for
 lack of adherents) revert to government possession. Some non-Muslim minorities,
 particularly the Greek Orthodox community and, to a lesser extent, the Jewish com-
 munity, the Armenian Orthodox community, and the shrinking Syriac Christian
 community have lost houses of worship and other facilities.
 d. ,Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens generally enjoy freedom of movement domestically and the
 freedom to travel abroad. The Constitution provides that a citizen's freedom to leave
 may be restricted only in the case of a national emergency, civic obligations (mili-
 tary service, for example), or criminal investigation or prosecution.
 Due to an improved security situation, the use of roadblocks in the southeast de-
 creased; security officials still search vehicles and travelers periodically.
 The internal exile law was repealed in 1987, but in 1990 the government granted
 the southeast regional governor the authority to "remove from the region," for a pe-
 riod not to exceed the duration of the state of emergency (now in its 13th year), citi-
 zens under his administration whose activities "give an impression that they are
 prone to disturb general security and public order." There were no known instances
 of the use of this broad authority during the year.
 Turkey hosts an estimated 300 Europeans who are given residence permits on
 grounds of temporary asylum, principally from Greece, Bulgaria, and the former
 Yugoslavia, while an estimated 2,000 persons from Bosnia are granted a special
 temporary "guest" status. When Turkey ratified the 1951 United Nations Conven-
 tion Relating to the Status of Refugees, it exercised the option of accepting the Con-
 vention's obligations only with respect to refugees from Europe. It has not subse-
 quently lifted the geographic limitation of its treaty obligation. As a result, the Gov-
 ernment does not recognize non-European asylum seekers as refugees and requires
 that they register with the authorities within 5 days of entering the country. The
 Government screens these applicants, determines those that it considers bona fide,
 and then refers them to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). If the
 UNHCR believes that a non-European asylum-seeker meets refugee criteria the case
 is submitted to third countries for resettlement. The UNHCR intervenes with gov-
 ernment officials if it disagrees with their negative decisions about individual asy-
 lum claims. An appeal may be lodged within 15 days of a negative decision by the
 authorities. After the appeal procedure, rejected applicants are issued with a depor-
 tation order which may be implemented after 15 days of its notification. In 1998
 some 3,000 persons had their asylum applications rejected.
 According to the UNHCR, implementation of asylum regulations improved consid-
 erably during the year. Police officials took a more relaxed and tolerant attitude to-
 ward asylum seekers who complied with the provisions of the asylum regulations.
 The number of refugees refouled (turned back) decreased from 76 in 1995, to 20 in
 1997, and to 15 in 1998. The refoulement of asylum seekers decreased from 61 per-
 sons in 1997 to 49 in 1998.
 Nonetheless, the 5-day limit for registration in the government's asylum program
 is implemented strictly and remains an obstacle to full access of asylum seekers to
 refugee status determination. However, the administrative court ruled that the sub-
 mission of an asylum claim within a fixed time limit is not a condition for being
 an asylum seeker and that being outside this limit cannot-be a reason for the au-
 thorities not to assess an asylum application or grant asylum.
 The obstacles inherent in the Government's asylum procedures lead to many refu-
 gees being considered as "illegals." These individuals, recognized as mandate refu-
 gees by the UNHCR, are not allowed to depart for resettlement. In 1997 the Govern-
 ment declined numerous offers from the UNHCR to assist in establishing reception
 centers for such undocumented asylum seekers in border areas. However, the
 UNHCR and government authorities continue to work to resolve this problem and
 to find ways to allow such cases to qualify for the Government's asylum program.
 According to the UNHCR, approximately 70 refugees were so affected during the
 year.
 
 
 1561
 In July the Government agreed to a UNHCR proposal for a comprehensive pro-
 gram to support government training of officials who deal with asylum and refugee
 issues, funded by foreign donors. The first two phases of the training started in Sep-
 tember and included police officers from 20 provinces. The Government also agreed
 to training sessions with judiciary officials.
 Turkey continues to be a major transit and departure point for illegal migrants
 and asylum seekers of various nationalities en route to Europe. While many trav-
 eled in small groups utilizing land routes across the Turkish-Greek border, increas-
 ing numbers departed via boat and ship. Arrivals from Turkey by ship peaked in
 early spring but diminished after authorities took action against alien smugglers in
 Turkish ports.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice. Turkey has a multiparty par-
 liamentary system, in which national elections are held at least every 5 years on
 the basis of mandatory universal suffrage for all citizens 18 years of age and over.
 As of September, more than 32 political parties were active (most of them minus-
 cule), 9 of which were represented in Parliament. The Grand National Assembly
 (Parliament) elects the President as head of state every 7 years or when the incum-
 bent becomes incapacitated or dies.
 The armed forces, with significant support from several segments of civil society
 including some political parties, the media, the judiciary, labor unions, and NGO's,
 continued their public campaign against fundamentalism. In accordance with the
 National Security Council's 1997 18-point program against fundamentalism, in June
 and July Parliament passed 3 pieces of legislation, viewed by some as restrictive of
 Islamist political activities: an amendment to the law governing the Religious Af-
 fairs Office (Diyanet), which makes it responsible for the administration of all
 mosques; an amendment to the Law on Zoning Regulations, under which the Office
 must authorize construction of new mosques; and, an amendment to the Law on As-
 sembly and Public Gatherings, which forbids the wearing of uniforms and masks by
 demonstrators.
 In April some 20 businessmen, primarily members of MUSIAD, briefly were de-
 tained as part of a government investigation into the funding of fundamentalist ac-
 tivities. An Ankara SSC filed charges in May against MUSIAD chairman Erol Yarar
 for a 1997 speech he made that was deemed to have violated Article 312 ("incited
 racial and religious enmity') of the Penal Code.
 The Government neither coerces nor forbids membership in any political organiza-
 tion, although the Constitutional Court may close down political parties for uncon-
 stitutional activities. In January it banned the Islamist Refah party for violation of
 the secular nature of the Republic (Articles 68 and 69 of the Constitution and the
 Political Parties Law). In May the European Court of Human Rights found that
 Turkey had violated the freedom of association article of the European Convention
 on Human Rights by dissolving the Socialist Party on the basis of statements that
 its leader Dogu Perincek made during the 1991 general election campaign. In July
 the Turkish Court of Appeals upheld Perincek's 1996 conviction for violating the Po-
 litical Parties Law by acting "against the principle of national unity and territorial
 integrity of the state" and ordered that he be stricken from the membership of the
 small Workers' Party (IP), which he headed (see Section 2.a.). There were no devel-
 opments in the case of the Democratic Mass Party (DKP), which was charged in
 June 1997 with violating provisions of the Constitution and the Political Party Law
 because its platform defends Kurdish rights. The case was pending a ruling by the
 Constitutional Court at year's end.
 There are no legal restrictions on women or minorities voting or participating in
 politics. The Constitution calls for equal political rights for men and women. How-
 ever, women are seriously underrepresented in government and politics: there were
 13 women in the 550-seat Parliament and 2 female ministers in the 39-member
 Cabinet in the Yilmaz Government. Women's committees are active in political
 party organizations.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The nongovernmental Human Rights Association has branches in 41 cities and
 claims a membership of about 19,000 persons. In 1990 the HRA established the
 Human Rights Foundation, which operates torture rehabilitation centers in Ankara,
 Izmir, Istanbul, and Adana, and serves as a clearinghouse for human rights infor-
 mation. Other domestic NGO's include the Istanbul-based Helsinki Citizens Assem-
 
 
 1562
 bly, the Ankara-based Turkish Democracy Foundation, human rights centers at a
 number of universities, and the pro-Islamic Mazlum-Der, the Organization of
 Human Rights and Solidarity for Oppressed Peoples.
 In April the Government closed the Mersin Migrants' Association (Goc-Der), an
 organization founded by ethnic Kurds to assist displaced Kurdish migrants. The clo-
 sure notice cited the discovery of unauthorized publications and activities inconsist-
 ent with the association's charter. Prior to its closure, the Association-- the first
 NGO of its kind in the southeast-assisted thousands of Kurdish migrants who fled
 villages in southeast Turkey to the southern port city of Mersin. It provided medical
 and legal services to migrant families, negotiated wage contracts for migrant labor-
 ers, and served as an ombudsman for Kurdish migrants with the Government.
 In November Amnesty International and the Istanbul Bar Association sponsored
 in Istanbul an international conference on human rights in Turkey, in which State
 Minister for Human Rights Hikmet Sami Turk participated. Amnesty Internation-
 al's foreign expert on Turkey, who had been banned from the country, was allowed
 in to attend the conference. However, -some local NGO's active in human rights com-
 plained that they were excluded, despite requests to participate.
 Despite the Government's outreach to the NGO community, local-level govern-
 ment agents, some as senior as provincial governors, harassed human rights mon-
 itors as well 'as lawyers and doctors involved in documenting human rights viola-
 tion. HRA branches were particularly hard hit. The HRA branch in Diyarbakir,
 closed for an indefinite period by court order in May 1997 for activities that alleg-
 edly threatened the integrity of the state, remained closed at year's end. Human
 rights monitors believe that the' Diyarbakir branch was targeted in part for its work
 in preparing several cases for consideration by the European Commission of Human
 Rights. In February the HRA branch in Mardin, also shut down in 1997, was al-
 lowed to reopen but was closed again for 3 months in late December. The Kirsehir
 HRA office was closed in June for 3 months but reopened. The Adana HRA office
 was ordered closed for 15 days in October for the alleged possession of an illegal
 publication, but it also reopened. The Sanliurfa HRA office, which was closed in
 May 1997 along with the Diyarbakir branch, reopened in December. According to
 the HRA, all of these closures were for alleged violation of the Associations Law.
 In August HRA Chairman Akin Birdal and two other human rights monitors, who
 were found guilty in 1997 of inciting ethnic hatred based on a speech Birdal gave
 during World Peace Day in 1996, were acquitted on appeal. HRA board members,
 including Birdal and 10 others, were acquitted in Ankara in February on charges
 of disseminating separatist propaganda and inciting racist and ethnic enmity for
 comments and speeches they made condemning human rights violations during
 events organized by the HRA in 1996 to commemorate Human Rights Week. In Oc-
 tber the Ankara Penal Court acquitted Birdal on charges that he had "insulted the
 military." However, in a separate case in October the Court of Appeals affirmed
 Birdar's conviction on charges of inciting hatred and enmity for a 1996 public state-
 ment that the Kurdish problem was a problem for all Turks, not just the Kurdish
 population, and that the continued existence of torture and extrajudicial killings
 was attributable to the lack of a resolution of the Kurdish problem. Birdal remains
 free pending an appeal of this latest verdict.
 In May Birdal was shot and severely wounded in his offices. Eleven people are
 on trial for the shooting. Some of the assailants have admitted to being part of a
 group accused of having links to the government and underworld figures.
 On June 13, the HRF opened a new office in Diyarbakir (in the southeast); how-
 ever, 4 days later officials from the local Office of Foundations shut the office on
 the grounds that the HRF had not obtained all necessary permits. The HRF was
 allowed to reopen the center in August. Other HRF documentation or torture treat-
 ment centers are located in Izmir, Ankara, Adana, and Istanbul.
 An Appeals Court in Diyarbakir upheld the conviction of Dr. Seyfettin Kizilkan,
 the former president of the southeast Chamber of Doctors and director of
 Diyarbakir's largest state hospital. He remains free pending a review of the case by
 the court of first instance. In 1996 Kizilkan was convicted and sentenced to a 3-year,
 9-month prison term after police allegedly found bomb materials and PKK docu-
 ments in his home. Dr. Kizilkan and his associates maintain that the police planted
 the evidence.
 The case against seven members of the Diyarbakir branch of the HRA accused
 of aiding the PKK was suspended. All seven were required to surrender their pass-
 ports and were released provisionally. They face sentences ranging from 12 to 222
 years if they again are alleged to violate the law. The trial, which began in 1995,
 focused mainly on the publication of the booklet "Emergency Situation-1992."
 In September Istanbul police forcibly dispersed persons who tried to participate
 in an HRA-organized World Peace Day event. Organizers sought to lead a convoy
 
 
 1563
 of buses from Istanbul to the southeast to demonstrate for peaceful resolution of the
 conflict in the region. Over 100 persons were beaten or detained briefly (see Section
 2.b.). Legal proceedings brought against some of the organizers of the 1997 "Musa
 Anter Peace Train" continued.
 The State Minister for Human Rights, as chair of the High Council for Human
 Rights, continued to investigate human rights abuses and to reach out to NGO and
 community leaders. The Council, composed of representatives from the Justice, Inte-
 rior, Education, Health, and Foreign Affairs Ministries (along with representatives
 of the security forces), met weekly to review aspects of the human rights situation,
 to advise the Government on steps for improvement, and to draft appropriate legis-
 lation. In order to broaden its research and outreach efforts beyond Ankara, the
 High Council met in several cities, including in the predominantiy Kurdish south-
 east.
 Since 1991 Parliament has convened a Human Rights Commission. The Commis-
 sion is authorized to oversee compliance with the human rights provisions of domes-
 tic law and international agreements to which Turkey is a signatory, investigate al-
 leged abuses, and prepare reports. During the year, the Commission visited prisons
 throughout the country and called attention to unsatisfactory conditions, including
 the use of torture and abuse.
 Representatives of diplomatic missions who wish to monitor human rights are free
 to speak with private citizens, groups, and government officials. Security police
 often place such official visitors in the southeast under visible surveillance in an ef-
 fort to intimidate those they meet. Visiting government officials and members of leg-
 islatures generally were able to meet with human rights activists, including Leyla
 Zana and three other imprisoned former DEP parliamentarians. However, Council
 of Europe rapporteurs in September were prevented by Ankara Central Prison au-
 thorities from holding a pre-arranged meeting with Zana and her colleagues.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state, regards all citizens as
 equal, and prohibits discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. Discrimi-
 nation nevertheless remains a problem in several areas. The Government officially
 recognizes only Eastern Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, and Jewish adherents as mi-
 norities covered under the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.
 A free and lively political debate took place during the year over the e of state
 institutions, including the military, in safeguarding the proper balance between the
 protection of secular democracy from religious extremism and the protection of free-
 dom of religion.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is serious and widespread. Parliament passed legislation
 in January making spousal abuse illegal. Nevertheless, spousal abuse still is consid-
 ered an extremely private matter, involving societal notions of family honor. Few
 women go to the police, who in any case are reluctant to intervene in domestic dis-
 putes and frequently advise women to return to their husbands. Turks of either sex
 may file civil or criminal charges but rarely do so. Laws and ingrained societal no-
 tions make it difficult to prosecute sexual assault or rape cases. Penalties may be
 reduced legally if a woman was not a virgin prior to a rape or if a judge deems the
 woman to have acted provocatively. "Honor murders"-the killing by immediate
 family members of women who are suspected of being unchaste-continue in rural
 areas or among recent immigrants to cities. The traditional practice of "virginity
 testing" continues as well. In October the Government introduced new regulation on
 police investigations that, among other things, banned the practice of"virginity test-
 ing." In 1997 five residents of a state foster home attempted sulcide rather than un-
 dergo such testing.
 According to the Family Research Institute in the Prime Minister's Office, beating
 is one of the most frequent forms of violence against women in the home. Data were
 not available for 1998, but in the past the Institute has noted complaints of beat-
 ings, threats, economic pressure, and sexual violence. In a survey of 12 provinces,
 physical abuse reportedy occurred in roughly 30 percent of families. There are sev-
 eral shelters for battered women, and at least two consultation centers-Istanbul's
 Purple Roof Foundation and Ankara's Altindag center city shelter.
 Some laws still discriminate against women. In June the Constitutional Court an-
 nulled Article 440 of the Penal Code, which punished women, but not men, for infi-
 delity (see Section i.e.). The Civil Code prohibits granting gender-based privileges
 or rights but retains some discriminatory provisions concerning marital rights and
 obligations. Because the husband is the legal head of household, he is authorized
 to choose the domicile and represents the conjugal unit. As parents, husband and
 wife exercise joint child rearing rights, but when they disagree, the husband's view
 
 
 1564
 often prevails. Women's groups have lobbied to change the provision that the hus-
 band is the legal head of household. A single woman who gives birth to a child out
 of wedlock is not considered automatically to be the legal guardian of her child: a
 court decision may be reuired. Divorce law requires that the divorcing spouses di-
 vide their property according to property registered in each spouse's name. Because
 in most cases property is registered in the husband's name, this provision can create
 difficulties for women who wish to divorce. Under inheritance laws, a widow gen-
 erally receives one-fourth of the estate, her children the rest.
 The literacy rate for women is 78 percent, compared with 91 percent for men, ac-
 cording to government statistics. Particularly in urban areas, women continue to im-
 prove their position, including in the professions, business, and the civil service, al-
 though they continue to face discrimination to varying degrees. Women constitute
 between 43 and 50 percent of the work force. However, only 11,000 of 151,000 man-
 agerial employees are women. Women generally receive equal pay for equal work
 in the professions, business, and civil service jobs, although a large percentage of
 women employed in agriculture and in the trade, restaurant, and hotel sectors work
 as unpaid family help. Women may take the examination required to become gov-
 ernors or subgovernors; several have been appointed subgovernors.
 Independent women's groups and women s rights associations exist and continue
 to increase in number. The concept of lobbying for women's rights, including greater
 representation in Parliament,"is still relatively new but is gaining momentum.
 Women continue to be very active in ongoing debates between secularists and
 Islamists, especially with respect to the right to choose whether to wear religious
 head garments in public places, such as government offices and universities.
 Children.-The Government is committed to furthering children's welfare and
 works to expand opportunities in education and health, including a further reduc-
 tion in the infant mortality rate. The State Minister for Women's and Family Issues
 oversees implementation of the Government's programs .for children. Government-
 provided education for children is mandatory. Since 1997 primary education is com-
 pulsory through age 14 or the eighth grade. Traditional family values in rural areas
 place a greater emphasis on advanced education for sons than for daughters. The
 new 8-year compulsory education requirement is expected to allow more girls to con-
 tinue their education.
 Although the law provides special safeguards for children in police custody, police
 officers and prosecutors frequently circumvent or ignore these provisions. The law
 stipulates that interrogations of minors should be carried out by the state prosecu-
 tor or a designated assistant and that minors must be provided with lawyers. How-
 ever, according to AI, police and prosecutors often deny minors access to lawyers
 and fail to inform parents. Children and juveniles detained under the Anti-Terror
 Law also often are held for up to 4 days in incommunicado detention.
 Children have suffered greatly from the cycle of violence in the southeast. The mi-
 gration-forced or voluntary-of many families, terrorism against teachers, and
 school closings in the southeast have uprooted children and moved them to cities
 that are hard pressed to find the resources to extend basic, mandatory services such
 as schooling. Many cities in the southeast are operating schools on double shifts,
 with as many as 100 students per classroom (see Section 1.g.). The Government
 built regional boarding schools to help combat this problem, but these are insuffi-
 cient. In practice in rural Anatolia and the southeast, the literacy rate for girls is
 very low, and many do not complete primary school. The literacy rate for boys, most
 of whom complete primary school, is higher. Some continue on to high school, for
 which they generally must travel or live away from home.
 Instances of child beating and abuse are more frequently reported than in pre-
 vious years, according to women's groups. The increase likely is attributable to
 greater public awareness of the problem.
 People With Disabilities.-Legislation dealing with the disabled is piecemeal, and
 little legislation exists regarding accessibility to buildings and public transportation.
 Certain categories of employers are required to hire disabled persons as 2 percent
 of their employee pool, although there is no penalty for failure to comply.
 Religious Minorities.-Jews and numerous Christian sects freely practice their re-
 ligions and report little discrimination in daily life. However, extremist groups tar-
 get minority communities from time to time. An arson attack occurred in January
 on the Orthodox shrine, now a museum, at St. Therapon. The custodian was killed
 and artifacts were stolen. Investigations into this incident and the December 1997
 bombing of the Orthodox Patriarchate in Istanbul produced no arrests by year's end.
 Many religious minority members, along with many in the secular political majority
 of Muslims, fear the possibility of rising Islamic extremism and the involvement of
 even moderate Islam in politics. Islamist journals frequently publish anti-Semitic
 diatribes.
 
 
 1565
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Constitution does not recognize the
 Kurds as a national, racial, or ethnic minority. There are no legal barriers to ethnic
 Kurds' participation in political and economic affairs, but Kurds who publicly or po-
 litically assert their Kurdish ethnic identity risk harassment or prosecution. Many
 Members of Parliament and senior officials and professionals are ethnic Kurds.
 Kurds who are long-term residents in industrialized cities in western Turkey have
 been for the most part assimilated into the political, economic, and social life of the
 nation, and much intermarriage has occurred over many generations. Kurds who
 currently are migrating westward (including those displaced by the conflict in the
 southeast) bring with them their culture and village identity, but often little edu-
 cation and few skills.
 The 1991 repeal of the law prohibiting publications or communications in Kurdish
 legalized private spoken and printed communications in Kurdish. The use of minor-
 ity languages, including Kurdish, in television and radio broadcasts by political par-
 ties and in schools is restricted by a plethora of laws and even articles of the Con-
 stitution; these restrictions are invoked arbitrarily. Kurdish is widely spoken on the
 streets, especially in the largely Kurdish southeast, and Kurdish music recordings
 reportedly were widely available there. Soz-TV in Diyarbakir reportedly played
 some Kurdish music as well. Materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and
 ethnic identity continue to be subject to confiscation and prosecution under the "in-
 divisible unity of the state" provisions of the Anti-Terror Law (see Section 2.a.).
 A series of actions against predominantly Kurdish organizations in the southeast
 has convinced many in the region that despite the Government's public commitment
 to improve its human rights record, the boundaries for cultural and political expres-
 sion are in fact shrinking. Some contend that official harassment of Kurdish groups
 in the southeast increased.
 In the wake of the November arrest in Italy of PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan and
 the protests in Turkey and elsewhere in his support, nationalist gangs attacked and
 beat suspected Kurdish sympathizers. Security forces also detained an estimated
 1,500 to 3,000 members of HADEP, and party leaders allege that many were tor-
 tured or beaten. In November an 18-year-old party member died in police custody,
 allegedly from beatings during interrogation.
 The Mesopotamian Cultural Center (MKM), a corporation established to promote
 Kurdish language and culture, has branches in Adana, Mersin, Sanliurfa, and
 Diyarbakir in addition to cities in western Turkey. Police pressure against MKM
 branches in Mersin and Adana is ongoing. The Diyarbakir and Sanliurfa branches
 remained closed. Cultural and theater performances are monitored and often inter-
 rupted by local officials. All MKM branches report that they have been prevented
 from selling Kurdish-language music cassettes and warned against organizing more
 cultural events.
 The Ministry of Education tightly controls the curriculum in schools (except for-
 eign-language schools not part of the Turkish system). Many Greek-origin students
 report difficulty in continuing their education in Turkey and go to Greece, often
 never to return.
 The Romani population is extremely small, and there were no reported incidents
 of public or government harassment directed against them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers' except police and military personnel, have
 the right to associate freely and form representative unions. This right encompasses
 civil servants, including schoolteachers.
 The Constitution stipulates that no one shall be compelled to become or remain
 a member of, or withdraw from, a labor union. The law states that unions and con-
 federations may be founded without prior authorization based on a petition to the
 governor of the province of the prospective union's headquarters. Although unions
 are independent of the government and political parties, they must obtain official
 permission to hold meetings or rallies and must allow police to attend their conven-
 tions and record the proceedings. The Constitution requires candidates for union of-
 fice to have worked 10 years in the industry represented by the union. The Supreme
 Court banned the DISK-aflfiliatd union in the leather sector, Deri-Is, because of
 this article in the Constitution. The International Labor Organization (ILO) Com-
 mittee on Freedom of Association stated that this provision is extremely prejudicial
 to the interests of the trade unions and urged that it be repealed.
 Just over 12 percent of the total civilian labor force (15 years old and above) is
 unionized. There are three confederations of labor unions: the Turkish Confed-
 eration of Workers Unions (Turk-Is); the Confederation of Turkish Real Trade
 Unions (Hak-Is); and the Confederation of Progressive Trade Unions (DISK). Unions
 
 
 1566
 
 and their officers have a statutory right to express views on issues directly affecting
 members' economic and social interests.
 Prosecutors may ask labor courts to order a trade union or confederation to sus-
 pend its activities or to go into liquidation for serious infractions, based on alleged
 violation of specific legal norms. However, the Government may not dissolve a union
 summarily.
 The constitutional right to strike is restricted partially. For example, workers en-
 gaged in the protection of life and property and those in the mining and petroleum
 industries, sanitation services, national defense, and education do not have the right
 to strike. The right to strike is suspended for the first 10 years in the nine free
 trade zones.
 Collective bargaining is required before a strike. The law specifies the steps that
 a union must take before it may strike or before an employer may engage in a lock-
 out. Nonbinding mediation is the last of those steps. A party that fails to comply
 with these steps forfeits its rights. The employer may respond to a strike with a
 lockoilt but is prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using administrative person-
 nel to perform jobs normally done by strikers. Article 42 of Law 2822, governing col-
 lective bargaining, strikes, and lockouts, prohibits the employer from terminating
 workers who encourage or partici pate in a legal strike. Unions are forbidden to en-
 gage in secondary (solidarity), political, or general strikes, or in slowdowns. In sec-
 tors in which strikes are prohibited, disputes are resolved through binding arbitra-
 tion.
 The Government has the statutory power under Law 2822 to suspend strikes for
 60 days for reasons of national security or public health and safety. Unions may pe-
 tition the Council of State to lift such a suspension. If this appeal fails, and the par-
 ties and mediators still fail to resolve the dispute, the strike is subject to compulsory
 arbitration at the end of the 60-day period. The ILO's Committee of Experts and
 the Committee on the Application of Standards regard the Government's application
 of Law 2822 as too broad and called on the Government to limit recourse to compul-
 sory arbitration to essential services in the strict sense of the term. The Government
 asserts that the law does not contradict the Committees' principles.
 During the first 6 months of 1998, there were 25 strikes involving 4,441 workers,
 which resulted in approximately 78,962 lost workdays, During the same period
 there were no lockouts. No strikes or strike decisions were suspended by the first,
 second, or third coalition governments since their formation following the 1995 gen-
 eral elections.
 Some labor union members faced government limits on freedom of speech and as-
 sembly (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.), while some civil service organizations continued
 to demonstrate for the right to strike and for higher salaries.
 In February 20 public employees, including a member of the executive committee
 of KESK and officials of the SES and Egitim-Sen unions in Diyarbakir, Adiyaman,
 Siirt, and Agri were banished. In November 1997 authorities closed down SES and
 Egitim-Sen offices in Urfa. KESK officials stated that the authorities were trying
 to prevent union activities in these cities.
 In March the public employees' c6nfederation, KESK, organized a national dem-
 onstration in Ankara to protest a draft bill on public employees' trade unions that
 the Parliament was debating. The draft did not grant the rights to bargain collec-
 tively and to strike and contained many prohibitions and restrictions. The dem-
 onstration was broken up violently by police, who also on the following day arrested
 many members of the BTS transport union. The Government withdrew the bill from
 parliamentary consideration.
 There were no developments in two separate trials, begun in 1996, of Turk-Is offi-
 cials over 1995 demonstrations that Turk-Is held to protest the deadlock in collec-
 tive bargaining. In the first case, the public prosecutor demanded prison terms for
 the Turk-Is officials of a minimum of 6 months. In the second case, the prosecutor's
 office accused Turk-Is management of violating the Associations Law when it an-
 nounced its support for opposition parties before the 1995 general elections.
 With government approval, unions may and do form or join confederations and
 international labor bodies, as long as these -organizations are not hostile to Turkey
 or to freedom of religion or belief. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU), of which Turk-Is had been an affiliate for years, approved DISK
 as an affiliate in 1992; Hak-Is became a member in 1997.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-All industrial workers have
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and most industrial and some public
 sector agricultural workers are organized. The law requires that, in order to become
 a bargaining agent, a union must represent not only 50 percent plus one of the em-
 ployees at a given work site, but also 10 percent of all the workers in that particular
 industry. This 10 percent barrier has the effect of favoring established unions, par-
 
 
 1567
 ticularly those affiliated with Turk-Is, the confederation that represents nearly 80
 percent of organized labor.
 The Ministry of Labor has reportedly manipulated membership figures to prevent
 unions from acquiring bargaining rights or to remove such rights. The ICFTU re-
 ports that, as a result of the law, workers in many sectors of economic activity are
 not covered by a collective agreement.
 The ILO called on Turkey to rescind this 10 percent rule. However, both Turk-
 Is and the Turkish employers' organization favor retention of the rule. In 1994 the
 Government informed the ILO Committee on the Application of Standards that the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Security proposed to remove the 10 percent numerical
 restriction and that it had communicated its proposal to the social partners. The
 ILO took note of the Government's statement that it continued to study removal of
 this requirement despite objections from employer and worker organizations. The
 Government has taken no further action.
 The law on trade unions stipulates that an employer may not dismiss a labor
 union representative without rightful cause. The union member may appeal such a
 dismissal to the courts, and if the ruling is in the union member's favor, the em-
 ployer must reinstate him and pay all back benefits and salary. These laws gen-
 erally are applied in practice.
 The ILO has urged the Government to take the necessary measures to ensure
 workers effective protection against antiunion discrimination. Some private sector
 employers continued to try to eliminate unions. The DISK trade union confederation
 reports that between January 1996 and June 1998, some 40,000 trade union mem-
 bers were fired. During the year union workers at the glass bottle factory Sise Cam
 San A.S. were offered large sums of money to leave the Birlesik Metal-Is union, 27
 workers were dismissed at a Siemens factory in Bursa in an effort to force them
 to leave the same union, and more than 250 members of the Tekstil trade union
 were dismissed at the Zumrut Orme factory in Cerkezkoy.
 Union officials in Diyarbakir stated that it is impossible to enforce labor rights
 in the southeast.
 Public employees held largely peaceful protests in major cities during March,
 June, and July to press their demands for higher wages. In late July, the Govern-
 ment agreed to a 35 percent wage increase, effective August 8.
 A law enacted in 1984 provides for the establishment of free trade zones, which
 are intended to attract domestic and especially foreign investment and to promote
 international trade. There are nine such zones operating in Mersin, Antalya, the Ae-
 gean region, Trabzon, Istanbul (2), Eastern Anatolia, Mardin, and Rize. Union orga-
 nizing and collective bargaining are permitted in the zones, but the right to strike
 is suspended for the first 10 years of operation. In the meantime, labor disputes that
 cannot be settled by the parties are subject to compulsory arbitration. Workers in-
 side the zones are paid in foreign exchange rather than Turkish currency, giving
 them a hedge against inflation.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and statutes pro-
 hibit compulsory labor, including that performed by children. The laws are enforced.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution and labor laws forbid the employment of children younger than age 15,
 with the exception that those 13 and 14 years of age may engage in light, part-time
 work if enrolled in school or vocational training. The Constitution also prohibits
 children from engaging in physically demanding jobs such as underground mining
 and from working at night. The Ministry of Labor effectively enforces these laws
 only in the organized industrial sector.
 In practice many children work because families need the supplementary income.
 An informal system provides work for young boys at low wages, tor example, in auto
 repair shops. Girls rarely are seen working in public, but many are kept out of
 school to work in handicrafts, especially in rural areas. The bulk of child labor oc-
 curs in rural areas and often is associated with traditional family economic activity,
 such as farming or animal husbandry. It is common for entire families to work to-
 gether to bring in the harvest. The Government recognizes the serious problem of
 child labor and works with the ILO to document its extent and to determine solu-
 tions. With the passage in 1997 of the 8-year compulsory education program (pre-
 viously 5 years were compulsory), the Government expects the number of child
 workers to be reduced significantly. Children enter school at 6 or 7 years of age and
 are required to attend until age 13 or 14.
 In April several NGO's greeted the 40-member "Global March Against Child
 Labor" delegation at the Iranian border and escorted it through the country to the
 border with Greece. The marchers spent several days in Istanbul and Ankara, and
 major labor confederations and some NGO's held events and conferences for the del-
 
 
 1568
 egation. The march was viewed as an important step in heightening awareness of
 the problem of international child labor.
 The Ministry of Labor, the Ankara municipality, the Turk-Is labor confederation,
 and the Turkish Employers Association are among the institutions participating in
 the ILO'S International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), a
 project to solve the problems of working children. The Ministry of Labor and the
 ILO jointly produced a study showing that almost one-half (44 percent) of the chil-
 dren working are below the age of 15, are paid less than the minimum wage, and
 have no insurance. According to a 1996 study conducted by the Turk-Is child work-
 ers bureau, for every 100 workers, 32 were between the ages of 6 and 19. Children
 employed at work sites and homes constitute 5 percent of the total working popu-
 lation and were employed mostly in the metal, shoe, woodworking, and agricultural
 sectors. The young workers employed on a monthly or daily wage payment basis
 worked over 40 hours er week, and those employed at home and not receiving a
 wage payment worked less than 40 hours per week. The study reported that 56 per-
 cent of these workers were uninsured. It added that the total number of working
 young persons between the ages of 12 and 19 was 3.5 million and-that 45 percent
 of them were under the age' of 16.
 According to the Ministry of Labor, there are approximately 60 trained child labor
 inspectors, and more are expected to be trained. However, according to Turk-Is,
 there are over 600,000 work sites and a mere 450 regular inspectors. No action took
 place on a labeling system that had been proposed for 1998.
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, including that performed by chil-
 dren, and the laws are enforced (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Ministry is obliged legally to set
 minimum wages at least every 2 years through a minimum  wage board, a tripartite
 government-industry-union body. In recent years, it has done so annually. However,
 in 1998 there were two adjustments: in January the nominal minimum wage was
 increased by 25 percent and increased again in August by 35 percent (compared
 'with an annual inflation rate of nearly 80 percent). The monthly gross minimum
 wage rates, which became effective on August 8, were approximately $174 (TL 47.8
 million) for workers older than age 16 and about $148 (TL 40.7 million) for workers
 under age 16.
 It would be difficult for a single worker, and impossible for a family, to live on
 the minimum wage without support from other sources. Most workers earn consid-
 erably more. Workers covered by the labor law, who constitute about one-third of
 the total labor force, also receive a hot meal or a daily food allowance and other
 fringe benefits that, according to the Turkish Employers' Association, make basic
 wages alone account for only about 33 percent of total compensation.
 The Labor law sets a 45-hour workweek, although most unions have bargained
 for fewer hours. The law prescribes a weekly rest day and limits the number of over-
 time hours to 3 a day for up to 90 days in a year. The Labor Inspectorate of the
 Ministry of Labor effectively enforces wage and hour provisions in the unionized in-
 dustrial, service, and government sectors, which cover about 12 percent of workers.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by law, but the Govern-
 ment has not carried out an effective inspection and enforcement, program. Law
 1475 sets out procedures under which workers may remove themselves from hazard-
 ous conditions without risking loss of employment. The law also allows for the shut-
 down of an operation if a five-person committee, which includes safety inspectors,
 employee, and employer representatives, determines that the operation endangers
 workers' lives. In practice financial constraints, limited safety awareness, careless-
 ness, and fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to occupational safety and
 health by workers and employers alike.
