TURKEY
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
The strongly nationalist ruling coalition of the Democratic Left Party,Nationalist
Action Party, and Motherland Party once again failed to enact key reforms in the
face of longstanding opposition to these measures by the army and security forces.
The government’s National Program for Accession to the European Union should
have marked a turning point for human rights, but consisted mainly of vague and
general undertakings that were clearly designed to delay or avoid significant
change. In June the Constitutional Court closed the religious Virtue Party for
“actions against the republic’s secular principles.” An opportunity for significant
change was missed in October,when a package of constitutional amendments were
enacted that shortened detention periods,but left the death penalty and constraints
on freedom of expression on the statute books. Three provinces remained under
state of emergency. In December, security forces deliberately killed prisoners resisting
transfers to new high security “F-type prisons,”and beat them in transit.Thirtythree
prisoners died in hunger strikes.
The Turkish government talked about lifting constraints on free expression, but
did not take effective legislative action to do so. Those who challenged the official
view of the role of religion, ethnicity, and the army were prosecuted and imprisoned.
In June, Dr. Fikret Baskaya began serving his third prison term for his writings,
a sixteen-month sentence for “separatist propaganda” under article 8 of the
Anti-Terror Law, for a 1999 newspaper article about the trial of Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Öcalan. Ahmet Turan Demir, deputy chairperson of
the People’s Democracy Party (HADEP) which has a largely Kurdish membership,
was committed to Ankara Closed Prison in August to serve a one-year sentence
under article 8 of the Anti-Terror Law for a speech at his party’s youth congress in
1998.
Military courts tried civilians on charges limiting free expression. In December
Sanar Yurdatapan, coordinator of the Freedom of Expression Initiative, and Nevzat
Onaran of the Contemporary Journalists’ Association were imprisoned by the
General StaffMilitary Court with two-month sentences for “criticizing the institution
of military service.”
Governors closed exhibitions, banned film shows, and confiscated books and
newspapers. In August police confiscated the Women Pensioners’ Union booklet
Voice and Courage, which published speeches from a conference on sexual assault
and rape in custody, and officials of the group were charged with “insulting the
security forces.”
The High Council for Radio and Television (R.T.U.K.) temporarily or permanently
suspended scores of independent broadcasters and in August banned BBC
World Service and Deutsche Welle on the grounds that they “threatened national
security.”
Various legal pretexts were used to prevent broadcasting and education in
minority languages, calling into question whether the 2001 constitutional amendments
ostensibly lifting the broadcasting ban would be fully implemented. Local
governors prohibited the use of Kurdish street names and banned plays, cassettes,
and films in Kurdish on the grounds that they were “separatist.”
The ban on wearing the headscarf was applied with increasing severity against
students and civil servants and extended to private universities. A change in regulations
prohibited any student wearing a headscarf from sitting for the June university
examinations, a move that human rights groups criticized as violating the
students’ right to freedom of religion, conscience, and thought. Teachers and doctors
were also dismissed for wearing the headscarf on duty.
Many lawyers and human rights defenders charged that the use of torture and
ill-treatment increased.Detainees in all quarters of the country reported that police
or gendarmes inflicted torture by beating, death threats, hosing with cold water,
sexual assault, electric shocks, and hanging by the arms. Victims included women
and children, and people detained for common criminal offenses as well as State
Security Court (SSC) offenses (those involving narcotics and organized crime,
political violence, and some nonviolent political offenses). Two people died as a
result of beatings during arrest.
The Turkish government refused to abolish incommunicado detention, the
principal factor in the persistence of torture in Turkey identified by U.N. and
Council of Europe experts. Turkish law continued to permit detention for SSC
offenses for up to four days without access to family or lawyers. In practice this was
frequently extended. Those held for common criminal offenses were entitled to a
lawyer from the first moments of detention but rarely got one. Blindfolding, similarly
condemned by international experts, also continued unchecked.
Legal safeguards for children in police custody were frequently ignored. In
March, parliamentary deputy Sema Piskinsüt, former president of the Parliamentary
Human Rights Commission, estimated that 90 percent of imprisoned children
had been tortured in police custody. In January, nine children under the age of fifteen
complained that they had been beaten, forced to remain standing for long
periods, and deprived of food, drink and sleep while detained in Viransehir in the
province of Sanlıurfa in southeast Turkey. Local lawyers complained about the illtreatment
and breach of detention procedures, but as of November 2001 no action
had been taken against the responsible police officers. A fifteen-year-old detained
in April during an Istanbul demonstration against F-type prisons reported that
police officers beat him with wooden sticks about the head and body. Medical
examination showed extensive bruising and broken teeth.
Women reported sexual abuse and rape in police custody. The Women’s Commission
of the Diyarbakır Bar stated in February that over the preceding year it had
received complaints of sexual assault or rape by police or gendarmes from 123
women. In July,Health Minister Osman Durmus issued a circular which appeared
to circumvent a 1999 ban on “virginity examinations” by providing for the expulsion of female medical students proven to be sexually active or engaged in prostitution.
The minister later denied that he had authorized the reinstatement of such
examinations, but did not rescind the circular. A sixteen-year-old in Van reported
that in June she was taken from a gendarmerie post, where she was being questioned
for alleged links with the PKK, to a state hospital and there subjected to a
forced “virginity test.”
The climate of impunity for torture remained unchanged.Where security personnel
were charged and convicted of crimes based on torture, sentences were frequently
light or suspended. In February a policeman convicted of torturing a
thirteen-year-old boy in Istanbul in 1994 received a suspended sentence of fifteen
months’ imprisonment and returned to active service. In August the Turkish Parliamentary
Human Rights Commission reported that it had forwarded 451 torture
cases to local prosecutors, who had responded in only sixty-nine cases. Only one
prosecution had been opened. The December 2000 Law on Conditional Release
and Suspension of Sentences, resulting in the release of thousands of prisoners held
on common criminal charges, also suspended sentences for police officers convicted
of ill-treatment under article 245 of the Turkish Criminal Code.
Torturers continued to be protected by the abuse of medical examination procedures.
In December, Dr.Nur Birgen, a Forensic Institute official, was convicted of
issuing misleading reports that concealed torture. Her three-month prison sentence
was commuted to a fine of approximately one U.S. dollar.
HADEP officials Serdar Tanıs and Ebubekir Deniz “disappeared” after being
summoned to a gendarmerie station in Silopi, Sırnak province, in January. The
authorities first denied and then admitted that the two men “visited” the gendarmerie,
but claimed they had left after half an hour.
The Justice Ministry moved forward with its long-planned transfer of prisoners
held for SSC offenses from large ward-based prisons to new F-type prisons organized
in smaller cells for up to three prisoners. The ministry ignored warnings from
nongovernmental and international organizations that the planned F-type regime
might amount to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment and that the lack of
transparency surrounding the prison reform risked exacerbating prisoners’ fears.
In December, the government launched “Operation Return to Life,”sending 10,000
soldiers into twenty ward-based prisons to transfer hunger-striking prisoners into
small-group isolation in the newly constructed F-type prisons. The operation left
twenty-eight prisoners and two gendarmes dead. Some prisoners burned themselves
in protest, but others were deliberately killed by security forces. Gendarmes
beat and tortured prisoners during transfer and on arrival at the F-type prisons.
Eight male prisoners formally complained that gendarmes anally raped them with
truncheons on arrival at Kandıra F-type Prison, but they were not medically examined
for three weeks.
Complaints that F-type prison guards maintained discipline through beatings
were corroborated by medical evidence in several cases. In February, Sabri Diri
made a formal complaint that guards at Tekirdag F-type Prison twice beat him and
subjected him to falaqa (beating on the soles of the feet) in his single cell. A medical
examination delayed for a week showed no signs of ill-treatment but a June
medical examination using scintigraphy, an imaging technique, revealed evidence consistent with Sabri Diri’s allegation of falaka and beating. As of October 2001,
thirty-three prisoners and eight relatives had died in hunger strikes in protest at the
F-type regime.More than fifty other hunger strikers suffered severe and permanent
brain damage.
More than 250,000 mainly Kurdish villagers remained unable to return to their
homes in the southeast, despite the substantial reduction in hostilities between
government forces and the PKK in that region. The vast majority had been forced
from their homes in the early and mid-1990s by security forces in brutal operations
accompanied by torture and “disappearances.”A smaller number had fled their villages
after repeated PKK attacks. Returns were slow due to apparent official reluctance
to repopulate distant rural areas.Where civil authorities granted permission
to return, villagers were sometimes turned back by gendarmerie or neighboring
communities’ paramilitary village guards who had occupied their lands.
Sporadic forced evacuation and house destruction actually continued. Following
the death of a gendarme in a landmine explosion near Beytüssebab in Sirnak
province in July, gendarmes forcibly evacuated the villages of Asat and Ortaklı.
The decline in attacks by armed illegal political organizations in recent years
continued but political killings of civilians continued. In September, a suicide
bomb attack by a member of the Revolutionary People’s Liberation Party/Front
(DHKP/C) in Istanbul killed Australian tourist Amanda Rigg and two Anti-Riot
Squad officers. A fifteen-year-old was killed and three other schoolchildren injured
in an attack on the extreme right Idealist Hearth in Istanbul. Official reports
claimed the attack was committed by the Turkish Communist Labour Party
(TKEP).
Asylum seekers were frequently denied proper protection. Under Turkey’s geographical
reservation to the 1951 Refugee Convention,non-European asylum seekers
were required to register with the police so that the U.N. High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) could determine whether they were refugees and eligible
for resettlement in a third country. Hundreds of asylum seekers entering the
country from Iran and northern Iraq were summarily returned across the borders.
Others were arbitrarily refused permission to register or to report weekly to police
stations, thereby exposing them to risk of summary return as illegal residents. In
July more than two hundred African asylum seekers, including some recognized by
UNHCR as refugees, were rounded up in Istanbul. One female member of the
group died in custody, while others reported that gendarmes ill-treated, raped, or
otherwise sexual assaulted them before forcing them at gunpoint across the Greek
border.
Landmines laid by the government along the borders and by both sides in the
conflict between the security forces and the PKK, killed at least ten people. In April,
however, Turkey declared that it would begin procedures to accede to the Ottawa
Convention on the prohibition of production and use of anti-personnel mines.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit issued a circular in June that required government authorities to be “tolerant towards civil society organizations,” but also said that
members of such organizations did not deserve to be called human rights defenders.
Human rights organizations saw little benefit from the circular. In September,
police raided the Diyarbakir referral center for the treatment of torture survivors
run by the Turkish Human Rights Foundation (TIHV) and carried off computers,
patient files, and information about assisting doctors. In March, nineteen participants
in a conference on sexual assault and rape in custody were put on trial for
“insulting the State authorities”at Beyoglu Criminal Court.Nazli Top,who was tortured
and raped with a truncheon in police custody in 1992, was a speaker at the
June 2000 conference and a defendant in the ongoing trial.
The F-type prison crisis and associated hunger strikes imposed considerable
strain on the human rights community.Government authorities relentlessly persecuted
TIHV, Human Rights Association (HRA), and Turkish Medical Association
members who were stretching their resources to the limit in order to document
abuses, ensure supplies of vitamins and clothing to F-type inmates, and provide
support to the relatives of sick, dead, and dying prisoners. Five HRA branches were
shut down by local governors because of their work on F-type prisons.HRA members
were repeatedly beaten and detained when they tried to make public press
statements. The Justice Ministry announced that providing information about the
hunger strikes was “supporting terrorism.”Accordingly,Ankara HRA branch president
Lutfi Demirkapı and eleven others were charged in March under the Anti-
Terror Law for their defense of human rights and face possible seven and a half year
prison sentences. Their trial at Ankara SSC was under way as of this writing.
In October, Yeni Safak (New Dawn) published an April 1998 memorandum
from the military’s Office of the Chief of General Staff, outlining a military plan to
discredit the HRA with false information linking it to the PKK.The military did not
deny the April 1998 memorandum’s authenticity but claimed it was never implemented.
However, an attempt on HRA president Akın Birdal’s life in May 1998 was
provoked by the type of groundless accusations contemplated in the memorandum.
Birdal barely survived the attack, which left him disabled.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
United Nations
In January, the U.N. special rapporteur on religious intolerance and discrimination
published a report on his 1999 visit to Turkey. The report strongly questioned
the Turkish Republic’s view of itself as a secular state, stating that the Directorate of
Religious Affairs wields “excessive powers of religious management such that religious
practice appears to be regimented by the government and Islam is treated as
if it were a ‘State affair.’”
The report noted that Muslim and non-Muslim religious minorities were not
satisfactorily protected and recommended that the U.N. Working Group on
Minorities review the effectiveness of safeguards provided by the Treaty of Lausanne, the foundation for Turkey’s policies towards minorities.The special rapporteur
also urged recognition of the right to conscientious objection.
The February visit of the U.N. special rapporteur on extrajudicial, arbitrary and
summary executions included investigations into the “disappearance” of HADEP
officials Serdar Tanıs and Abubekir Deniz.
In June the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that the Turkish
government introduce legislative changes and an awareness campaign in order
to combat “honor killings,” the murder of women by family members who believe
that they have been dishonored by the woman’s conduct. The committee was also
“extremely concerned” that children were being exposed to torture and ill-treatment
as a result of incommunicado police detention.
Council of Europe
The Committee for the Prevention of Torture (C.P.T.) concertedly engaged the
Justice Ministry on the violence of the December prison operation, isolation in Ftype
prisons, and associated hunger strikes. The C.P.T. visited Turkey in December
just before the operation, attempting to resolve hunger strikes that started in October.
It visited again in January,April, and September.
The Turkish government authorized the committee’s publication of all outstanding
reports visits dating back to 1990. The C.P.T. did not oppose the change
from large wards to cells but emphasized that small-group isolation in F-type prisons
was “not acceptable” and urged the Justice Ministry to establish out-of-cell
activities and independent monitoring.
In a number of judgments the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruled
that Turkish security forces had been responsible for arbitrary house destruction,
torture, “disappearance,” and extrajudicial execution in their operations in the
southeast.
The ECHR’s controversial judgment in July rejected the Welfare Party’s complaint
against closure by the Turkish Constitutional Court for “activities against the
principle of secularism” in 1998. The European Court considered that the party
leadership’s intention to establish Islamic law (shariah) conflicted with values
embodied in the convention, and that statements by the leadership suggested that
it might resort to force in order to gain and retain power. In the same month the
court ruled that Kurdish former parliamentary deputies Hatip Dicle, Orhan
Dogan, Selim Sadak, and Leyla Zana, sentenced to fifteen years for treason in 1994,
had been imprisoned after an unfair trial.
European Union
The E.U. Presidency’s May statement on the prison crisis urged the Turkish government
to implement “generously and properly” the C.P.T.’s suggested steps and
underlined that prison reform was a priority area for meeting the accession criteria.
In June, a European Parliament delegation visited Turkey to investigate developments
in F-type prisons.
The European Parliament’s October 2000 report on the accession process criticized the vagueness of the National Plan and noted that “the signs of openness
which are on occasion expressed by governmental authorities may be challenged by
military powers, which still have an unusual influence on Turkish politics.” The
European Commission’s November 2001 Regular Report concluded that on
human rights, “the situation on the ground has hardly improved.”
United States
The State Department’s Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2000 surveyed
the continuing abuses, giving examples of restrictions on speech and the
press, extrajudicial killings and torture.The report blamed incommunicado detention
and impunity for the persistence of torture. It documented child labor, violence
against women, and spousal abuse.
Its description of “an upsurge in the rate of returns” of displaced Kurdish villagers
gave a more optimistic picture than warranted. The conclusion, apparently
based on official Turkish government pronouncements, was not borne out by
Human Rights Watch investigations. The State Department’s Trafficking in Persons
Report stated that Turkey did not meet the minimum standards nor had it made significant
efforts to combat trafficking of women and girls to Turkey for forced prostitution.
Technical issues slowed contractual negotiations on the sale of 145 attack helicopters
to Turkey by U.S. manufacturer Bell Textron. This class of equipment was
implicated in past human rights violations in Turkey, making the pending sale,
which is subject to U.S. Congressional approval, highly controversial in the United
States.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Small Group Isolation in F-type Prisons and the Violent Transfers of Prisoners to
Sincan, Kandira, and Edirne Prisons on December 19, 2000, 4/01