Turkey
The State Department's 1992 report on Turkey presents a selective account of the country's human rights record. It correctly identifies Turkey's primary human rights problems and discusses two of them in great detail - the torture of those detained incommunicado by police and security forces and limitations on the freedoms of speech and the press.
However, it fails to discuss accurately or fully other human rights abuses, including restrictions on the freedom of assembly and association, the increased number of extrajudicial killings resulting from house raids, and abuses that occurred in southeastern Turkey against Turkey's Kurdish population. In particular, the report understates the Turkish government's use of excessive force against Kurdish noncombatants, and at times, appears to imply that Turkey's deviation from internationally recognized human rights principles in southeast Turkey was somehow excused as a legitimate response to increased activity by the Kurdish Worker's Party (PKK), an armed guerrilla group active in that area.
With respect to torture, the report correctly notes that the torture of persons detained by police or security forces remained widespread in 1992, that few complaints of torture were investigated or prosecuted, that at least 15 people died under suspicious circumstances while in police custody, and that the government made no serious effort to investigate these deaths. Doctors who work with the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey estimated that between 80% and 90% of persons detained for political reasons and
a large percentage of detainees who were suspected of ordinary crimes were tortured or ill-treated.
Even government officials were not immune from police brutality. In November 1992, a counsellor to the Minister of the Interior was severely beaten in a local police station in Ankara after having been detained in connection with a driving offence. Upon his release, he stated, "If this is what happens to people like me, alas for the ordinary citizen."
The report accurately states that the government failed to implement legal reforms that would assist in the eradication of torture. However, it does not discuss fully the fact that the Turkish government took steps to perpetuate conditions which have permitted torture to flourish. Because most allegations of torture arise during pre-arrest detention when detainees are generally held incommunicado by the police or security forces, Turkey has come under increased pressure to shorten its permissible detention periods as a means of eradicating torture. As the report correctly notes, prior to November 1992, Turkish law permitted the police to detain individuals suspected of crimes of a collective or conspiratorial nature for 30 days in Turkey's 10 southeastern provinces and 15 days in other parts of Turkey.
In April, the Turkish parliament passed a legal reform bill that would have permitted detainees immediate access to attorneys and shortened permissible detention periods somewhat. However, after military leaders expressed their
388
Turkey
opposition to its chief features, President Turgut Ozal vetoed the bill.
The Parliament subsequently passed a revised version which was signed into law by President Ozal on November 30. Human rights advocates report that pursuant to the new law, ordinary criminal suspects have the right to consult with a lawyer during the detention period, but those charged with crimes of a political nature do not. Moreover, ordinary criminal suspects charged with crimes of a collective nature can be detained for eight days, while those suspected of political crimes may still be detained for 30 days in southeast Turkey and 1 5 days in other parts of Turkey.
Thus, the new law essentially reaffirms the right of the Turkish government to hold political detainees incommunicado, prior to any formal arrest, for up to 30 days. It also casts grave doubt on promises made by the Turkish government in late 1991 to resolve its human rights problems, and is a clear violation of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, a convention to which Turkey is a signatory and which provides that detainees must be brought "promptly" before a judge.
The report also neglects to mention that the Turkish government continued to insulate police officers from charges of torture. Pursuant to Turkey's Law on the Prosecution of Civil Servants and the Anti-Terror Law of 1991, allegations of torture by police officers must be investigated by local administrative councils to determine whether they have any merit before they are referred to government
prosecutors. Because the administrative councils usually consist of local gendarmerie or police commanders, they have been extremely effective in ensuring that allegations of torture do not reach the courts.
In March, the Constitutional Court found this application of the Law on the Prosecution of Civil Servants unconstitutional. As of November, however, it was still in effect. The Constitutional Court's decision must be published in the Official Gazette to become operative and it had not yet appeared.
The report also fails to mention that on December 15, the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) issued a public statement under Article 10 of the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment concerning Turkey. The statement noted that torture and other forms of severe ill-treatment of persons in the custody of the Turkish police remained widespread and that Turkey had failed to strengthen its legal safeguards against such abuse. It was the first public statement ever issued by the CPT and was made only after the Turkish government repeatedly failed to respond appropriately to recommendations made by the CPT to eradicate torture.
As previously stated, the report accurately addresses Turkey's significant restrictions on the freedoms of speech and press, most of which seemed designed to limit independent reporting from southeast Turkey. It notes that the pattern of confiscating left-wing and pro-
389
Turkey
Kurdish journals and charging their writers and editors with crimes of thought continued unabated in 1992. In the first six months of 1992, 41 magazines and newspapers and 12 books were confiscated.
It also correctly states that journalists continued to be harassed and mistreated by government officials. As of September 1992, an estimated 57 journalists had been detained at least once by the police. In most instances, the journalists were not charged with any crime and their detention appears to have been a systematic form of harassment.
As the report notes, 11 journalists were murdered by unknown assailants in southeast Turkey. The report fails to state, however, that the number of journalists killed represents the highest figure ever documented in Turkey in a single year and the second highest, after the former Yugoslavia, of all the countries in the world for 1992. The report also neglects to mention that several of the journalists had worked for newspapers which were critical of the government and had written about governmental human rights abuses or purported connections between a "counter-guerrilla" force, known as the Hizbullah, and the Turkish security forces. The report acknowledges only that one journalist had reported on connections between Hizbullah and the Turkish security forces.
While the report notes that at least one non-governmental human rights organization accused the Turkish security forces of complicity in some of the deaths, it does not discuss evidence implicating the security forces. It does
not mention, for example, that on February 18, Halit Gungen, Diyarbakir bureau chief of the newsweekly, Ikibin'e Dogru, was shot to death in his office, at or about the same time that a police van was parked outside. When his magazine published an account of Gungen's death, implicating the police, the authorities never issued a denial.
Similarly, it neglects to state that Cengiz Altun, a journalist with the newspaper, Yeni U/ke, was killed in February, two months after he reported that police officers had detained and threatened to kill him, and shortly after his father had received a telephone call from the police informing him that his son would be killed.
And, it does not mention that three journalists who went to investigate the September 20 shooting of journalist Musa Anter immediately after its occurrence were abducted at gunpoint near the scene of the crime. They were subsequently beaten, threatened and released. Their abductors identified themselves as police officers.
The report accurately states that no one has been charged with the murder of any of the 11 journalists. As the report also notes, in August both the Turkish Prime Minister, Suleyman Demirel, and the Interior Minister, Ismet Sezgin, accused the dead journalists of being terrorists. It is unclear, however, whether the report makes this observation to legitimize the government's reluctance to investigate the murders, or to demonstrate the government's further intransigence with respect to the rule of law in southeast Turkey.
390
Turkey
The manner in which the report discusses Turkish human rights problems other than torture and restrictions on the freedoms of speech and the press are not nearly as detailed or accurate. For example, it significantly understates restrictions on the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association. While the report mentions that five organizations were raided in 1992, it neglects to note that during the first six months of the year, 18 organizations, including the Elazig Solidarity and Culture Association, the Association for Researching and Spreading Public Culture, the Adana Halkeri, the Patriotic Democratic Culture Association, the Folklore and Education Association, a branch of the Green Party and the 19 Mayis University Students' Association, were closed. Similarly, although the report notes that security forces disrupted one demonstration in 1992, it fails to mention that the police disrupted numerous peaceful demonstrations and detained many participants. On January 13, 78 students at Hacettepe University were detained for protesting an increase in bus fare. On January 22, 15 high school students were detained for demonstrating in front of the National Education Board in Istanbul and demanding an end to beatings in school. On January 24, 44 persons in Izmir and 61 in Erzurum were detained for protesting the military coup in Algeria.
In addition, the report does not discuss the increased number of people killed during house raids in 1992. While it mentions one such raid in which five people were killed, human rights organizations reported that at least 74 people were killed when police officials raided houses alleged to be the safe houses of
armed opposition groups or criminals located in Ankara, Adana, Van, Urfa, Silvan, Elazig and Istanbul.
There is no question that Turkey faces serious law enforcement and military problems, or that those suspected of criminal and violent activities should be arrested, questioned and tried. However, when Turkish security forces kill suspects in house raids, they act simultaneously as investigator, judge, jury and executioner, in violation of international human rights and humanitarian laws.
Although the police routinely asserted that deaths that occurred during house raids were the result of shootouts between police and the alleged guerrillas, this does not appear to be true. In many cases, eyewitnesses reported that no firing came from the attacked houses, and police and security force officers were rarely, if ever, injured.
In April, for example, Ayse Gulen, an artist active in the Ortakoy Cultural Center in Istanbul was killed in a house raid. She was shot 60 times in the bathroom of an apartment given to her by her family as a wedding gift. Although the police claimed that Ms. Gulen was killed after someone in the apartment shot at them, the bullet shells found on the floor of the apartment were from police guns.
The report selectively recounts human rights abuses against Turkey's Kurdish population in the southeast. It accurately notes the Turkish government's harassment of the People's Labor Party (HEP) (a party active in southeast Turkey which advocates a political solution to Turkey's Kurdish problems), the continued mass
391
Turkey
detention of Kurdish villagers, and the continued attempts to suppress Kurdish culture and ethnicity. However, it falls far short in its description of the use of excessive force against non-combatants in southeast Turkey.
In 1992, Turkish security forces attacked the Kurdish civilian population with increased ferocity, in apparent retaliation for increased guerrilla activity by the PKK. According to the Kurdish Institute in Paris, 296 villages and parts of six cities were destroyed by security forces, forcing thousands of Kurds to flee their homes. The report, however, alludes to only three such incidents, the destruction of significant sections of the cities of Sirnak and Kulp.
It neglects, for example, to mention the destruction of homes and offices in the town of Batman. On April 22, after a police officer from Batman was killed on the way to his office, security forces reportedly opened a widescale operation in that town. They raided and destroyed shops and offices which belong to the Batman branch of the Turkish Human Rights Association, the Batman bureau of the newspaper Yeni U/ke, the HEP Provincial Center and many others, seized HRA documents and archives, and detained about 100 people.
Similarly, the report fails to discuss an attack by security forces in Cizre. On November 7, after a tank carrying 12 security force members hit a mine laid by an armed wing of the PKK in the Cudi region of Cizre, security forces reportedly retaliated by firing on a civilian residential area for four hours with tanks and heavy artillery. During the attack, a shell hit the
house of Haci Cekirge, killing nine people, including five children. Many residential and commercial buildings were heavily damaged.
While the report notes that celebrations of the Kurdish New Year, also known as Nevroz, led to charges of indiscriminate firing and excessive use of force by security personnel, it does not describe the events that resulted in such charges. Months before the Kurdish New Year, which is celebrated on March 21, the Turkish Prime Minister Demirel announced that Kurds would be permitted to celebrate Nevroz freely as long as they did so peacefully. In late January, however, the PKK reportedly announced that it was preparing an uprising at or around the same time. In response, the government deployed tens of thousands of soldiers and police and many tanks and helicopters throughout the region.
On March 5, police marched through the town of Sirnak shouting slogans such as "Blood for blood," "Sirnak will be the grave of the Kurds," and "Human rights are the enemy of the police." Two weeks later, between March 21 and 25, at least 90 people, including many women, children and elderly people, were killed by security forces using live ammunition as a method of controlling large crowds of peaceful Kurdish civilian demonstrators in the towns of Cizre, Sirnak, Nusaybin, Van and Hakkari. No one was held responsible for any of these deaths and no one has ever been arrested or prosecuted.
On March 21, security forces fired on thousands of unarmed civilians in Cizre on their way to the town cemetery to pay homage to the dead, a Kurdish holiday
392
Turkey
custom. At least 13 were killed, and 50 injured. Similarly, on March 22, a tank operated by Turkish security forces fired into a crowd of hundreds of residents of Nusaybin who had gathered spontaneously to protest the deaths of those in Cizre. Nineteen villagers were killed and 52 were wounded.
While heavily-armed pro-PKK sympathizers were present in some towns, human rights groups, including Helsinki Watch, the Human Rights Foundation of Turkey and the Parliamentary Human Rights Group of the British Parliament, concluded that nearly all of the casualties resulted from unprovoked, unnecessary and unjustified attacks by Turkish security forces against peaceful civilian demonstrators.
Although the regional Governor acknowledged that state forces in Nusaybin had not been confronted by a substantial armed PKK threat, he refused to admit that the Turkish military or police had acted improperly. He argued, among other things, that the demonstration was illegal under Turkish law and that the government forces had only opened fire after being fired upon. Eyewitnesses, however, stated that no one from the crowd fired at the government forces and no police officer or soldier was killed.
The report neglects to mention that the German government loudly condemned the Turkish government's misuse of force during Nevroz, and on March 26, suspended arms deliveries to Turkey. It also fails to state that on April 9, the European Parliament passed a resolution charging Turkey with violating the fundamental rights of innocent civilians. On
the other hand, on March 24, State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tut-wiler congratulated the Turkish government on its use of "restraint."
The report correctly notes that the number of extrajudicial killings in southeastern Turkey increased dramatically in 1992. The United Nations' Special Rapporteur reported in December 1992 that
(He had] received an alarming number of allegations of civilian casualties resulting from the use of excessive and arbitrary force by the Turkish security forces. Virtually every day, extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions were reportedly perpetrated by members of the Turkish Army, the police, "village guards" paid by the authorities to fight the guerrillas and the "Kontrgerilla," a secret service undercover force allegedly affiliated to the Special Welfare Department and engaged in secret operations against Kurdish separatists.
However, it fails to state that most of those killed were not only sympathetic to Kurdish causes, but leaders in the Kurdish community. Of those killed, 11 were the journalists previously discussed, 23 were HEP leaders, and the remainder were Kurdish doctors, lawyers, teachers, human rights activists and businessmen. Moreover, the exact number of total deaths appears to be in dispute. The UN rapporteur reported 296 deaths. In February 1993, Reuters reported that at least 450 people had been assassinated by unknown attackers in southeastern Turkey during 1992. On February 10, 1993,
393
Turkey
the Turkish government put the total even higher at 534 killings, described as "victims of mysterious crimes by unknown assailants."
Although the report contends that some human rights organizations and local Kurds believe that government security forces either instigated or colluded in these assassinations, human rights organizations report that this belief is widespread in Turkey. Moreover, the report neglects to mention that this claim appears to be substantiated, at least in part, by a number of facts, including: the detention, interrogation and torture by the police of many of the victims prior to their death; the government's failure to investigate seriously the murders; and an episode which occurred in early 1992 in the town of Silvan, where nearby a number of the assassinations occurred.
That episode involved a 16-year-old boy, Rifat Akis, who had been detained in Silvan on suspicion of being a member of the PKK. He claimed that, during his detention, the commander of the Silvan Gendarmerie Post threatened and attempted to bribe him into assassinating Mehmet Menge, a board member of a local political party, and gave him a rifle and hand grenades. Akis reported the threats to his family, who appealed to members of the Turkish Parliament for assistance. At the request of the Interior Minister, Akis was taken to the Ankara Police Headquarters and asked to telephone the Silvan Gendarmerie Post. His conversation with the commander, who again told him to kill the politician, was recorded and reported in Turkish newspapers.
In conclusion, the State Department's failure to present a complete picture of Turkey's human rights record is disturbing. As previously stated, there is no question that Turkey faces serious domestic problems. In 1992, for example, extreme left-wing groups assassinated 54 police officers and other officials in western Turkey and set off bombs in crowded civilian areas. In addition, the PKK intensified its guerrilla warfare in the southeast. While the activities of these groups can never be condoned, Turkey cannot use such horrendous actions to justify violations committed by its army, police and security forces or to avoid its obligations under the international human rights conventions to which it is a party and which are binding law in Turkey.
394
