	TURKEY
The State Department's 1993 report on Turkey accurately identifies the country's principal human rights problems — including extrajudicial killings, torture, systematic abuses against Turkey's Kurdish population, strict limitations on press freedom and the harassment and intimidation of independent journalists — and on the whole discusses these abuses in commendable detail. In one significant respect, moreover, the 1993 report represents a distinct improvement over its predecessor. As in 1992, it notes that many of the human rights abuses committed against Kurds in southeastern Turkey occurred in the context of the continuing armed conflict in that region between government forces and the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK). In contrast to last year, however, the 1993 report makes no effort to suggest that this conflict somehow excuses Turkey's repeated violations of internationally recognized human rights principles in the treatment of its Kurdish minority.
Despite this improvement, the 1993 report still fails to convey fully just how deplorable the human rights situation remains in Turkey today. In some instances, such as the intimidation and persecution of lawyers who represent Kurds, it ignores the problem entirely; in others, such as the abuses committed against independent voices in the media, it understates the magnitude even of those abuses that it mentions; and in yet other cases, it mentions approvingly certain procedural reforms that have had no demonstrably positive effect on the country's human rights situation. In larger measure, however, the shortcomings of the 1993 report stem from the standard format of the State Department's report itself. Through its division of human rights concerns into traditional categories — such as "Torture," "Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings" "Denial of Fab- Public Trial" and "Freedom of Speech and Press" — the report compartmentalizes into discrete and at times seemingly uncormected topics what is, in large part, an indivisible pattern of cruelty and harassment directed agamst the Kurdish minority. Indeed, while the 1993 report catalogues a horrendous series of human rights abuses against journalists, activists and legislators, many of whom are Kurds or support Kurdish causes, nowhere does it explicitly state that many of the victims of these abuses were targeted precisely because of their Kurdish nationality or sympathies, or that these abuses, virtually all of which have gone unpunished, amount to an officially-sanctioned policy of ethnic discrimination.
As the report observes, political murders and extrajudicial killings in 1993 "continued to occur at the relatively hi^ 1992 rates." It correctly notes that these extrajudicial killings took place in a variety of circumstances. According to the report, some 20 persons died in suspicious circumstances while in official custody; more than 40 persons died in house raids without returning police fu-e; 18 peaceful civilian demonstrators were killed by security forces on two days in August alone; and an untold number of persons were killed during official attacks or round-ups
363
CRITIQUE 1993
in rural villages. The greatest number of extrajudicial murders resulted, however, from "mystery killings" by unidentified attackers mostly in the east and southeast of the country, where Turkey's Kurdish population is concentrated. The report deserves credit for pointing out the severity of this problem, and for noting, in contrast to the 1992 report, that the majority of the victims "were leaders or prominent members of the Kurdish community, including journalists, physicians, human rights activists, local politicians, members of the People's Labor Party (HEP) and its successor, the Democracy Party (DEP), and others viewed as sympathetic to Kurdish causes."
However, the report's discussion of these "mystery" or "unknown perpetrator killings" is still inadequate in certain respects. It states, without any supporting reference, that, "More than 291 civilians [were] assassinated during the first nine months of the year" but then, without any effort to reconcile the apparent contradiction, proceeds to note that the Turkish Human RigJits Association (HRA) claimed that 524 people were killed by unidentified assailants in all of 1993 (emphasis added). Perhaps more important than this discrepancy over numbers, the report softpedals the official impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of these "mystery killings." On the one hand, the report notes that not one person was charged with (let alone convicted of) murder in any of the mystery killings of Kurdish leaders and activists during 1993, even in such notorious cases as the assassinations of Mehmet Sincar, a DEP parliamentarian from Mardin; Metin Can, the local HRA chairman in Elazig; or Ugur Mumcu, a prominent journalist killed in January by a car bomb. On the other hand, the strongest conclusion that the report derives from this clear pattern of non-prosecution is that, "In most cases, the Government failed to initiate any public inquiry or to press charges in connection with these murders." The report ascribes to "human rights organizations, religious leaders, Kurdish leaders and local Kurds," but conspicuously declines to adopt as its own finding, the conclusion "that the Government acquiesces in, or even carries out, the murder of civilians." In discussing individual cases, furthermore, the report at times omits evidence that points directly to official involvement in the execution. For example, the report cites the deaths of attorney Metin Can and Dr. Hasan Kaya, both of whose bound bodies were found in eastern Tunceli province with a single bullet wound to the head, but mentions only that government officials were accused of failing to search for the victims once their disappearance had been reported. The report should have said that the men disappeared en route to a police station, after receiving a phone call stating that one of Mr. Can's clients had been detained and that the lawyer's presence was necessary.
The report's discussion of torture in Turkey accurately notes that this widespread practice continues, particularly in the context of police interrogations, and has subjected Turkey to "unprecedented" public criticism fi"om both the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture and the UN Committee
364
_TURKEY
Against Torture. As the report observes, in November 1993, the UN Committee on Torture "confirm[ed] the existence and systematic character of the practice of torture" in Turkey. At several points, however, the report suggests that the incidence of torture may have been reduced — or may be reduced in ftiture — by Turkey's recent enactment of the Criminal Trials Procedure Law (CMUK). The report's guarded optimism on this score is unwarranted,
The new law, which went into effect in December 1992, requires that suspects accused of common crimes be brought before a court for arraignment within 24 hours. Those accused of "collective" crimes, however, may be detained incommunicado without formal charges for up to eight days, a period which clearly exceeds the maximum pre-arraignment period permitted by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which Turkey is a signatory. Worse still, the CMUK allows pre-arraignment detention for a period of up to 30 days in cases brought under Turkey's Anti-Terror Law (an extremely expansive statute routinely used to prosecute the expression of ideas deemed to threaten the "integrity" of the Turkish state) as well as in all cases subject to the state security courts, which operate in the southeastern provinces that are subject to emergency rule. For these reasons, Helsinki Watch has described CMUK as
an example of a recurrent pattern in which the Turkish government announces with much fanfare a new development that is allegedly designed to improve human rights practices in Turkey. On close examination, however, the new reform turns out to be little more than a public relations move....
The prolonged pre-arraignment period permitted by the new law effectively means that suspects in virtually all political cases, as well as in all cases in the emergency zone, may wait a month before being formally accused, appearing in court and seeing a defense attorney. Not surprisingly, therefore, the State Department report observes, that, according to the Human Rights Foundation, a respected Turkish non-govemmental organization, "There was no indication either of the amelioration of treatment of those charged under the Anti-Terror Law or of an overall decrease in the incidence of torture in 1993." On this evidence, the report's finding that the CMUK's "efficacy in decreasing incidents of torture cannot yet be ascertained" is, at best, perplexing. The reality is that the CMUK's effect on the frequency of torture can be ascertained quite easily. They are nil.
Even more perplexing is the report's silence concerning the Turkish government's increasingly aggressive prosecution and intimidation of lawyers involved in representing Kurdish suspects. As noted above, lawyer Metin Can was assassinated in February 1993 while en route to a police station. In March,
365
CRITIQUE 1993
attorneys Ercan Kanar, Chair of the Istanbul HRA, and Ali Riza Dizdar, Chair of the Contemporary Jurists Association, were charged under the Anti-Terror Law for alleging in a judicial petition that Metin Can had been killed by security forces. Although both were acquitted, Mr. Dizdar was further charged with having signed the petition without official permission. In another case, an arrest warrant was issued charging Diyarbakir attorney Sedat Aslantas (as well as 19 others who are not lawyers) with violations of the Anti-Terror Law for issuing a press statement complaining of the death in custody of a Bismil villager in May 1993. In another case, Edip Yildiz and Husniye Olmez, both attorneys, face possible imprisonment and disbarment for signing a petition to the United Nations complaining of the massive killings of civilians during the Kurdish New Year celebrations in 1992. In yet another case, Sezgin Tanriklu, Vice-Chair of the Diyarbakir Bar Association, is being prosecuted for contempt of court for having argued, on behalf of a client, that the court improperly disregarded an earlier finding that a confession had been extracted under torture. If convicted, Mr. Tanrikulu faces a prison sentence of six months to three years as well as disbarment.
In a dramatic escalation of its campaign against lawyers, the government arrested a total of 16 lawyers in southeastern Turkey in November and December 1993. Eight of the 16, including several who are members of the HRA, were subsequently charged with "aiding and abetting" members of an illegal armed organization. The prosecution is reportedly based on statements given to the police by a political prisoner in Diyarbakir prison and appears to stem from the fact that the detained lawyers have represented clients associated with the PKK. Amnesty International has received reliable reports that at least some of the lawyers were tortured in prison. If convicted, the attorneys face prison terms of 10 to 15 years and disbarment, The State Department report, in an uncharacteristic and inexplicable omission, makes no reference to any of these cases to the chilling effect that these prosecutions will have on the Turkish bar.
In contrast to its treatment of the legal profession, the report covers in substantial detail the harassment, threats, prosecutions, attacks and even murders to which independent media voices were subject throughout 1993. As the report notes, panel discussions were banned; numerous issues of leftist and pro-Kurdish periodicals, including Yeni Ulke, Ozgur Gundem, Azadi and Newroz, were confiscated; substantial fines and even prison sentences were imposed under the Anti-Terror Law for the publication of journals and books "spreading subversive propaganda"; newspaper offices were raided and ransacked by the authorities; journalists, particularly in the southeast, were harassed and beaten in policy custody; and, most disturbingly, five journalists were assassinated in "mystery killings." Even in this area, however, the report does not convey the full extent of the attack on press freedom. Most significant, the report fails to mention that, in addition to the five journalists murdered, 10 newspaper vendors or distributors were
366
_TURKEY
also killed last year. Most of these vendors had previously been warned not to sell or distribute Yeni Ulke and/or Ozgur Gundem, two pro-Kurdish publications; one of the victims was a 12-year-old boy.
As in 1992, the 1993 report notes the inhibiting effect of this pattern of harassment and intimidation on coverage of politically sensitive subjects in Turkey, in particular the Kurdish question. In an improvement over last year, the 1993 report explicitly fmds that the mainstream Turkish press "demonstrated its fidelity to self-censorship" and "limit[ed] its independent reporting of southeast-related news." As the report notes, the Turkish government has made an express effort to enlist the mainstream press in its fight against the PKK, and the press, with few exceptions, has been willing to lend itself to that effort.
Finally, both in its discussion of political rigjits and elsewhere, the report depicts in reasonable detail the legal and extrajudicial obstacles facing the DEP, the party that succeeded the now-banned HEP as the principal lawful voice of Turkey's Kurdish community. As the report notes, the DEP continues to be subjected to extreme pressure on every front. Fifty-four DEP or HEP party administrators have been killed in the past two years; hundreds of DEP members have been detained on charges of disseminating subversive propaganda or supporting the PKK; DEP offices throughout the southeast have been attacked; and DEP parliamentarians face the continued threat of being stripped of their immunity against prosecution on account of "offending" speeches on the parliament floor and elsewhere.
Regrettably, though, one crucial sentence in the report stands out in sharp contradiction to its generally perceptive account of the government's treatment of the DEP and the Kurdish community as a whole. That sentence reads: "Turkish citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully." Given the systematic abuses that the report itself powerfully documents, the ability of Turkey's Kurdish people to exercise this fimdamental prerogative of a democratic society is far from clear. -
367
CRITIQUE 1993
