 TURKEY
 Turkey is a republic with a multiparty parliamentary system
 and an increasingly strong presidency. The ruling
 center-right Motherland (ANAP) Party won a 5-year mandate in
 the 1987 national elections and commands an absolute majority
 in Parliament. President Turgut Ozal was elected to a 7-year
 term by the Grand National Assembly in 1989. Yildirim Akbulut
 became Prime Minister and head of ANAP when.Ozal became
 President.
 The Turkish National Police in the cities and the Jandarma in
 the countryside are responsible for maintaining public order.
 A state of emergency.continued in 10 southeastern provinces,
 where the Turkish Government is combatting Kurdish terrorists.
 In addition, the adjacent provinces of Mus, Bitlis, and
 Adiyaman were placed for 8 months in 1990 under the authority
 of the regional governor for security purposes. The state of
 emergency allows civilian governors to exercise certain quasi-
 martial law powers, including restrictions on the press and
 control or prohibition of union activities. New government
 decrees in 1990 instituted stringent security measures as well
 as additional economic benefits in the area under the state of
 emergency.
 During the 1980's, Turkey's economy was greatly liberalized
 and grew at a rapid pace. It now has a strong, free market
 orientation although state-owned enterprises still account for
 an estimated 40 percent of the gross national product (GNP).
 The industrial sector in particular has grown considerably,
 and approximately 80 percent of Turkey's exports are
 industrial sector goods. The Persian Gulf crisis has taken a
 great toll on the economy due to the doubling of energy prices
 and substantial losses in trade and related services.
 Although Turkey is a signatory to several international
 conventions against torture, it remains one of Turkey's
 principal human rights problems. Other problems include
 restrictions on freedom of expression, proscriptions against
 Kurdish culture and language, overcrowded prisons, and the use
 of excessive-force against noncombatants in the southeast to
 suppress terrorism. Turkey is an open society where human
 rights abuses are freely discussed and reported on. However,
 some restrictions on press freedon.remain. Parliament did not
 act on proposed legislation to improve access to legal counsel
 or repeal Articles 141, 142, and 163 (concerning so-called
 thought crimes) of the Turkish penal code.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. -Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known politically motivated killings instigated
 by the Government or opposition political parties in 1990.
 However, a death in official custody came to light in 1990
 that may have been due to police torture (see Section l.c.).
 Additionally, 16 prominent persons, including professors,
 journalists, and police and other security officials, were
 killed in shooting and-bombing incidents during the year.
 Police have not identified those responsible. The assassin of
 a noted secularist theology professor, who was killed by a
 parcel bomb, is presumed to be a radical Muslim fundamentalist.
 In September, members of Dev Sol (Revolutionary Left) claimed
 
 
 1287
 TURKEY
 responsibility for the assassination of retired MIT (Turkish
 National Intelligence) Director Hiram Abas.
 The Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK), a terrorist organization
 active in Turkey's southeast, killed dozens of policemen,
 soldiers, teachers, and villagers in 1990 (see also Section
 l.g.). The southeast remained a violent region in 1990, with
 617 reported terrorist incidents resulting in over a thousand
 casualties in the first 10 months.
 b. Disappearance-
 There were no known disappearances caused by government forces.
 The PKK has kidnaped-numerous villagers. In November 1989,
 PKK terrorists kidnaped 9 shepherds from Ikiyaka village in,
 Hakkari province and killed 21 pebple. Eight of the shepherds
 were killed near the Iraqi border. The ninth escaped. There
 were also cases in 1990 in which some PKK members captured by
 security forces claim to have been kidnaped.
 c. Torture and.Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 While the Turkish Constitution outlaws torture, and Turkey is
 a signatory to several international conventions proscribing
 it, pervasive and credible reports of torture persist
 throughout Turkey. In 1989 Turkey recognized the compulsory
 jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights. Turks are
 free to file appeals with the court, and several have done
 so. Knowledgeable observers contend that many persons charged
 with political crimes are tortured and that significant
 numbers charged with ordinary crimes are subjected to police
 brutality. This mistreatment continues to occur in-police
 stations largely durinq periods of incommunicado detention.
 There were no reports of torture in prisons.
 Credible reports indicate that systematic beatings-, including
 beatings on the soles of the feet, high-pressure cold water
 hoses, electric shocks, and hanging by the arms are methods
 commonly employed. Psychological abuse in the form of verbal
 intimidation and threats is also said to be common. Interviews
 with former detainees tend to confirm that these types of
 abuse occur. Several former detainees gave similar
 descriptions of a torture facility and the methods employed by
 the police at the "Deep Investigation Laboratory" (DAL) in
 Ankara. Government-ordered medical examinations generally
 take place too long after the event to allow any definitive
 findings, and former detainees indicate that the examinations
 ate cursory in nature and are sometimes done in the presence
 of police officials.
 Although prosecution of alleged perpetrators of torture is
 becoming more common, credible sources estimate that judicial
 authorities investigate only 50 percent of formal complaints
 involving torture, and only a small fraction of these are
 prosecuted. Moreover, those who have been found guilty have
 received light sentences. In one important human rights case,
 for example, a Jandarma major was convicted in June of
 "mistreatment" in a 1989 incident in which southeastern
 Yesilyurt villagers were beaten and forced to eat human
 excrement. The major was sentenced to 2 1/2 months in prison
 and. fined about $125, but both the fine and the sentence were
 suspended on condition of no further violations for 2 years.
 The chief lawyer for the plaintiffs, the President of the
 Turkish Human Rights Association, is appealing the sentence.
 
 
 1288
 TURKEY
 In another example of the'relative leniency accorded those
 convicted of torture or mistreatment, Ankara's -criminal court
 in 1990 reduced on appeal the sentences of five former police
 officers convicted in the Novembdr 13, 1984, death of Sah
 Ismail Sut in Kars province. The court reduced the sentences
 from 8 to 4 1/2 years. All five will be eligible for parole
 after serving 36 months of their sentences.
 According to government-provided figures, 1,799 allegations of
 torture were investigated between January and November 12,
 1990. Officials in 115 cases were acquitted, 32 were
 convicted, 450 cases continue in judicial proceedings, and 485
 cases are still under administrative review or have been
 dismissed by the courts. Police charged with torture may be
 temporarily suspended on the recommendation of their superiors
 and an administrative decision from the Ministry of Interior.
 In many cases, however, they remain on duty pending formal
 resolution of the charges.
 It is unclear whether any people died of torture during 1990.
 Neriman Tapis, a 45-year-old female pickpocket, died on
 January 14, 1989, allegedly from a beating received while in
 police custody. Three experts of the Istanbul Medical
 Association, after reviewing earlier forensic studies,
 concluded that Tapis died of an internal brain hemorrhage
 caused by blows to the head. The Istanbul prosecutor opened a
 case against the accused police chief in September 1990 and
 asked for a sentence of 5 years.
 In February the Istanbul state prosecutor opened a case
 against the Deputy Chief of Police and another police officer
 of the Istanbul Security Police for allegedly torturing Mehmet
 Tok, a physician who was detained on August 7, 1989. The
 prosecutor is requesting a prison term of 3 years if the
 officers are convicted.
 Three police officers were charged in Adana with torturing
 Kemal Kurtul, who suffered a broken shoulder when police
 reportedly tortured him with the "Palestinian hanger"
 (suspension of a person by his arms tied behind his back).
 Police suspected Kurtul of membership in an illegal leftist
 organization when other suspects, whom the courts later
 acquitted, reportedly gave his name.under torture. The
 prosecutor dropped all charges against Kurtul.
 The Government recognizes that torture occurs but asserts that
 it is neither widespread nor systematic. The Minister of
 Justice has said Turkey is engaged in an all-out fight against
 torture and is not tolerating anyone who mistreats suspects
 and inmates. However, while the Government has introduced
 some reforms that could contribute to a reduction of abuse,
 these reforms have not been effectively implemented.
 According to government figures and estimates, the number of
 cases of torture prosecuted or being referred to judicial
 authorities for prosecution rose from over 700 in 1989 to over
 900 in the first 11 months of 1990. The percentage of
 convictions also showed a small increase in the same period.
 Although prison conditions generally do not threaten the lives
 and health of prisoners, there is overcrowding, inadequate
 nutrition, and, in rural areas with few doctors, incomplete
 medical care. In reaction to the prison strikes of 1989, the
 Ministry of Justice in January announced a series of prison
 reforms that liberalized furlough eligibility, expanded
 correspqndence and reading materials in prison, increased
 
 
 1289
 TURKEY
 visitation rights, proscribed physical punishment, and banned
 the tying or chaining of prisoners during transport. As of
 August, there were 46,119 arrestees and convicts, including
 472 juveniles, in Turkey's 640 prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except in limited circumstances, such as when a person is
 caught in the act of committing a crime, a prosecutor must
 issue a detention order. The detention period for those
 charged with common or individual crimes is a maximum of 48
 hours. Those charged with political crimes, or any other
 crime of a collective or conspiratorial nature, may still be
 detained up to 15 days. In the 10 southeastern provinces
 under a state of emergency, incommunicado detention for
 collective crimes may last up to 30 days.
 Turkish law does not give detainees the right to have an-
 attorney present during questioning. A proposal to give
 detainees this right was introduced in Parliament in 1990 and
 is now in committee. Under existing legislation, a-detainee's
 next of kin must normally be notified 'in the shortest time"
 after arrest. Once formally charged by the prosecutor, a.
 detainee is arraigned before a judge and allowed to retain a
 lawyer. Once arraigned, the judge may release the accused on
 presentation of an appropriateL guarantee, such as bail, or
 order him held in detention if the court determines that he is
 likely to flee or destroy evidence.
 A Prime Ministry circular issued in 19a9 on the issue of
 lawyers' access has not improved such access for most
 detainees, particularly those charged with collective or
 political crimes. According to the circular, suspects
 detained for individual or collective crimes are allowed
 acces- to an attorney.
 -The Ministry of Justice, which distributed the circular to
 public prosecutors, has stated that prosecutors should not
 deny detainees sucr access. Because the final decision is
 left to the independent prosecutors, however, such access is
 routinely denied, usually with an explanation that access
 would prejudice an ongoing investigation. Access can also be
 made difficult by prosecutors whose interpretation of the
 circular differs from that of defense attorneys. In some
 cases, police are reported to make access impossible through
 dilatory bureaucratic requirements. A parliamentary initiative
 to eliminate the practice of incommunicado detention was not
 pursued after issuance of the Prime Ministry- circular.
 The Constitutioi specifies- the right of detainees to request
 "speedy conclusion of arraignment and trial." Nevertheless,
 judges have ordered a significant number of persons detained
 while their cases progress, sometimes for years. While many
 cases involve persons accused of violent crimes, it is not
 uncommon for those accused of membership in illegal
 organizations or dissemination of ideas proscribed by Articles
 141, 142, and 163 to be held in custody until the conclusion
 of their trials. Detentions sometimes appear very arbitrary.
 For example, in October police detained a 16-year-old student
 and an accountant, both of whom had displayed placards reading
 "No to war." Both were charged with participating in an
 illegal demonstration and with membership in an illegal
 organization after being detained for several days, and were
 eventually freed pending the outcome of their trials. There
 was a demonstration inside the courthouse when the student's
 
 
 1290
 TURKEY
 trial opened in December. Police detained 62 people.
 According to December 1989 government figures, about 27,600
 arrestees charged with common crimes and 1,807 charged with
 terrorist crimes were in prison hwaiting the outcomes of
 trials.
 There is no formal external exile. The Government has refused
 to renew the passports of a number of Turks working abroad who
 have refused to return home to face court charges or perform
 military service. These persons may apply to the Interior
 Ministry for permission to return to Turkey. Turkey's
 internal exile law was lifted in 1987, but in 1990 the
 Government gave authority to the southeast regional governor
 to exile citizens from the 10 provinces under his jurisdiction.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The court system and judicial procedures are modeled on
 Italian (criminal) and Swiss (civil) law codes. Defendants
 normally have the right to an open trial, and the Constitution
 states that "no one shall be found guilty until proven guilty
 in a court of law." The law requires the Bar Association to
 provide free counsel to indigents who make such a request to
 the court. Costs are borne by the Association, but Parliament
 is considering a proposal for the State to assume these legal
 fees. There is no jury system; all cases are decided by a
 judge or a panel of judges.
 Defense lawyers generally have access to the independent
 prosecutor's files after arraignment and before the trial (a
 period of a few weeks). In political cases, access may be
 denied to files dealing with national intelligence or security
 matters. Defense lawyers do not have access to imprisoned
 clients during the prearraignment period (i.e., during
 incommunicado detention). However, in the postdetention,
 pretrial period, attorneys are free to visit their clients
 during prison visiting hours.
 The Constitution declares that judges shall be independent in
 the discharge of their duties and pnovides for the security of
 their tenure. It also prohibits authorities from giving
 orders or recommendations concerning the exercise of judicial
 power. In many instances, charges' brought by the prosecutors
 are dismissed by the courts.
 The judicial system is composed of general law courts,
 extraordinary courts, and military courts. The majority of
 cases are prosecuted in the general law courts, which include
 the civil courts, administrative courts, and criminal courts.
 Appeals are heard in either the High Court of Appeals or the
 Council of State.
 Two sets of extraordinary courts in the Turkish legal system
 are the martial law and state security courts. Four martial
 law courts are still conducting trials relating to offenses
 committed during the period following-the 1980 military
 takeover of the government. According to the Government, 98
 cases involving 2,284 defendants remained in the martial law
 courts as of October, the majority of which have been referred
 to the military Supreme Court of Appeals. Eight state security
 courts, composed of two civilian judges and one military judge,
 try defendants accused of crimes such as terrorism, drug
 smuggling, membership in illegal organizations, and espousing
 prohibited ideas as defined by Articles 141, 142, and 163.
 Government sources indicate there are currently 1,600 cases
 
 
 1291
 
 TURKEY
 involving 9,481 defendants being tried in the state security
 courts. State security courts admit testimony secured during
 police interrogations and evidence extracted under torture if,
 they are corroborated by evidence from other sources.
 Military courts, with their own appeals system, hear cases
 relating to infractions of military law by members of the
 armed forces.
 The Supreme or Constitutional Court is composed of 11 judges
 nominated by members of the judiciary and appointed by the
 President. It examines the constitutionality of laws,
 decrees, and procedural rules of the Parliament. However, no
 "decrees with the force of law" issued during a state of
 emergency, martial law, or in time of war may be brought
 before the Constitutional Court.
 According to-the Government, 166 defendants were convicted in
 the first 10 months of 199G under Articles 141, 142, and 163,
 which proscribe activities (which can include expressions of
 ideas or crimes of violence) in support of a state based on
 domination by a class or race, on ethnic origins, or on the
 abolition of secularism. Turkey's Human Rights Association-
 estimates the-number of "political" prisoners convicted of
 Articles 141, 142, and 163 at the end of 1990 to be as high as
 5,000, although this figure includes many convicted of crimes
 of violence. Figures on political prisoners can only be
 speculative, but the number'of such prisoners convicted of
 nonviolent- crimes is probably- fewer than 5O.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of a person's
 domicile and the privacy of correspondence and communication.
 Government officials may enter a private-residence and
 intercept or monitor private correspondence only upon- issuance
 of a j-udicial warrant.
 In the 10 provinces under a atate of emergency, the governor
 (or regional governor) may empower authorities to search
 residences or the premises of political parties, businesses,
 associations, and other organizations without a warrant.
 Authorities in these provinces may also search, hold, or seize
 -  without warrant persons, letters, telegrams-, and documents.
 Roadblocks are commonplace in the southeast, and security
 officials, in search of smugglers and terrorists; regularly
 search vehicles and travelers.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and.Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Since 1984 several thousand separatists, mostly members of the
 PKK, have conducted a campaign of terrorism in southeast
 Turkey against security forces as well as against fellow Turks
 of Kurdish origin. Over 2,000 people have died in this
 violence since 1984. In a January press conference, Regional
 Governor Hayri Kozakcioglu noted that incidents of PKK
 violence had increased from 59 in 1987 to 96 in 1989.
 According to the Government, in the first 10 months of 1990,
 152 security force members, 314 terrorists, and 191 civilians
 were killed in 617 terrorist incidents in the southeast.
 Another 497 people were wounded, mostly security force members
 and civilians.
 
 
 1292
 TURKEY
 In a March 21 incident, PKK terrorists in Elazig ambushed and
 killed seven engineers and two technicians who were in the
 region working on a development project. On June 12, in the
 fourth largest massacre since 1987, the PKK opened fire on the
 village of Cevrimli with rockets and automatic weapons,
 killing 3 policemen and 26 villagers, including 13 children.
 In the spring of 1990, PKK guerillas increased their attacks
 against schools, villagers, and other civilians. During the
 1989-90 academic year, 442 schools had to be closed for
 security reasons. The PKK reportedly burned 44 schools. On
 April 14, PKK guerillas attacked a village in Elazig, forced
 teachers and their wives out of the teachers' residence, and*
 killed five persons, including four teachers.
 Villagers complain that Jandarma searches for PKK terrorists
 and for evidence of local support for them have resulted in
 expulsions, beatings, torture, and arbitrary killing of
 innocent civilians.
 On March 15, security forces, after killing an alleged PKK
 terrorist, clashed with a crowd of 5,000 people in Nusaybin
 attending his funeral. They killed 1 demonstrator, wounded 6,
 and detained 500 people. In Cizre on March 19, Kurds closed
 their shops and went on strike. The next day during a
 demonstration, security forces killed 4 persons, wounded 9, and
 detained 68. On March 27, as a result of rioting that broke
 out when security forces ordered demonstrating students to
 disperse, security forces killed 4, wounded 9, and detained
 138. On May 21, prosecutors asked for 10-year sentences for
 155 Kurds whom they charged with engaging in separatist
 propaganda, illegal rallies, and damaging government property.
 In other, less volatile situations, security forces have
 reportedly used excessive force in dealing with unarmed
 civilians. According to press reports, security officials
 fired on a group of fleeing child vendors near the Habur
 border crossing with Iraq, killing 13-year-old Faruk Aytug. A
 government investigation into the incident and the accused
 officer's actions is still under way.
 Government decrees 413 and 414, issued in April (and later
 codified as Decrees 424 and 425), imposed stringent new
 security measures in the southeast. The Regional Governor may
 censor news, ban strikes or lockouts, and impose internal
 exile. The decree also provides for the doubling of sentences
 for those convicted of cooperating with separatists.
 Informants and convicted persons who cooperate with the State
 are eligible for rewards and reduced sentences. Provisions in
 the decree that specifically prohibited court challenges to
 administrative decisions of the Regional Governor were later
 amended to provide limited judicial review. The impact of
 these decrees on freedom of the press is discussed in Section
 2.a.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 With some significant exceptions, the freedoms of speech and
 press are widely and vigorously practiced in Turkey. The
 privately owned press does not hesitate to criticize the
 Government and reflects a broad range of opinion. However,
 three articles of the penal code (Articles 141, 142, and 163),
 designpd to prevent what have historically been-considered
 
 
 1293
 
 TURKEY
 threats to the democratic and secular nature of the State, are
 often interpreted broadly by zealous prosecutors, resulting in
 suppression of speech and press freedoms, sometimes with
 severe penalties.
 The penal code's.Article 141 proscribes advocacy or activities
 on behalf of a government based on class or racial domination
 (e.g., communism or~fascism). Article 142 proscribes the
 creation of a separate state based on ethnic origins (e.g.,
 Kurdish separatism). Article 163 proscribes activities that
 threaten the secular nature of the state (e.g., an Islamic
 state). In November Parliament rescinded the death penalty
 for violation of Article 141 and 12 other crimes of the
 Turkish penal code.
 In one example of how these articles are applied, Mayor Orhan
 Yagiz celebrated his 1989 election by reading from the Koran
 in front of a large crowd. The Burdur prosecutor obtained a
 conviction of Yagiz, who was sentenced to 20 months by the
 Izmir state security Court. In April the High Court of
 Appeals vacated the decision. On July 30, the Izmir state
 security court reheard the case and again sentenced Yagiz to
 20 months. The case is again before the High Court of Appeals
 for a final decision. In-October, Ali Ozler, the head of the
 HRA's provincial branch in Tunceli, was sentenced to 6 years
 and 8 months in prison for espousing separatist propaganda
 (Article 142) during March demonstrations in the southeast.
 His attorney is appealing.
 Parliament is considering the revocation of immun ity for
 several opposition parliamentarians for statements made about
 Kurds. They have- been charged with violating laws against
 separatism. In April Nusaybin Mayor Muslum, Yildirim was
 suspended by the Interior-Ministry for claiming that the
 people of the region support the PKK. The Ankara state
 security court subsequently decioed to. dismiss the charges.
 Yildirim has applied for reinstatement.
 Hella Schlumberqe, a German sociologist who visited' an animal
 sanctuary in Sanliurfa and wrote in the visitors' book "Down
 with v-io-lence, long live free Turkey and Kurdistan with equal
 rights," was charged with violating Articles 142 and 143.
 Schlumberge was found to have acted "unintentionally," was
 acquitted, and expelled from the country.
 While it is generally permissible to criticize government
 leaders or policies, the criminal code provides penalties for
 those wha "insult the President- the Parliament, and the
 Army," ranging from a- 3-yeLar minimum sentence-for instdting
 the President to a 6-year maximum for.insultinq-the other
 branches of government. Judges have generally been rigorous-
 in examining evidence and have dismissed many charges brought
 under these laws. Police still detain and prosecutors still
 bring persons to court under this section, resulting in long
 and expensive trials in many cases.
 Journalists sometimes face harassment and aggressive
 application of the law by public prosecutors. Publications
 must designate a "responsible editor" who is legally
 accountable for a publication's contents. Many have faced
 repeated criminal proceedings. According to Turkey's
 Contemporary Journalists' Association (CJA), in 1989
 approximately 31 editors, journalists, and writers were
 serving sentences in prison or awaiting trial. In addition,
 the Government reportedly has 394 cases pending against 16
 
 
 1294
 TURKEY
 newspapers. The CJA also reports that about a dozen more
 cases are being tried against journalists in absentia.
 .Decrees 424 and 425 mandate self-censorship on all news
 reporting from or about-the southeast; The decrees'
 provisions give the Interior Ministry the authority to ban,
 upon the Regional Governor's proposal, the distribution of any
 news regarded as misrepresenting events in the region. Decree
 430f announced on December-15, supersedes Decree 424 .and, in
 effect,-modifies some of the-more severe provisions of the
 April decree. For example, indefinite closure of printing
 houses that violate the decrees is not permitted under Decree
 430. Nevertheless, operations may be suspended--10 days for'a
 first offense and 30 days for subsequent offenses--if a
 gove-rnment warning is not obeyed.
 The leftwing weekly, Toward the Year 2000, failed to go to
 press in April when its publisher, Hurriyet, declined to risk
 closure. The Government ordered the closure of Ilicak
 printing house, which subsequently published the periodical,
 for 10 days. The Interior Ministry on June 28 suspended
 indefinitely the publication of Toward the Year 2000,
 effectively closing it, on grounds it was reporting
 "incorrect" news about the emergency law region and adjacent
 provinces. After the closure of Toward the Year 2000, the
 publication changed its name to Yuz Yil (Century). It is
 published regularly, but some issues have been confiscated.
 The overall result of the decree on the press has been a
 dearth in independent reporting on southeastern Turkey as well
 as a reduction in leftwing publications. Approximately 18
 leftwing publications either stopped publication or are being
 published only sporadically since the April decree.
 Obscenity and censorship laws have resulted in the
 confiscation and banning of numerous publications and films.
 "Tropic of Capricorn" was banned in 1989, as were portions of
 the 1990 Amnesty International film, "Human Rights Now."
 Ismail Besikci, a sociologist who was in prison from 1981 to
 1987 for his writings on Kurdish affairs, was arrested in 1990
 for three books. On July 25, the.Istanbul state security
 Court acquitted Besikci of charges. related to one book, but he
 must still stand trial on the other two. Besikci was freed in
 July pending the outcome of his trial. Ayse Zarakoglu, owner
 of the publishing house which printed these books, is also
 reportedly on trial but free on her own recognizance. In
 August, Dogu Perincek, the responsible editor of Toward the
 Year 2000, was arrested and imprisoned in Diyarbakir on
 several charges related to the publication and to speeches he
 made in the southeast. He was released in September pending
 the outcome of the trial. If convicted, he faces a sentence
 of up to 25 years. Besikci, Zarakoglu, and Perincek were all
 charged with violations of Article 142.
 Turkish radio and television (TRT) is a government monopoly.
 Opposition figures assert that TRT's broadcasts have a strong
 progovernment bias, despite coverage~of opposition leaders and
 their parties. A government commission apportions party
 access to television and radio during election and referendum
 campaigns based on the proportion of parliamentary seats that
 each party holds.
 
 
 1295
 TURKEY
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Peaceful assemblies are permitted with prior notification to
 government authorities but may be restricted to designated
 sites.
 The law on associations reflects lingering concern over the
 widespread violence that preceded the military intervention of
 1980. It prohibits associations from having ties to political
 parties or engaging in political activity. Associations must
 submit their charters for government approval. In October the
 State Security Court in Istanbul sentenced a 16-year-old youth
 to 4 1/2 years in prison for participating in an illegal
 demonstration in the Beyazit district of Istanbul and being a
 member of an illegal terrorist organization, namely, Dev Genc,
 the Revolutionary Left. He was identified by a photograph
 taken at the demonstration.
 The Constitution and the law governing political parties
 proscribe student and faculty involvement in political
 activities. Political parties may not form youth branches.
 Students are not eligible tojoin political parties, and
 faculty members who are elected to Parliament must resign
 their university positions. Students and faculty members may
 participate in polities as individuals.
 c. Freedom of Religion-
 Turkey is a secular state.  The Constitution provides for
 freedom of belief, freedom of worship (in a specifically
 designated place of worship), and private dissemination of
 one'-s religious ideas-
 Turkey's population is 98 percent Muslim. Although Turkey is
 a secular state, religious instruct-ion for Muslims is
 compulsory. Turkish law exempts -non-Muslims from Muslim
 religious- nstructio. upow written verification of their
 nen'-uslim background, although students who wish ta attend-
 may do- so with parental consent.
 Many prosecutors view proselytism and religious activism on
 the part of Islamic fundamentalists- and Christian evangelicals
 with suspicion, especially when their activities are seen to
 have political overtones. Islamic fundamentalists have been
 charged with membership in illegal organizations that oppose
 the secular nature of the Turkish State. Courts dismissed all
 charges brought against Turkish and foreign evangelica1l
 Christians in 1989. The p-lice, nevertheles , continued their
 surveillance and detentions of evangelicals, refused to renew
 some residence permits, and expelled- some from the country.
 Among Turkey's non-Muslim religious groups, there are some
 50,000 Armenians, 20,000 Jews, 20,000 Syriac Christians,
 18,000 Arab Orthodox, 6,000 Greek Orthodox, and several
 thousand Roman Catholics and Chaldean Christians. Most
 religious minorities are concentrated in Istanbul. They
 operate churches, monasteries, synagogues, schools, and
 charitable religious foundations such as hospitals and
 orphanages. Complicated and dilatory bureaucratic procedures
 deter repairs to some religious facilities, which often
 require government approval because of their historical
 value. Under Turkish law, religious buildings that become
 "extinct" (i.e.i due to prolonged absence of clergy or of lay
 persons to staff local religious councils) revert to the
 possession of the Government. Some non-Muslim minorities,
 
 
 1296
 TURKEY
 particularly the Greek Orthodox and, to a lesser extent,
 Armenians and Jews, are faced with the danger of losing houses
 of worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Turkish citizens enjoy freedom of movement within Turkey and
 are generally free to travel abroad. The Constitution
 provides that a citizen's freedom to leave may be restricted
 only on account of the national economic situation, civic
 obligations (i.e., military service), or criminal
 investigation or prosecution. Some human rights activists
 have experienced delays in acquiring passports. Zubeyir
 Aydar, a human rights monitor from Siirt, was unable to attend
 a December Helsinki Watch banquet honoring him in the United
 States because Turkish authorities delayed his passport
 application for several months. The Government still has not
 acted on Mr. Aydar's application.
 The Government has opened its borders to those fleeing
 persecution in neighboring countries. Turkey resettled
 approximately 200,000 Bulgarian Turks who escaped from
 Bulgaria in 1989. Turkey also serves as a country of first
 asylum and safe haven for many-Iranians; it neither grants
 them legal refugee status nor requires visas of them. About
 28,500 of the original 60,000 Iraqi Kurdish refugees who
 arrived in 1988 remain in camps in the southeast. The rest
 have gone to third countries such as Iran and France or have
 voluntarily returned to Iraq. The Government does not
 recognize the Iraqi Kurds' claims to refugee status but has
 also stated these people will not be forcibly returned to
 Iraq. Turkey has allowed only irregular inspections of the
 three camps, located in Mus, Mardin, and Diyarbakir. The
 Government has refused to accept $14 million from the United
 Nations and various donor countries to help construct new
 shelters. Some 50,000 third-country citizens sought refuge in
 Turkey (as of September 25) following the Persian Gulf
 crisis. The Government has offered them shelter and expedited
 their movement on to their places of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 .to Change Their Government
 Turkish citizens have the right and ability to change their
 government peacefully, within certain legal constraints.
 Turkey has a multiparty, presidential parliamentary system.
 There are approximately 20 legal political partieg, of which 3
 are represented in Parliament. The opposition parties--
 including those not represented in Parliament--are outspoken
 and represent political views contrary to those of the
 Government. Court cases against Turkish United Communist
 Party (TBKP) members are at a virtual standstill pending the
 outcome of the trial of party leaders Haydar Kutlu and Nihat
 Sargin. If convicted, they face a maximum sentence of 36
 years. Both were released on their own recognizance on May 5
 and frequently give public speeches. Subsequently, they
 applied for legalization of the TBKP, which under Turkish law
 gives the party legal status until the courts decide upon the
 application.
 Elections for public office are on the basis of mandatory
 universal suffrage for all citizens 20 years of age and over.
 Parliamentary seats are allocated on a weighted proportional
 representation basis. Turkish law excludes parties obtaining
 
 
 1297
 TURKEY
 less than 10 percent of the total national vote. This
 provision is intended-to prevent political fragmentation and
 recurrence of the parliamentary paralysis of the late 1970's.
 A party that wins a plurality of the popular vote is likely to
 obtain a strong majority in Parliament. In the 1987
 parliamentary elections, a 36-percent plurality gave the
 Motherland Party 292 seats (65 percent) in the 450-member
 unicameral Parliament.
 The Constitution provides equal political rights for men and
 women. Members of minorities, Muslim and non-Muslim, face no
 legal limitations on political participation.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A nongovernmental Human Rights Association (HRA), officially
 approved in 1987, has branches in 36 provincial capitals and -
 organizes discussions, publications, rallies, petitions, and
 an annual human rights day celebration. Its membership
 numbers about 10,000. The HRA established a Human Rights
 Foundation in 19a0 which serves as a clearing house for
 information on human rights and is raising funds for a torture
 rehabilitation center.
 The Government closed the Samsun branch of the HRA for 20 days
 and ordered the Gaziantep branch shut indefinitely. The
 Government contends that HRA statements opposing war-in the
 Persian Gulf are of a political nature and violate the
 associations law which restricts political activities to
 political parties. Police have also reportedly raided HRA
 branches in Istanbul and Mersin and confiscated materials. In
 December police detained 36 relatives of .prisoners on the
 fourth day of a hunger-strike.. The-protest occurred at the
 .Istanbul branch of the  A. One HRA-member was also
 detained. All were subsequently released. According to a
 1989 Helsinki Watch report, dozdns-of human rights activists
 were subjected.to arrests.-prosecutions, and'imprfsonment. .
 Many of these stemmed-from alleged:violations of the Turkish
 law on associations or holding illegal demonstrations.
 The Social Democratic Populist Party, the principal opposition
 party, has a human rights committee and has actively pursued
 .human rights issues in Parliament. Members of the opposition,
 as well as leading figures in the-rutling Motherland Party,
 have spoken out-against human rights abuses. Parliament on
 -December 5 established a parliamentary human rights
 commission.  The commission has authority to oversee Turkey's
 ;compliance with the human rights provisions of Turkish law and
 international agreements to which it is a signatory,
 -investigate alleged abuses, and prepare an annual report.
 There are no restrictions placed on representatives of foreign
 private organizations who wish to monitor human rights in
 Turkey. They are free to speak with private citizens,
 although official visitors to the southeast may be followed by
 security police. The Government contends that protection from
 possible terrorist assaults is necessary, but the presence of
 security officials has an intimidating effect upon
 interviewees. The Government continues to be ambivalent
 toward these groups because of its belief that their reports
 are biased and do not adequately reflect the country's
 progress in human rights. Access to government bfficials or
 facilities at times may be refused or restricted. In 1990
 
 
 1298
 
 URKEY
 Helsinki Watch requested a comprehensive tour of several
 prisons. The Government agreed to provide access only to
 Bursa prison, and Helsinki Watch declined the offer. The
 Government on short notice arraiiged a tour of Bayrampasha
 Prison in Istanbul for visiting U.S. officials.
 Turkey has ratified the European and U.N. Conventions Against
 Torture, under thefirst of which Turkey has allowed
 committees or rapporteurs to visit all places of detention at
 any time, following notification to the Government. In
 �September the Council of Europe's Human Rights Committee
 visited Turkey and was given access to prisons and police
 facilities. Turkey formally recognized the compulsory
 jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights in 1989,
 and a number of Turks have appealed to it:- In September
 Turkey signed the U.N. Children's Rights Convention, with.
 reservations on articles concerning ethnic and bultural
 education, which it interprets as contrary to the Turkish
 Constitution and the Treaty of Lausanne.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language,-or Social Status
 The Constitution proclaims Turkey to be a secular state,
 regards ill Turkish citizens as equal, and prohibits'
 discrimination on ethnic, religious, or racial grounds. The
 Treaty of Lausanne also guarantees the rights of Turkey's
 non-Muslim religious minorities.
 The Government officiall9 recognizes only those minorities
 mentioned in the Treaty. Muslim ethnic or sectarian
 minorities-face difficultiesin maintaining distinct separate
 identities within Turkish society as a. result of official
 attempts to assimilate them into mainstream society.
 'Millions of-Turkish Kurds who have moved to industrialized
 cities in the western part of the country are by and large
 fully integrated-into the-politi6al, economic, and'social life
 of the nation. Most parliamentary representatives:from
 southeastern Turkey are ethnic Kurds, but representatives of
 Kurdish ethnic origin have been elected from districts far
 removed from the southeast. A number of Cabinet ministers
 claim an ethnic Kurdish background..
 Nonetheless, the controversial 1983 language law states that
 "the mother tongue of Turkish citizens is Turkish" and
 prohibits publications and dnfettered communication in "any
 language 'other than the first official languages of states
 that are recognized by the Turkish Republic."- Broadcasts in
 Kurdish or'the publication of any book, newspaper, or other
 material in the Kurdish language is illegal, as are Kurdish
 materials dealing with Kurdish history, culture, and ethnic
 identity.* Dozens of persons, from professionals to
 schoolchildren, are detained each year and publications
 confiscated for statements interpreted under Articles 141 and
 142 as support for separatism or the terrorist PKK. AI
 publications have been confiscated for criticizing government
 policy concerning Kurds.
 The question of Kurdish cultural identity within Turkey is
 more openly debated than in the past, however, both in the
 Government and among the general public. President Ozal has
 publicly recognized the importance of the issue. In June
 Halim Aras, the Deputy Chairman of the Parliament, called the
 language law "absurd." In July the Social Democratic Populist
 
 
 1299
 TURKEY
 Party issued a report on the southeast, the first of its kind,
 in which it criticized the language law and explicitly called
 for the legalization of Kurdish.
 In practice, the authorities do not restrict the private use
 of Kurdish, nor is the use of the language viewed as connoting
 separatism. The Regional Governor in the southeast announced
 in June that Kurdish could be spoken in government offices.
 Kurdish musical cassettes are sold and publicly played.
 However, in August singer Gulhan Tabak was arrested for using
 Kurdish during a concert in Iskenderun. Three HRA delegates,
 who presented a speech in Kurdish to the HRA general
 convention in October, were arrested and charged with
 violating Article 142 of the Turkish penal code. Arrests such
 as these discourage the uninhibited use of Kurdish in public
 fora. Kurdish-speaking prisoners are permitted to converse in
 Kurdish with their lawyers or visitors. At the.public
 prosecutor's request, the Diyarbakir state security court
 acquitted former Mayor Mehdi Zana in February for presenting
 his defense in Kurdish during his 1989 trial. Notwithstanding
 this court decision, court proceedings are conducted in
 Turkish, and the poor quality of court-provided translators
 may disadvantage some Kurdish-speaking defendants.
 Women are improving their situation in Turkish society.
 Nonetheless, they face discrimination to varying degrees
 depending on modernization, urbanization, and education.
 Traditional values, shared in large numbers by both men and
 women, prevent many women from entering career fields. For
 example, until 1989, when the first, and only, woman to date
 was appointed, there were no female Kaymakams (subgovernors)
 in Turkey because the job, which entails rural travel, was
 traditionally thought of as improper, too difficult, and too
 dangerous for women. Although women hold about 20 percent of
 the positions in the legal profession, there is a 10-percent
 quota on women judges.
 Traditional family values in rural Turkey place a greater
 emphasis on advanced-education for sons than for daughters.
 Primary education through the fifth grade is compulsory for
 all children, but thereafter female school attendance declines
 dramatically. Women make up about 35 percent of the secondary
 school population, 43 percent of the technical school
 population, and 37 percent of university students.
 Women comprise 35 percent of the paid Turkish work force and
 generally receive equal pay for equal work. Maternity
 benefits are guaranteed by law. Turkish women receive 6
 weeks' maternity leave with pay and have the option of taking
 an additional 6 months of unpaid leave. Although seldom
 enforced, some laws that discriminate against women remain on
 the books. On November 29, Turkey's Constitutional Court
 struck down an anachronistic law of the Turkish civil code
 stipulating that a wife may work only with the open or
 implicit permission of her husband. Nonetheless, married
 women are sometimes required to submit their spouse's written
 permission to receive a passport; the husband determines the
 legal domicile of the family; and a married woman needs her
 husband's consent to be a legal partner in a company. In some
 parts of Turkey, laws requiring civil marriage are ignored,
 and polygamy is accepted, although technically illegal.
 Parliament acted on November 21 to amend provisions in the
 Turkish penal code that provide lenient sentences to convicted
 rapists if the victim is a prostitute- The repeal was
 
 
 1300
 TURKEY
 prompted by an appeals court decision earlier in the year,
 which was met with public outrage, to uphold a one-third
 reduction in a convicted rapist's sentence because the woman
 was an alleged prostitute. All-three political parties in
 Parliament, human rights groups, and women's organizations
 worked for repeal of the controversial law.
 Spousal abuse is still considered an extremely private matter,
 although government and public interest in the problem is
 growing. The police do not normally intervene in domestic
 disputes. Turks of either sex may file civil or criminal
 charges but rarely try to resolve family disputes in court.
 Turkish law makes no discrimination between the sexes in laws-
 concerning violence or abuse, and courts make no distinction
 between men and women. In 1989-90, Turkey's first three homes
 for battered women were opened by a private organization
 called the Purple Roof Foundation. In addition, the
 Government announced in August that it would begin a program
 to open shelters in the major cities for abused women who have
 left home. The first such government shelter was opened in
 Ankara in the fall of 1990.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Most workers have the right to associate freely and form
 representative unions. Exceptions are school teachers (both
 public and private), civil servants, the police, and military
 personnel. The law prescribes that unions and confederations
 may be founded without prior authorization on the basis of a
 petition to the governor of the province where the union's
 headquarters are to be located..
 Unions are independent of the Government and the ruling
 party. Unions must have government permission to hold
 meetings or rallies, a requirement that also applies to other
 organizations. Unions must also -allow police to attend
 conventions and record the proceedings. Union officers may
 serve no more than eight consecutive 3-year terms in a given
 union position.' The Constitution-requires "candidates for
 union office to have worked 10 years in the industry
 represented by the union.
 Both the 1983 Law on Trade Unions and an amendment enacted in
 1988,recognize the right of unions and their officers to
 express views on issues directly affecting members' economic
 and social interests but did not undo constitutional
 prohibitions on any union role in party politics. Unions may
 not establish organic or financial connections with any
 political party or other association. In practice, union
 leaders and the executive board of the Turkish Confederation
 of Labor Turk-Is) have been able to -convey clearly in
 election and referendum campaigns their support for, or
 opposition to, given political parties without, however,
 citing parties or �candidates by name.
 Prosecutors may request labor courts to order a trade union or
 confederation into liquidation based on alleged violation of
 specific legal norms. However, the Government may not
 summarily dissolve a union.
 The right to strike, while guaranteed in the Constitution, is
 subject to a number of restrictions. For example, workers in
 the petroleum industry, workers engaged.in the protection of
 
 
 1301
 TURKEY
 life and property, sanitation services, national defense, and
 education do not have the right to strike. Turkish law and
 the labor court system require collective bargaining before a
 strike. The law specifies the series of steps a union must
 take before it may legally strike and a similar series of
 steps before an employer may engage in a lockout. Nonbinding
 mediation is the last of those steps. In those sectors in
 which strikes are prohibited, binding arbitration is
 required. A party that fails to comply with these steps
 forfeits the exercise of its rights.
 Once a strike is declared, unions are restricted in the
 actions pickets may take as well as in the number of pickets
 they may place at each entrance and exit of a strike site.
 The struck employer may respond with a lockout. The employer
 is, however, prohibited from hiring strikebreakers or using
 administrative personnel to perform jobs normally done by
 strikers. Unions are forbidden to engage in secondary
 (solidarity), wildcat, or general strikes.
 Some 250 strikes, involving about 180,000 workers and
 resulting in 3.5 million lost worker-days, took place during
 1990. The largest strike of the year was that of 48,000 mine
 workers, which began at the end of November and continued into
 1991. All of the 1990 strikes were peaceful, and most were
 resolved by wage and benefit settlements that significantly
 exceeded Turkey's annual inflation rate of about 60 percent.
 Unions may form or join confederations and international labor
 bodies. The law requires governmental approval to do so and
 prohibits affiliations with organizations hostile to Turkey or
 to freedom of religion or belief. Turk-is, the major Turkish
 labor confederation, has 32 constituent unions, with a total
 of 1.6 million members. Turk-Is is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC). The banned
 Confederation of Revolutionary Trade Unions (DISK) is also a
 member of the ETUC. There are a number of smaller
 confederations. The most important is-the religiously
 oriented Hak-Is, which is composed of approximately 190,000
 workers in 8 unions in various fields. Independent unions
 also exist, for example the Steelworkers' Union and the even
 larger Automobile Workers' Union. An estimated 25 percent of
 the nonagricultural work force is unionized.
 At its 1990 session, the Committee on Freedom of Association
 (CFA) of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 extensively reconsidered the several cases filed against the
 Government alleging violations of ILO Convention 87 on freedom
 of association, which Turkey has not ratified. The cases,
 some of which go back to 1981, concern the dissolution of the
 DISK trade union confederation and its affiliates and the
 trial and imprisonment of their leaders; certain provisions of
 the Turkish Constitution and labor laws that the CFA contends
 violate worker rights; a complaint involving pending charges
 against the President of the Turkish Automobile Workers'
 Union; and a more recent complaint by the Turk-Is railway
 affiliate about legal impediments against unionization of
 railroad workers.
 In an unusual action, the November 1990 meeting of the CFA
 highlighted its concern for the pending cases against Turkey
 by devoting an entire separate report exclusively to three of
 those cases. The CFA expressed "regret" over the long delay
 in resolving the DISK cases, and the 9-year suspension of DISK
 
 
 1302
 
 TURKEY
 in the interim. The CFA expressed "dismay" at the inordinate
 delay in concluding the case against Automobile Workers' Union
 President Ozdogan, reiterated its insistent request that the
 66vernment amend statutory and constitutional provisions
 violating fundamental principles of freedom of association,
 and asked the Government to state its intentions in this
 regard. The -FA also made specific recommendations of wording
 that the Government could propose in order to narrow its
 strike banto strictly essential services, as defined by the
 ILO; and it asked the Government to amend existing and
 proposed legislation to ensure collective bargaining rights
 for the staff of public enterprises.
 b". The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 All industrial workers have the right to organize and bargain
 collectively, and most industrial activity and some public
 sector agricultural activities are organized. The law
 requires that, in order to become a bargaining agent, a union
 must represent not only 50 percent plus one of the employees
 at a given work site but also 10 percent of all the workers in
 that particular industry. This has the effect of favoring
 established unions. There is no agent election; the union
 submits -its membership rolls to the Labor Ministry and
 requests certification as the collective bargaining agent.
 Once certified, the union receives checkoff privileges, as
 well as compensatory payment for nonunion members.
 The employer must enter good-faith negotiations with the
 certified union. Antiunion discrimination by employers is
 prohibited by law. An effective means for resolving
 complaints of such discrimination exists within the system of
 labor courts.
 Union organizing and collective bargaining are permitted in
 the duty-free export processing zones at Mersin and Antalya,
 but workers in those zoneg will not be allowed to strike until
 1994 (10 years after the legal establishment of the zones).
 Until then, settlements not otherwise reached will be
 determined by-binding arbitration.
 In its 1990 report,,the ILO Committee of Experts (COE) called
 on the Government to amend the provisions of legislation,
 including those embedded in the Constitution, which restrict
 trade union rights, the right to strike, and the right to
 bargain collectively, and which, in the opinion of the COE,
 are incompatible with the principle of freedom of
 association. In particular, the COE cited the legal
 prohibitions on political activity by trade unions and on
 various forms of "strike activity, including strikes by
 teachers; the use of. binding arbitration to terminate strikes
 with a national security or public safety dimension; and the
 denial of collective bargaining rights to unions unless they
 represent'more than 50 percent of employees at a work site and
 at least 10 percent of all workers in that particular industry.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor is prohibited by the Constitution and
 statutes, and it is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Education is compulsory in Turkey for the 5 years of primary
 school, ending at age 11. In practice, however, children in
 rural-areas, especially in the east, sometimes leave school
 
 
 1303
 early. The Constitution and labor laws forbid employment of
 children younger than 15 years of age, with the exception that
 those aged 13 and 14 may engage in light, part-time work, if
 enrolled in school or vocational training. The Constitution
 also prohibits women and children from engaging in physically
 demanding jobs, such as underground mining, and from working
 at night. The laws are effectively enforced by the Ministry
 of Labor in the organized industrial sector but not elsewhere
 in the economy.
 In practice, many children work in Turkey. Families
 frequently need the supplementary income their children can
 earn. Many young boys shine shoes and peddle sesame rolls and
 sandwiches on city streets. In family-owned businesses such
 as restaurants, boys visibly younger than 15 work long hours,
 for example, as busboys. In addition, there is an informal
 and essentially unsupervised apprentice system in which young
 boys.work at low wages, e.g., in. auto repair shops, in the
 hope of learning a trade. Girls are rarely seen in public in
 work circumstances, but many are kept out of school to work on
 indoor handicrafts, especially in rural areas.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Labor Ministry is legally obliged to set minimum wages at
 least every 2 years through a minimum wage board. The latter
 is a tripartite government-industry-union body-. On August 1,
 the minimum wage was increased to the equivalent of $153 a
 month at the mid-September exchange rate. This represented an
 84-percent increase over the minimum wage of 1989 (compared to
 an increase in the consumer.price index of 55 percent during
 the period August 1989-August 1990). The minimum wage is
 effectively enforced in the industrial sector.
 Without support from other sources, it would be difficult for
 a single worker, and impossible.for a family, to live qn the
 minimum wage. The minimum wage is generally paid to persons
 new to the work force or providing temporary or part-time
 services. Most workers earn considerably more. In addition
 to wages, workers covered by the labor law also receive a hot
 meal daily (or a food allowance), transportation to and from
 work, a fuel allowance, and other fringe benefits which,
 according to the Turkish Employers Association, make basic
 wages alone only 36 percent of total remuneration.
 Labor law provides for a nominal 45-hour workweek. Most
 .unions have bargained for fewer hours in the workweek, both to
 .increase premium-pay overtime and to obtain more leisure
 time. Labor law limits the number of overtime hours a worker
 may work to 3 hours a day for up to 90 days in a year. Wage
 and hour provisions are effectively enforced by the labor
 inspectorate of the Ministry of Labor in the unionized
 industrial, service, and government sectors.
 Occupational health and safety regulations are mandated by
 law, but the Government has not carried out an effective
 inspection and enforcement program. In practice, financial
 constraints, limited safety awareness, carelessness, and
 fatalistic attitudes result in scant attention to occupational
 safety and health by workers and employers alike.
 
 
 1304
