 TURKEY
 Turkey's Constitution, penal code and administrative
 regulations provide safeguards which approximate due
 process as understood in Western European countries
 and afford protection from arbitrary arrest and
 detention. Torture or degrading treatment of prisoners
 is illegal under Turkish law. Turkey's free press and
 competitive political system have served as additional
 safeguards. The new Turkish government which took
 office in January 1978 has enunciated protection of
 human rights as one of its primary concerns.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 An amnesty in 1974 released all political-prisoners,
 and other legislation restored political rights to
 all those previously deprived them. In 1976 and
 1977 scattered allegations of torture were reported
 in a few newspapers and in individual witness state-
 ments made to Amnesty International;-conclusive
 proof is lacking. While incidents of torture may
 occur, there clearly is no systematic policy of
 torture directed by the government.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no verified evidence of cruel, inhuman or de-
 grading punishment being practiced in Turkey.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Occasional allegations that the prescribed detention
 period has been exceeded are not supported by signifi-
 cant evidence.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials in Turkey are open, and defense lawyers are
 available under all circumstances.
 (816)
 
 
 317
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Privacy of the home is protected by law, the require-
 ments of which are met.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Governmental policies relating to the fulfillment of basic
 needs for food, shelter, health care and education are
 good and limited only by the economic resources of the
 country.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 Freedom of thought, religion and assembly are respected
 in Turkey. Government notification and approval are
 necessary for large public meetings, but such meetings,
 including thqse of a political nature, are freely held.
 Freedom of worship is protected under both the Turkish
 Constitution and the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. The
 Armenian Patriarch of Istanbul stated in 1977 that "we
 enjoy complete freedom of worship."
 The small Greek, Christian, and Jewish populations also
 enjoy freedom of worship.
 Charges have been made that various minorities, for ex-
 ample the Armenians, Greeks and Kurds, suffer from
 cultural and economic, although not religious, discrimin-
 ation. As for the Kurds, the Turkish Government has pro-
 hibited publication in, or teaching of, Kurdish since
 1925 when a series of Kurdish revolts threatened the
 stability and unity of Eastern Turkey. However, there
 does not appear to be any official discrimination against
 individuals belonging to minority groups, some of whom
 are prosperous and are leaders in the professions.
 Minority institutions have encountered problems in such
 areas as permits to maintain or expand existing churches
 and other facilities. Such actions appear to be haphazard
 in nature and do not appear to be the result of deliberate
 government policy.
 
 
 318
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement, foreign travel and
 emigration.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The ability to participate in the political process is
 extensively protected in Turkey. Turkey enjoys a
 vibrant political process, with parties reflecting all
 parts of the political spectrum. Elections are well
 contested and honest.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 We are not aware of any obstacles to outside investiga-
 tion and members of Amnesty International, for example,
 operate freely in Turkey.
 In light of the Turkish military intervention in 1974
 and the continued presence of Turkish armed forces in
 northern Cyprus, Turkey to some extent shared with the
 Greek community responsibility for the human rights
 situation on the island. The report relating to
 Cyprus takes up charges and counter-charges relating
 to human rights violations on the island.
 
 
