 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 9,000 people occupying a land surface area of 26 square kilo-
 meters on 9 atolls in the centr South Pacific is one of the world's smallest inde-
 pendent nations. The population is primarily Polynesian. Tuvalu became independ-
 ent from the United IKngdom on October 1, 1978, and is now a member of the Com-
 monwealth of Nations. Its Constitution provides for a Westminster-style parliamen-
 tary democracy. Tuvalu's Head of State is the British Queen, represented by the
 Governor-General who must be a Tuvaluan citizen. In 1992 there was debate over
 whether Tuvalu should become a republic. Prime Minister Bikenibeu Paeniu called
 for a national referendum, and a consultative process began in mid-1992. Each is-
 land community Is deliberating the issue in its respective council. Once all results
 have been reported to Parliament, the Government will announce its decision. A 32-
 member police constabulary, the only security apparatus, is responsible to and effec-
 tively controlled by civilian authority.
 The economy, primarily subsistence based, relies mainly on coconuts, taro, and
 frhing. Tuvalu depends heavily on foreign aid, mainly from Great Britain, Aus-
 tralia, and New Zealand through the Tuvalu Trust Fund, to meet its recurrent and
 capital expenditures. Remittances from Tuvaluans working abroad, the sale of com-
 memorative and thematic postage stamps and of fishing licenses to foreign vessels,
 provide additional sources of foreign exchange. Tuvalu's isolation and meager natu-
 ral resources severely limit prospects for economic self-sufficiency.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights. Social
 behavior, as determined by custom and tradition, however, is considered as inpor-
 tant as the law and is ensured by the village elders. Land is also key to much of
 the structure of Tuvaluan society. There were no reports of specific human rights
 abuses in 1992. In the traditional culture of the islands, women occupy a subordi-
 nate role, with limits on their job opportunities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no politically motivated
 kcilins.
 b. sappearance.-There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people
 being abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and inhuman or degra ding punishment or other such treatment are forbid-
 den by the Constitution and there were no reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, etention, or Exile.--Constitutional safeguards against arbi-
 trary arrest and detention are observed in practice. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system consists of the higher courts,
 namely, the Privy Council, the Court of Appeal, and the High Court, and the lower
 courts, i.e., those of the senior and resident magistrates, the island courts, and the
 land courts. The Chief Justice, who is also Chief Justice of the neighboring island
 nation of Nauru, sits on the High Court about once a year.
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed in practice. The
 Constitution provides that accused persons must be informed of the nature of the
 offenses with which they are charged and be provided time and facilities to prepare
 
 
 674
 
 a defense. The position of an independent peple's lawyer is ensured by statute. The
 services of this public defender are available to all Tuvaluans free of charge. T..
 right to confront witnesses, present evidence and appeal convictions is enshrined
 in law. Prmcdura safeguar    are based on English common law. The  diciary is
 independent and free oF governmental interference. Tuvalu has no political pris-
 oners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Corre pondence.-The pri-
 vacy of the home is protected in law and respected by the Government. There is
 no arbitrary intrusion by the State or political organizations into the private life of
 the individual. Membership in political organizations is voluntary.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Preedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution and observed in practice. Tuvalu has a radio station under govern-
 ment control.
 b. Freedom of Peacefid Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, including the right to form or belong to asso-
 ciations for the advancement or protection of the group's interests. There are no sig-
 nificant restrictions in practice.
 c. Freedom of Reigion.--Complete freedom of religion prevails in Tuvalu. Al-
 though 70 percent oUmuvaluans belong to one denomination, separation of church
 and state is maintained.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.---Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroad. There are no
 restrictions on repatriation. Tuvalu has no refugees or displaced persons.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely elect their government. Tuvalu's 12-member unicameral Par-
 liament is elected directly by the people. Parliament is presided over by a speaker
 elected by Members of Parliament (M.P.'s). The normal term of Parliament is 4
 years. The minimum voting age is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret ballot from among
 the M.P.'s, and up to four other ministers apointed and removed from office by
 the Governor General with the advice of the Prime Minister. There are no formal
 political parties in Tuvalu. The Prime Minister may be removed from office by a
 parliamentary vote of no confidence. The Government of Prime Minister Paeniu was
 elected in October 1989. The next general election is due to take place in September
 1993.
 Each of the islands is administered by six-person councils, also elected by univer-
 sal suffrage to 4-year terms. In the outer islands, social behavior, determined by
 custom and tradition, is considered as important as the law. Local hereditary elders
 exercise considerable traditional authority-including the seldom invoked right to
 inflict corporal punishment for infringing customary rules-which can be at odds
 with the nation al law.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights violations by the Gov-
 ernment and no known requests for investigations. While no known barriers block
 their establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations that concern
 themselves with human rights. Tuvalu is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex. Religion, Languqge, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, creed, sex, or na-
 tional origin. Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human
 rights. Nevertheless, there is still resistance to changing the role of women from the
 traditional role, with its emphasis on childbearing and housekeeping. However
 Tuvalu does count a female minister in its cabinet, and women increasingly hold
 positions in the health and education sectors. This trend is no doubt partly due to
 the efforts of the Prime Minister who is known to favor greater opportunities for
 women. Violence against women is not a problem in Tuvalu. If wife beating occurs,
 it is rare and has not become a source of societal concern.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in Tuvalu are free to organize unions and
 choose their own labor representatives, but most of the population lacks permanent
 employment and is engaged in subsistence activity.
 The right to strike is provided for by law, but no strike has ever been recorded.
 
 
 675
 
 In the public sector, the country's civil servants, teachers, and nurses-who, taken
 together, total lea than L00 employees-are grouped into associations which do
 not presently have the status of unions but may develop into them over time. The
 only registered trade union, the Tuvalu Seamen's Union, has about 600 members,
 who work on foreign merchant vessels around the world. The Seamen's Union is a
 member of the International Transportation Workers' Federation. In recent years,
 the South Pacific and Oceanic Council of Trade Unions has held seminars in Tuvalu
 to promote the creation of labor unions.
 b. The Riqht to Organize and Bargain Colectively.-The Industrial Relations Code
 (1978) provides for conciliation, arbitration, and settlement procedures in cases of
 labor disputes. Although there are provisions for collective bargaining, in practice
 in the private sector wages are set by employers The Minister of Works, Labor, and
 Communications may establish an incomes commission to determine appropriate
 levels of pay. For both the private and public sectors, the legal procedures for resolv-
 ing labor disputes noted a= - are seldom used, instead the two sides normally en-
 gage in nonconfrontational deliberations in the local "maneapa" (multipurpose meet-
 ing hall). There are no exportprcessing zones
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compsulsory Labor.-Article 74 of the Tuvalu Employ-
 ment Ordinance (1978) prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and there have been
 no reports of either being practiced.
 d. Minimum Aefor imployment of Children.-In Tuvalu children under the Age
 of 14 are prohibitJ from employment. Children under 15 years of   are prohb-
 ited from Industrial employmenT an work on any ship. Workers under the age of
 18 years are not allowed to enter into a contract. Children are rarely employed-out-
 side the traditional economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The modest minimum wage, set administra-
 tively by the Government, is sufficient to allow a worker and family in the wage
 economy to maintain a decent standard of living. The Commissioner of Labor may,
 by order, specify the days and hours of work for workers in various industries. Cur-
 rently, a workday is legally set at 8 hours. The majority of workers are outside of
 the wage economy. Rudimentary health and safety standards are provided for by
 law. They require employers to provide an adequate potable water supply, basic san-
 itary arrangements, andmedical care. Specific provisions of the law provide for the
 protection of female workers. The Government has been directing its attention to-
 ward the lack of safety protection measures for workers in the boat building yards
 and on the lack of protective gear for divers and for pharmacists who mix drgs at
 the hospital pharmacy.
