 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 9,500 people, occupies a land surface area of 26 square kilo-
 meters on 9 atolls in the central South Pacific. The population is primarily Polyne-
 sian. Tuvalu became independent from the United Kingdom on October 1, 1978, and
 it is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. Its Constitution provides for a
 Westminster-style parliamentary democracy. Tuvalu's Head of State is the British
 Queen, represented by the Governor General who must be a Tuvaluan citizen.
 
 
 704
 A 32-member police constabulary, the only security apparatus, is responsible to
 and effectively controlled by civilian authority.
 The economy, rimaril subsistence based, relies mainly on coconuts, taro, and
 fishing. Tuvalul depends heavily on foreign aid, mainly from Australia, New Zea-
 land, Japan, and Taiwan. Remittances from Tuvaluans working abroad and the sale
 of commemorative and thematic postage stamps and of fishing licenses to foreign
 vessels provide additional surcea of foreign exchange. Tuvalu's isolation and mea-
 ger natural resources severely limit prospects for economic self-sufficiency.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights. Social
 behavior, as determined by custom and tradition, however, is considered as impor-
 tant as the law and is ensured by the village elders. Land is also key to muc of
 the structure of Tuvaluan society. There were no reports of specific human rights
 abuses in 1994. However in the traditional culture of the islands, women occupy
 a subordinate role, with Iimits on their job opportunities, although recently there
 has been substantial effort to accord women equality in employment and decision-
 making.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment, and there
 were no reported instances of such practices. Local hereditary elders exercise consid-
 erable traditional authority-including the seldom invoked right to inflict corporal
 punishment for infringing customary rules-which can be at odds with the national
 aw.A
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Constitutional safeguards against arbi-
 trary arrest and detention are observed in practice. There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The judicial system consists of the higher courts,
 namely, the Privy Council, the Court of Appeal, and the High Court; and the lower
 courts, i.e., those of the senior and resident magistrates, the island courts, and the
 land courts. The Chief Justice, who is also Chief Justice of the neighboring island
 nation of Nauru, sits on the High Court about once a year.
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed in practice. The
 Constitution provides that accused persons must be informed of the nature of the
 offenses with which they are charged and be provided the time and facilities re-
 quired to prepare a defense. An independent people's lawyer is ensured by statute.
 The services of this public defender are available to all Tuvaluans free of charge.
 The right to confront witnesses, present evidence, and appeal convictions is en-
 shrined in law. Procedural safeguaids are based on English common law. The judici-
 ary is independent and free of governmental interference. Tuvalu has no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government adheres in practice to the legal protection of privacy of the home. It
 does not arbitrarily intrude into the private life of the individual.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government respects in practice freedom
 of speech and press. Tuvalu has a radio station under government control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, and there are no significant restrictions in
 practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for separation of church and
 state and imposes no restrictions on freedom of religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroad. The Govern-
 ment does not restrict repatriation. Tuvalu has no refugees or displaced persons.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely and directly elect a 12-member unicameral Parliament, whose
 normal term is 4 years. Each of Tuvalu's nine atolls is administered by six-person
 councils, also elected by universal suffrage to 4-year terms. The minimum voting
 age is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret ballot from aonit
 the Members of Parliament, and up to four other ministers, appointed and removea
 
 
 705
 from office by the Governor General with the advice of the Prime Minister. The
 Prime Minister may appoint or dismiss the Governor General on behalf of the Brit-
 ish Monarch. There are no formal political parties in Tuvalu. The Prime Minister
 may be removed from office by a parliamentary vote of no confidence.
 In an effort to cement his leadership, Prime Minister Kamuta Latasi in June
 named Tulaga Manuella to be the Governor General, replacingToomu Sione, who
 had served in that position only for 7 months. Latasi revoked Sione's appointment
 on the grounds that it was a political appointment from the last days of former
 Prime Minister Paeniu's government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights violations by the Gov-
 ernment and no known requests for investigations. While no known barriers block
 their establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations that concern
 themselves with human rights. Tuvalu is not a member of te United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, creed,
 sex, or national origin. Women increasingly hold positions in the health and edu-
 cation sectors. This trend was partly due to former Prime Minister Paeniu, who fa-
 vored greater opportunities for women. Paeniu named women among his senior ad-
 visers, including them in his Cabinet. Although the current Prime Minister has not
 appointed any women to his Cabinet, he has encouraged the participation of women
 in other areas of the Government, especially in the Tuvaluan Education for Life pro-
 gram.
 Violence against women is rare in Tuvalu. If wife beating occurs, it is infrequent
 and has not become a source of societal concern.
 Children.-There are no reports of child abuse. If it does occur, it is rare. The
 Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare and provides com-
 mensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the total resources
 available to the State.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no mandated accessibility provisions
 for the disabled, there are no known reports of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers are free to organize unions and choose their
 own labor representatives, but most of the population lacks permanent employment
 and is engaged in subsistence activity. The law provides for the right to strike, but
 no strike has ever been recorded.
 In the public sector, the country's civil servants, teachers, and nurses-who, taken
 together, total less than 1,000 employees-are grouped into associations which do
 not presently have the status of unions. The only registered trade union, the Tuvalu
 Seamen's Union, has about 600 members, who work on foreign merchant vessels.
 The Seamen's Union is a member of the International Transportation Workers' Fed-
 eration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Code
 (1978) provides for conciliation, arbitration, and settlement procedures in cases of
 labor disputes. Although there are provisions for collective bargaining, the practice
 in the private sector is for wages to be set by employers. For beth the private and
 public sectors, the legal procedures for resolving labor disputes noted above are sel-
 dom used; instead, the two sides normally engage in nonconfrontational delibera-
 tions in the local multipurpose meeting hail.
 Tuvalu is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 74 of the Tuvalu Employ-
 ment Ordinance (1978) prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and there have been
 no reports of either being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment law prohibits
 children under the age of 14 from working. Education is compulsory for children
 from 6 through 13 years of age. The law also prohibits children under 15 years of
 age from industrial employment or work on any ship and stipulates that children
 under the age of 18 years are not allowed to enter into formal contracts, including
 work contracts. Children are rarely employed outside the traditional economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The modest minimum wage, set administra-
 tively by the Government, is sufficient to allow a worker and family in the wage
 economy to maintain a decent standard of living. The present minimum wage in the
 
 
 public (government) sector is $0.40 per hour ($A0.55) per hour. This rate applies re-
 gardless of sex and age. In most cases, the private sector adopts the same minimum
 wage rate.
 The Labor Office may specify the days and hours of work for workers in various
 industries. The workday is legally set at 8 hours. The majority of workers are out-
 side of the wage economy. The law provides for rudimentary health and safety
 standards. It requires employers to provide an adequate potable water supply, basic
 sanitary arrangements and medical care. Specific provisions of the law provide for
 the protection of female workers. The Ministry of Labor, Works and Communica-
 tions is responsible for the enforcement of the rudimentary safety and health regula-
 tions but is able to provide only minimum enforcement.
