 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 8,500 people occupying a land surface area
 of 26 square kilometers on 9 atolls in the central South
 Pacific, is one of the world's smallest independent nations.
 The population is primarily Polynesian. Tuvalu became
 independent from the United Kingdom on October 1, 1978, and is
 now a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. Its Constitution,
 revised in 1986, provides for a Westminster-style parliamentary
 democracy. Tuvalu's head of state is the British monarch,
 represented by a governor-general who must be a Tuvalu citizen.
 A 32-member police constabulary, the only security apparatus,
 is responsible to and effectively controlled by civilian
 authority.
 The nation's economy, primarily subsistence based, relies
 mainly on coconuts and taros and fishing. Tuvalu depends
 heavily on foreign aid, mainly from Great Britain, Australia,
 and New Zealand, to meet both its recurrent and capital
 expenditures. Remittances from Tuvaluans working abroad, the
 sale of commemorative and thematic postage stamps, and the sale
 of fishing licenses to foreign vessels provide additional
 sources of foreign exchange. The island's isolation and meager
 natural resources severely limit prospects for economic
 self-sufficiency.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of
 human rights. Social behavior, as determined by custom and
 tradition, however, is considered as important as the law and
 ensured by the village elders. Land is also key to much of the
 structure of Tuvaluan society. There were no reports of
 specific human rights abuses in 1991. In the traditional
 culture of the islands, women occupy a subordinate role, with
 limits on their job opportunities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no disappearances, and no evidence of people being
 abducted, secretly arrested, or clandestinely detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or other such
 treatment are forbidden by the Constitution, and there were no
 reported instances of such practices.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Constitutional safeguards against arbitrary arrest and
 detention are observed in practice. There is no exile,
 internal or external.
 
 
 1018
 TUVALU
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed
 in practice. The Constitution provides that an accused person
 must be informed of the nature of the offense with which he is
 charged and be provided given time and facilities to prepare a
 defense. The position of an independent people's lawyer is
 ensured by statute. The services of this public defender are
 available to all Tuvaluans free of charge. The right to
 confront witnesses, present evidence, and appeal convictions is
 enshrined in law. Procedural safeguards are based on English
 common law. The judiciary is independent and free of
 governmental.interference. Tuvalu has no political prisoners.
 The judicial system consists of the higher courts, namely, the
 Privy Council, the Court of Appeal, and the Higher Court, and
 the lower courts, i.e., those of the Senior and Resident
 Magistrates, the Island Courts and the Land Courts. The Chief
 Justice, who is also Chief Justice of Nauru, sits on the High
 Court about once a year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The privacy of the home is protected in law and respected by
 the Government. There is no arbitrary intrusion by the State
 or political organizations into the private life of the
 individual. Membership in political organizations is voluntary.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the Constitution
 and observed in practice. Tuvalu has a radio station and a
 mimeographed newspaper, Tuvalu Echoes, published on a bimonthly
 basis. Both are government controlled.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly and
 association, including the right to form or belong to
 associations for the advancement or protection of the group's
 interests. There are no significant restrictions in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Complete freedom of religion prevails in Tuvalu. In 1990 the
 Church of Tuvalu, a Protestant church, requested the Government
 to recognize it as the official and only religion of the
 country; 70 percent of Tuvaluans belong to this church. Prime
 Minister Bikenibeu Paeniu rejected the proposal, stating his
 belief in the separation of church and state, and warning that
 such action would threaten the rights of other religious
 denominations.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroad.
 There are no restrictions on repatriation. Tuvalu has no
 refugees or displaced persons.
 
 
 1019
 
 TUVALU
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people freely elect their government. Tuvalu has a
 12-member unicameral Parliament elected directly by the
 people. Parliament is presided over by a Speaker elected by
 Members of Parliament. The normal life of Parliament is 4
 years. The minimum voting age is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret
 ballot from among the Members of Parliament, and up to four
 other ministers, appointed and removed from office by the
 Governor-General with the advice of the Prime Minister. The
 Prime Minister may be removed from office by a parliamentary
 vote of no confidence. The current Government of Prime
 Minister Paeniu was elected in 1989.
 Each of the islands is administered by six-person councils,
 also elected by universal suffrage to 4-year terms. In the
 outer islands, social behavior, determined by custom and
 tradition, is considered as important as the law. Local
 hereditary elders exerciseoconsiderable traditional
 authority-including the-seldom invoked right to inflict
 corporal punishment for infringing customary rules--which can
 be at odds with the national law.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights
 violations by the Government and no known requests for
 investigations. While there are no known barriers to their
 establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations
 that concern themselves with human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race,
 creed, sex, or national origin. Tuvaluan society is
 egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights.
 Nevertheless, there is still resistance to changing the role of
 women from.the traditional emphasis on childrearing and
 housekeepihng. Despite such traditional attitudes, Tuvalu
 counts a female minister in its small Cabinet, and women
 increasingly hold positions in the health and education
 sectors. This trend is no doubt partly due to the efforts of
 the current Prime Minister, who is known to favor greater
 opportunities for women. Violence against women is not a
 problem in Tuvalu. If wife beating occurs, it is rare and has
 not become a source of societal concern.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers in Tuvalu are free to organize unions and choose their
 own labor representatives. The right to strike is provided for
 by law, but no strike has ever been recorded.
 The country's civil servants, teachers, and nurses--who, taken
 together, total less than 1,000 employees--are grouped into
 associations which do not presently have the status of unions
 but may develop into them over time. The only registered trade
 
 
 1020
 TUVALU
 union, the Tuvalu Seamen's Union, has about 600 members who
 work on foreign merchant vessels around the world.% The
 Seamen's Union is a member of the International Transportation
 Workers' Federation (ITF). The South Pacific and Oceanic.
 Council of Trade Unions (SPOCTU) in recent years has held
 seminars in Tuvalu to promote the creation of labor unions
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Industrial Relations Code (1978) provides for conciliation,
 arbitration, and settlement procedures as well as inquiry into
 trade disputes. Although there are provisions for collective
 bargaining, wage setting is the rule. The Minister of Works,
 Labor, and Communications may establish an incomes commission
 to determine appropriate levels of pay. For both the private
 and public sectors, the legal mechanisms for resolving labor
 disputes noted above are normally set aside in favor of
 nonconfrontational deliberations in the local "maneapa"
 (multipurpose meeting hall). There are no export processing
 zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Article 74 of the Tuvalu Employment Ordinance (1978) prohibits
 forced or compulsory labor, and there have been no reports of
 either being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 In Tuvalu, children under the age of 14 are prohibited from
 employment. Children of 15 years of age are prohibited from
 industrial employment and work on any ship. Workers under the
 age of 18 years are not allowed to enter into a contract.
 Children are rarely employed outside the traditional economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The modest minimum wage, set administratively by the
 Government, is sufficient to allow persons in the wage economy
 to maintain a decent standard of living. The Commissioner of
 Labor may, by order, specify the days and hours of work for
 workers in various industries. Currently, 8 hours is
 considered a workday. The majority of workers are outside of
 the wage economy. Rudimentary health and safety standards are
 provided for by law. They require an adequate potable water
 supply, basic sanitary arrangements, and medical care.
 Specific provisions of the law provide for the protection of
 women workers.
 
 
 1021
