 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 10,000 primarily Polynesian people, occupies a land surface
 area of 26 square kilometers on 9 atolls in the central South Pacific. It became inde-
 pendent from the United Kingdom on October 1, 1978, and is a member of the Com-
 monwealth of Nations. Its Constitution provides for a Westminster-style parliamen-
 tary democracy. Tuvalu's Head of State is the British Queen, represented by the
 Governor General who must be a Tuvaluan citizen.
 A 32-member police constabulary, the only security apparatus, is responsible to
 and effectively controlled by civilian authority.
 The primarily subsistence economy relies mainly on coconuts, taro, and fishing.
 Tuvalu depends heavily on foreign aid, mainly from Australia, New Zealand, Japan,
 and Taiwan. Remittances from Tuvaluans working abroad as well as the sale of
 commemorative and thematic postage stamps and of fishing licenses to foreign ves-
 sels provide additional sources of foreign exchange. Tuvalu's isolation and meager
 natural resources limit prospects for economic development.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights. Social
 behavior, as determined by custom and tradition, however, is considered as inpor-
 tant as the law and is ensured by the village elders. Land is also key to much of
 the structure of Tuvaluan society. There were no reports of specific human rights
 abuses. However, in the traditional culture of the islands, women occupy a subordi-
 nate role, with limits on their job opportunities, although recently there has been
 substantial effort to accord women equality in employment and decisionmaking.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment, and there
 were no reported instances of such practices. Local hereditary elders exercise consid-
 erable traditional authority-including the seldom invoked right to inflict corporal
 punishment for infringing customary rules-which can be at odds with the national
 laW.
 Prison facilities in this tiny island nation with less than 10,000 population consist
 of several holding cells at the back of the police station. There have een no serious
 crimes within the memory of local officials. It is rare for a prisoner to spend as long
 as a week in a cell; more commonly, a person is incarcerated overnight because of
 drunkenness. While prison conditions are somewhat Spartan as regards food and
 sanitation, the level of complaints seems to -be minimal or nonexistent. Since there
 are no local human rights groups, the question of prison monitoring by them has
 not arisen. Visits by church groups and family members are permitted.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial system consists of the higher courts,
 namely, the Privy Council, the Court of Appeal, and the High Court; and the lower
 courts, i.e., those of the senior and resident magistrates, the island courts, and the
 land courts. The Chief Justice, who is also Chief Justice of Nauru, sits on the High
 Court about once a year.
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed in practice. The
 Constitution provides that accused persons must be informed of the nature of the
 offenses with which they are charged and be provided the time and facilities re-
 
 
 quired to prepare a defense. An independent people's lawyer is ensured by statute.
 The services of this public defender are available to all Tuvaluans free of charge.
 The right to confront witnesses, present evidence, and appeal convictions is provided
 by law. Procedural safeguards are based on English common law. The judiciary is
 independent and free of governmental interference. There were no reports of politi-
 cal prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government adheres in practice to the legal protection of privacy of the home. It
 does not arbitrarily intrude into the private life of the individual.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-he Government respects in practice freedom
 of speech and press. The one radio station is under government control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, and there are no significant restrictions in
 practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for separation of church and
 state and imposes no restrictions on freedom of religion, and the Government re-
 spects these provisions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroaTd
 The Government does not restrict repatriation. The Government cooperates with
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other humanitarian orga-
 nizations in assisting refugees. No person in recent memory has applied for refugee
 status, and the Government has not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees,
 asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely and directly elect a 12-member unicameral Parliament whose
 normal term is 4 years. Each of Tuvalu's nine atolls is administered by a six-person
 council, also elected by universal suffrage to 4-year terms. The minimum voting age
 is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret ballot from among
 the Members of Parliament, and up to four other ministers, appointed and removed
 from office by the Governor General with the advice of the Prime Minister. The
 Prime Minister may appoint or dismiss the Governor General on behalf of the Brit-
 ish Monarch. There are no formal political parties in Tuvalu. The Prime Minister
 may be removed from office by a parliamentary vote of no confidence.
 or cultural reasons women are underrepresented in politics. The Parliament has
 one female member. Se had served as Minister of Health in a previous government
 but stepped aside in favor of her husband's successful bid to become Prime Minister.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights violations by the Gov-
 ernment and no known requests for investigations. While no known barriers block
 their establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations that concern
 themselves with human rights. Tuvalu is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, creed, sex, or na-
 tional origin, and the Government generally respects these prohibitions. However,
 the traditional culture has limited women's job opportunities.
 Women.-Violence against women is rare. If wife beating occurs, it is infrequent
 and has not become a source of societal concern.
 Women increasingly hold positions in the health and education sectors. This trend
 was partly due to former Prime Minister Paeniu, who favored greater opportunities
 for women. Paeniu named women among his senior advisers and included them in
 his Cabinet. Although the current Prime Minister has not appointed any women to
 his Cabinet, he has encouraged the participation of women in other areas of the
 Government, especially in the Tuvaluan Education for Life program.
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of the
 total resources available to the State. There are no reports of child abuse.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no mandated accessibility provisions
 for the disabled, there are no known reports of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers are free to organize unions and choose their
 own labor representatives, but most of the population lacks permanent employment
 and is engaged in subsistence activity. The law provides for the right to strike, but
 no strike has ever been recorded.
 In the public sector, the country's civil servants, teachers, and nurses-who, taken
 together, total less than 1,000 employees--are grouped into associations which do
 not presently have the status of unions. The only registered trade union, the Tuvalu
 Seamen's Union, has about 600 members, who work on foreign merchant vessels.
 Unions may affiliate with international bodies. The Seamen's Union is a member
 of the International Transportation Workers' Federation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Industrial Relations Code
 (1978) provides for conciliation, arbitration, and settlement procedures in cases of
 labor disputes. Although there are provisions for collective bargaining, the practice
 in the private sector is for wages to be set by employers. For both the private and
 public sectors, the legal procedures for resolving labor disputes are seldom used; in-
 stead, the two sides normally engage in nonconfrontational deliberations in the local
 multipurpose meeting hall.
 Tuvalu is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Tuvalu Employment Ordi-
 nance (1978) prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and there have been no reports
 of either being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Employment Law prohibits
 children under the age of 14 from working. Education is compulsory for children
 from 6 through 13 years of age. The Law also prohibits children under 15 years of
 age from industrial employment or work on any ship and stipulates that children
 under the age of 18 years are not allowed to enter into formal contracts, including
 work contracts. Children are rarely employed outside the traditional economy.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The modest minimum wage, set administra-
 tively by the Government, is sufficient to allow a worker and family in the wage
 eonomy to maintain a decent standard of iving. The present minimum wage in the
 public (government) sector is $0.40 per hour ($A0.55) per hour. This rate applies re-
 gardless of sex and age. In most cases, the private sector adopts the same minimum
 wage rate.
 The Labor Office may specify the days and hours of work for workers in various
 industries. The workday is legally set at 8 hours. The majority of workers are out-
 side the wage economy. The law provides for rudimentary health and safety stand-
 ards. It requires employers to provide an adequate potable water supply, basic sani-
 tary arrangements, and medical care. Specific provisions of the law provide for the
 protection of female workers. The Ministry of Labor, Works and Communications is
 responsible for the enforcement of these regulations, but it is able to provide only
 minimum enforcement.
