 TUVALU
 Tuvalu, with about 10,000 primarily Polynesian people, occupies a land area of
 a little more than 10 square miles on 9 atolls in the central South Pacific. It became
 independent from the United Kingdom in 1978 and is a member of the Common-
 wealth of Nations. Its Constitution provides for a Westminster-style parliamentary
 democracy. Tuvalu's Head of State is the British Queen, represented by the Gov-
 ernor General who must be a Tuvaluan citizen. The judiciary is independent.
 A 32-member police constabulary, the only security force, is responsible to and ef-
 fectively controlled by civilian authority.
 The primarily subsistence economy relies mainly on coconuts, taro, and fishing.
 With donor assistance, Tuvalu has developed a well-managed trust fund, which is
 supplemented by significant annual payments for use of international telephone di-
 aling prefix. An agreement was reached during the year for the use of the country's
 Internet address, which has the potential to increase government revenues by as
 much as $50 million. Remittances from Tuvaluans working abroad as well as the
 sale of postage stamps and of fishing licenses to foreign vessels provide additional
 foreign exchange. Tuvalu's isolation and meager natural resources limit the pros-
 pects for economic development.
 Tuvaluan society is egalitarian, democratic, and respectful of human rights. Social
 behavior, as determined by custom and tradition, however, is considered as impor-
 tant as the law and is ensured by village elders. There were no specific reports of
 human rights abuses. However, in the traditional culture of the islands, women oc-
 cupy a subordinate role, with limits on their job opportunities, although recently
 
 
 1084
 
 there has been a substantial effort to accord women equality in employment and de-
 cisionmaking.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading punishment, and there
 were no reported instances of such practices. Local hereditary elders exercise consid-
 erable traditional authority-including the seldom-invoked right to inflict corporal
 punishment for infringing customary rules, which can be at odds with the national
 law.         o        n            rs      h       c   b
 Prison facilities consist of several holding cells at the back of the police station.
 There have been no serious crimes within the memory of local officials. It is rare
 for a prisoner to spend as long as a week in a cell; more commonly, a person is in-
 carcerated overnight because of drunkenness. While prison conditions are somewhat
 Spartan as regards to food and sanitation, complaints seem to be minimal or non-
 existent. Since there are no local human rights groups, the question of prison mon-
 itoring by them has not arisen. Visits by church groups and family members are
 permitted.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and it is free of governmental interference.
 The judicial system consists of the higher courts, namely, the Privy Council, the
 Court of Appeal, and the High Court; and the lower courts, that is, the senior and
 resident magistrates, the island courts, and the land courts. The Chief Justice, who
 is also Chief Justice of Nauru, sits on the High Court about once a year.
 The right to a fair public trial is ensured by law and observed in practice. The
 Constitution provides that accused persons must be informed of the nature of the
 offenses with which they are charged and be provided the time and facilities re-
 quired to prepare a defense. The right to confront witnesses, present evidence, and
 appeal convictions is provided by law. Procedural safeguards are based on English
 common law. An, independent people's lawyer is ensured by statute. The services of
 this public defender are available to all Tuvaluans without charge.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government adheres in practice to the legal protection of privacy of the home. It
 does not intrude arbitrarily into the private life of the individual.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government respects in practice freedom
 of speech and press. The one radio station is under government control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and.Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, and there are no significant restrictions in
 practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for separation of church and
 state, and imposes no restrictions on freedom of religion. The Government respects
 these provisions.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens are free to travel within the country and abroad. The Govern-
 ment does not restrict repatriation.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No person in re-
 cent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has not formu-
 lated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely and directly elect a 12-member unicameral Parliament whose
 normal term is 4 years. Each of Tuvalu's nine atolls is administered by a six-person
 council, also elected by universal suffrage to 4-year terms. The minimum voting age
 is 18 years.
 The Cabinet consists of the Prime Minister, elected by secret ballot from among
 the Members of Parliament, and up to four other ministers, appointed and removed
 from office by the Governor General with the advice of the Prime Minister. The
 
 
 1085
 
 Prime Minister may appoint or dismiss the Governor General on behalf of the Brit-
 ish Monarch. There are no formal political parties. The Prime Minister may be re-
 moved from office by a parliamentary vote of no confidence. General elections were
 held in March.
 For cultural reasons, women are underrepresented in politics. The one female
 Member of Parliament was defeated in the March general elections.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported allegations of human rights violations by the Gov-
 ernment and no known requests for investigations. While no known barriers block
 their establishment, there are no local nongovernmental organizations that concern
 themselves with human rights. Tuvalu is not a member of the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, creed, sex, or na-
 tional origin, and the Government generally respects these prohibitions. However,
 the traditional culture has limited women's job opportunities.
 Women.-Violence against women is rare. If wife beating occurs, it is infrequent
 and has not become a source of societal concern.
 Women increasingly hold positions in the health and education sectors, and also
 are more active politically.
 Children.-The Government is committed to children's human rights and welfare
 and provides commensurate funding for children's welfare within the context of its
 total available resources. There are no reports of child abuse.
 People With Disabilities.-Although there are no mandated accessibility provisions
 for the disabled, there are no known reports of discrimination in employment, edu-
 cation, or provision of other state services.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers are free to organize unions and choose their
 own labor representatives, but most of the population lacks permanent employment
 and is engaged in subsistence activity. The law provides for the right to strike, but
 no strike has ever been recorded.
 In the public sector, civil servants, teachers, and nurses-who total less than
 1,000 employees-are grouped into associations which presently do not have the sta-
 tus of unions. The only registered trade union, the Tuvalu Seamen's Union, has
 about 600 members, who work on foreign merchant vessels. Unions may affiliate
 with international bodies. The Seamen's Union is a member of the International
 Transportation Workers' Federation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1978 Industrial Relations
 Code provides for conciliation, arbitration, and settlement procedures in cases of
 labor disputes. Although there are provisions for collective bargaining, the practice
 in the private sector is for wages to be set by employers. For both the private and
 public sectors, the legal procedures for resolving labor disputes are seldom used; in-
 stead, the two sides normally engage in nonconfrontational deliberations in the local
 multipurpose meeting hall.
 Tuvalu is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The 1978 Tuvalu Employment Or-
 dinance (prohibits forced or compulsory labor, including by children, and there have
 been no reports of either being practiced.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Em-
 ployment Law prohibits children under the age of 14 from working. Education is
 compulsory for children from 6 through 13 years of age. The Law also prohibits chil-
 dren under 15 years of age from industial employment or work on any ship and
 stipulates that children under the age of 18 years are not allowed to enter into for-
 mal contracts, including work contracts. Children rarely are employed outside the
 traditional economy. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children
 and enforces this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The modest minimum wage, set administra-
 tively by the Government, is sufficient to allow a worker and family in the wage
 economy to maintain a decent standard of living. The present biweekly minimum
 wage in the public (government) sector is $81.25 ($A130). This rate applies regard-
 less of sex and age. In most cases, the private sector adopts the same minimm
 wage rate.
 The Labor Office may specify the days and hours of work for workers in various
 industries. The workday by law is set at 8 hours. The majority of workers are out-
 
 
 1086
 
 side the -wage economy. The law provides for rudimentary health and safety stand-
 ards. It requires employers to provide an adequate potable water supply, basic sani-
 tary arrangements, and medical care. Specific provisions of the law provide for the
 protection of female workers. The Ministry of Labor, Works, and Communications
 is responsible for the enforcement of these regulations, but it is able to provide only
 minimum enforcement.
