 TAIWAN
 In 1992 Taiwan continued its transition from party-state authoritarian rule by the
 Nationalist Party (KMT) toward a more pluralistic system. The more open political
 environment was exemplified by the 1991 year-end retirement of "old guard- main-
 land-elected representatives and subsequent election of a new National Assembly
 and Legislative Yuan in 1991 and 1992 respectively, creating institutions broadly
 representative of the island's population.
 The transition to majority rule has eroded the previously disproportionate role of
 Chinese mainlanders who had dominated politics and government since 1949, and
 who still hold a majority of ranking party, government, and military positions. The
 military's role in politics and civil administration has diminished considerably since
 the 1987 lifting of martial law on Taiwan proper. The Taiwan Garrison General
 Headquarters (TGGH)-the principal enforcement mechanism for martial law rule-
 was disbanded in 1992, with most of its law enforcement functions handed over to
 civilian police agencies. Martial law on the offshore islands of Kinmen and Matsu
 was terminated on November 7, 1992.
 Taiwan has basically a free market economy, but major sectors--including fi-
 nance,  transportation,  utilities,  shipbuilding,  steel,  petrochemicals,  and
 telecommunications-    remain dominated by stateand party-run enterprises. Tai-
 wan's economy continued to shift toward the service sector and capitaland tech-
 nology-intensive industries. Shortages of unskilled labor resulted in the exodus of
 many labor-intensive manufacturers, as well as moves to admit foreign workers on
 a limited basis.
 Some notable advances in human rights included a major reduction in the number
 of overseas dissidents barred from returning to Taiwan, revision of sedition statutes
 to allow nonviolent advocacy of such issues as Taiwan independence, a very signifi-
 cant advance in protecting freedom of speech, and the release of persons convicted
 on sedition charges. The authorities also announced the abolition of formerly ubiq-
 
 
 555
 uitous "second personnel department? tasked with monitoring the political and ide-
 ological loyalties of civil servants.
 Although protection of human rights continued to improve, problems remained.
 There continued to be credible reports of police abuse of detainees. Restrictions on
 freedoms of speech and association still remained, including impediments on work-
 era' rights of association and to strike. Other abuses included politically motivated
 prosecutions and retention of antihoodlum laws--including a secret witness" sys-
 term-which violate commonly accepted standards of due process. Unfair political
 practices, including the authorities' monopoly control of broadcast media, and ruling
 party ownership of a vast network of KMT-run enterprises, also continued. Finally
 child prostitution, including the sale of aborigine chldren, and discrimination and
 intrafamily violence against women remained significant problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrujudcial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing in 1992.
 b. Disappearan. -There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There continued to be credible reports of physical abuse of persons in police custody.
 Ministry of Justice spokespersons claim all interrogations are recorded and that an
 attorney may be present. They add that all allegations of mistreatment are inves-
 tigated. Criminal lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur in
 local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and that most persons
 do not have attorneys present at the interrogation stage.
 During Legislative Yuan hearings the National Police Administration (NPA) Di-
 rector announced that the NPA had begun investigating three plainclothes police-
 men accused of beating opposition participants durin street rtests in April. How-
 ever, the prosecutor announced he would not press charges due to lack of sufficient
 evidence. A physician at National Taiwan Universit Hospital contradicted NPA
 claims that only 16 civilians were "lightly wounded,  an  said hospital records
 showed that 28 persons were admitted for treatment, including three who required
 hospitalization.
 Authorities say that the June 1991 death of Chen Ching-chi an inmate in a re-
 formatory education camp for "hoodlums," then under the jurisdiction of the eastern
 Taiwan garrison command, was caused when he accidentally fell from a building.
 They say that a militar" court is investigating allegations of negligence on the part
 of the camp staff. Earlier press accounts reported that an autopsy showed that he
 had been beaten severely before he died. Prison authorities, after repeated requests,
 allowed incarcerated independence activist George Chang (Chang Tsan-hung) to
 enter National Taiwan University Hospital for medical tests and subsequent out-
 patient visits. Authorities repeatedly denied a motion by Chang's attorneys that he
 be allowed to undergo long-term hospitalization. Chang was subsequently released
 on bail, however, on October 24 (see Section .e.).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Police may legally arrest without a war-
 rant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison and may call in persons for questioning without a for-
 mal summons. The authorities must, within 24 hours after detention, give notice in
 writing to the detained person or a designated relative or friend, stating the reason
 for the arrest or questioning. he Code of Criminal Procedure specifies that the au-
 thorities may detain an accused person for up to 2 months during the investigation
 phbase before filing a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months during the trial.
 The prosecuting officer may apply once to the court to extend the investigative de-
 tntion for 2 months, and twice while in detention during trial. The authorities gen-
 erally have followed these procedures in extending periods of detention, although
 trials usually take place within 3 months of indictment.
 Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal offenses can be released on bail at
 the judge's discretion. The right to have a lawyer present during the investigation
 phase is generally respected, but defense lawyers complain that persons often are
 not advised of their right to have legal representation during police interrogation,
 and there is no legal requirement that indigent persons be provided with counsel
 during police interrogation.
 The Legislative Yuan in July revised the 1985 "Antihoodlum" Law, transferring
 enforcement responsibilities from the TGGH to the NPA. The revised law leaves in-
 tact the secret witness system which allows police to use the testimony of unidenti-
 fied informants in prosecuting alleged hoodlums, but now provides that such inform-
 
 
 556
 ants shall be liable under the criminal statutes for false witness and slander. The
 law is an extreme departure from ap ropriate standards of due process, because it
 does not permit counsel for an acusedhoodlum to cross-examine his accuser. Critics
 say bringing testimony of secret witnesses within the purview of the perjury law is
 not sufficient to remedy the defect, because the accused lacks the means to prove
 theprury.
 hile a decision to commit a designated hoodlum to reformatory education can,
 in principle, be appealed to the high court, critics say that courts simply
 rubberstamp police decisions. The law does not authorize the courts to determine
 the length of reformatory education; police and prison authorities decide. The usual
 term is 3 to 6 months for a first offense. Repeat offenders are detained for longer
 periods, and detention may be extended up to 3 years, depending on behavior in cus-
 tody.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The right of fair public trial is provided by law
 and generally respected in practice. Taiwan's legal system does not provide for trial
 by jury. In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are interrogated by a single
 judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor. The judge may decline
 to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit. All judges are
 appointed by, and responsible to, the Judicial Yuan. Informed observers have char-
 acterized the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to political and
 personal pressure.
 Taiwan independence activist George Chang was convicted in June on charges of
 violent sedition, manufacture and use of an explosive to commit an offense, and at-
 tempted murder in connection with his alleged role in masterminding a 1976 plot
 to manufacture and send letter bombs, including one which seriously wounded then
 provincial governor Hsieh Tung-min. Chang received a 5-year prison sentence and
 a 4-year period of deprivation of civil rights. Defense attorneys appealed his sen-
 tence, protesting that the prosecution relied on evidence obtained from a prisoner
 during a 1977 military tribunal which the witness publicly recanted during Chang's
 trial. Chang is currently free on bail pending retrial on charges of attempted homi-
 cide and manufacture of bombs. Because the retrial of the case will be based on the
 prosecutor's original indictment, Chang may also be charged with sedition.
 Although trials are public, attendance at trials involving juveniles or politically
 sensitive issues may require court permission. Defendants have a right to an attor-
 ney-, if the defendant is suspected of committing a crime for which the penalty is
 3 or more years' imprisonment, or, if the defendant is handicapped or elderly, the
 judge may assign an attorney. Criminal law specifically provides the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination. Persons convicted in cases in which the sentence
 exceeds 3 years have a right to a ppeal to a high court and the Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-
 Warrantless searches, common before the lifting of martial law, are unusual now.
 A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained before a search, ex-
 cept when the search is incidental to arrest. The exception is car searches, which
 are routinely conducted at roadblocks.
 There continued to be credible reports that police and security agencies interfere
 with the right to privacy. Opposition leaders allege that their correspondence and
 telephone calls are routinely intercepted and that they are subject to surveillance.
 In March representatives of the Lung Chuan temple in Taipei county protested to
 the NPA after they discovered a police officer installing a monitoring device during
 an opposition symposium held at the temple.
 Until July 31, the Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau (MJIB) maintained
 "second personnel offices" which monitored civil servants' political and ideological
 loyalties. Authorities say these units will be replaced by "political morals depart-
 ments" charged with anticorruption duties. Although authorities have promised to
 destroy dossiers relating to political loyalties of civil servants and employees of
 state-run corporations, some opposition legislators characterize the move to set up
 anticorruption units as "old wine in new bottles," and have questioned security
 agencies' commitment to destroy all personnel records.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The May 1992 revision of Taiwan's sedition
 statutes are a major advance toward protection of freedom of speech. However, this
 achievement followed a tempestuous course in late 1991 and early 1992, including
 the arrests and trials on sedition charges of a number of Taiwan independence ac-
 tivists. These persons were freed after the mid-year revision of the sedition laws.
 These changes eliminated provisions outlawing "conspiracy" to commit sedition and
 limited the purview of the sedition law to cases involving violence or threats. The
 
 
 557
 authorities in mid-1992 released all prisoners convicted on sedition charges and
 dropped other sedition cases pending before the courts.
 Similarly, the Executive Yuans Political Party Screening Committee (]:?SC)
 began hearngs in late 1991 to determine whether the opposition Democratic Pro-
 gressive Party's (DPP) October 1991 espousal of a Taiwan independence plank in
 the party platform warranted imposition of penalties, ranging from a warnin to
 outright disbandment. Following revision of the Civic Organizations Law in July,
 however, the PPSC lost the power to order political parties to disband, and the case
 against the DPP was dropped. The right to dissolve political parties now resides in
 a constitutional court composed of members of the Judicial Yuan's Council of Grand
 Justices. Grounds for such dissolution include objectives or actions that are deemed
 to jeopardize the existence of the ROC or the order of free and democratic rule of
 law.
 A July revision of the National Security Law (NSL) removed prohibitions on "ac-
 tions against the Constitution." However the NSL-and related statutes such as the
 Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and Assembly Law-still retain prohibi-
 tions against advocating communism or espousing division of national territory.
 Cases of censorship of the print media are rare, but the Publications Law empow-
 ers the police to seize or ban printed material that commits or instigates others to
 commit sedition, treason sacrilege, offenses of interference with the lawful exercise
 of public functions, or offenses against public order or morals. In contrast with the
 relatively open and highly competitive environment in which the print media now
 operate, television and radio remain tightly controlled. The three television stations
 are owned and operated by the KMT, the Taiwan provincial government, and the
 military. Television coverage is slanted to the KMT viewpoint and reports of sen-
 sitive subjects, such as opposition demonstrations, are restricted and slanted. Au-
 thorities claim only 12 of 33 radio stations are owned by military and civil authori-
 ties but count among ostensibly "private" stations such entities as the KMT-con-
 trolfed Broadcasting Corporation of China. More than three-fourths of Taiwan's
 radio frequencies are held by  vernment, party, and other noncommercial entities.
 No requests to open new radio and television stations have been approved since
 1969, although unregistered cable television networks are pervasive. Former sedi-
 tion convicts are banned from working in television or radio stations.
 Several ruling party legislators charged in November 1992 that the KM's De-
 partment of ltural Affairs sent guidelines on election coverage to television sta-
 tions during election campaigns. The authorities permitted political parties to broad-
 cast election advertisements on television during the Legislative Yuan election.
 However, broadcast time was apportioned on the basis of number of candidates
 nominated by each party, giving the ruling KMT the lion's share of broadcast time.
 In addition, the opposition DPP criticized a requirement that all campaign materials
 be approved by a censor prior to broadcast. The Central Election Commission cut
 22 seconds out of a DPP campaign advertisement after the DPP refused to do so.
 Restrictions on academic freedom have diminished in recent years, and the trend
 has been to allow greater expression of dissenting political views. Student dem-
 onstrations occur and are tolerated, at least on university campuses. Teachers are
 sometimes pressured to discourage students from taking part in demonstrations and
 risk being disciplined and harming their careers if they express unorthodox views
 themselves. No tenure system exists to protect teachers who express such views.
 However, the overall trend has been to remove political loyalty from professional
 consideration. The effect has been to enhance the independence of faculty from KMT
 political control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly is pro-
 vided for in the Constitution but is restricted in practice. The Civic Organization
 Law requires all civic organizations to register, but authorities have refused to ap-
 prove registration of some groups, such as the Taiwan Association for Human
 Rights, that use the word "Taiwan' in their titles. According to the Parade and As-
 sem     Law, as amended in 1992, peaceful demonstrations are permitted if a
 proved in advance by the authorities and if they do not advocate communism or a-
 vocate Taiwan's separation from China. The new law also reduced from 7 to 6 the
 number of days before a demonstration that an application must be filed. Penalties
 for violating orders to disperse, however, were increased.
 Opposition leaders have frequently been prosecuted and fined for alleged harm to
 public order and interference with public functionaries (usually the police) resulting
 from demonstrations they organized, for holding them without a permit, or for vary-
 ing from the officially authorized route. Demonstrators are also liable for "insults
 or slander" of public officials. Prosecutors deny that politics plays a part in decisions
 to bring charges under the Parade and Assembly Law, but the authorities have not
 asserted that those being prosecuted personally advocated or engaged in violence.
 
 
 c. Freedom of Rel4ion.-The constitutional provision for freedom to practice reli-
 gion is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere to Confu.
 cianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism or a combination of these beliefs. Other reli-
 gions include Christianity and Islam. here is no established or favored religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Legislative Yuan in July revised the NSL, easing restrictions on
 overseas Taiwanese and others, including citizens of the Peoples Republic of China,
 entering Taiwan. Under the new law former Taiwan residents still require permis-
 sion to enter the island but restrictions on entry of persons "strongly suspected of
 harming national security or social order" were revised to cover only those about
 whom there are facts sufficient to create a strong suspicion of engaging in terrorism
 or violence. The NSL revision was followed by an Interior Ministry announcement
 that the list of excluded overseas dissidents was being reduced from 282 to fewer
 than 5. Before the easing of restrictions, however, a number of blacklisted overseas
 dissidents apprehended in late 1991 after entering Taiwan surreptitiously were im-
 prisoned after conviction for illegal entry. With the exception of Cheng Tzu-tsai, who
 received a 1-year sentence for illegal entry in July 1992 they served their sentences
 and have been released. Critics say Cheng received a fonger sentence compared to
 others convicted of similar offenses because of his involvement in a 1970 assassina-
 tion attempt on then Vice Premier Chiang Ching-kuo. Illegal entry charges were
 also pending against convicted independence activist George Chang, but no court
 hearing has yet taken place.
 Except for military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom of internal
 travel. An exit permit is required for travel abroad and may be refused for a number
 of reasons, including failure to complete compulsory military service. Entry permits
 for overseas-resident Taiwan passport holders may also be refused for a variety of
 reasons. Reasons for entry and exit refusals must be given, however, and appeals
 may be made to a special board. The authorities claim to recognize the right of Chi-
 nese who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in Taiwan to return
 from abroad. Nonresident Taiwan citizens, however, are usually issue -overseas
 Chinese* passports and require entry permits to travel to Taiwan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Taiwan has made significant progress in moving away from its authoritarian po-
 litical system to a more pluralistic one. The KMT, which established itself in Taiwan
 after the Japanese surrender in 1945 remains the dominant political party. Reflect-
 ing their constitutional claim to be the overnment of all of China, the authorities
 maintain not only a provincial and loci government system but also an array of
 central-level political bodies generally identical to those found on the mainland be-
 fore 1949. In the past, centers of power on Taiwan have been the Presidency, the
 Executive Yuan, the military and security apparatus, and the KMT Central Stand-
 ing Committee.
 Both the President and Vice-President are elected by the National Assembly (NA).
 The Premier is apointed by the President with the approval of the Legislative
 Yuan (LY), Taiwan s highest legislative organ. The NA has jurisdiction over con-
 stitutional revisions and meets every 4 years to elect the President and Vice-presi-
 dent. The election of a new National Assembly and Legislative Yuan in 1991 and
 1992 respectively, has created institutions broadly representative of the island's
 population. There had been no general elections to these two bodies since before the
 1949 KMT retreat to Taiwan.
 On December 19, the Taiwan authorities conducted the first Legislative Yuan
 election in which all members were elected solely from the Taiwan electorate. KMT
 nominees won 53 percent of the vote; combined with KMT members who ran with-
 out party approval or nomination, the ruling party will hold 103 seats in the 161-
 seat body. The opposition DPP won 31 percent of the vote, and will field 50 legisla-
 tors. The KM'rs 103 seats and the DPP's 50 seats include 23 and 13 proportional
 representation seats, respectively. Independents and the Chinese Social Democratic
 Party won the remaining eight seats. The election was conducted in a generaly free
 and fair manner. There were, however, credible reports that individual KMT can-
 didates in particular engaged in large-scale vote buying. Moreover, three losing can-
 didates have charged vote rigging, and prosecutorial authorities have preliminarily
 found election irregularities in one of these disputed races. There were also minor
 and isolated instances of election-related violence.
 The newly elected NA met for a 60-day session in March and passed a number
 of constitutional amendments, including: reduction of the terms of office for subse-
 quent presidents vice presidents, NA, and Control Yuan members from 6 to 4 years;
 direct election of the provincial governor, and giving the NA the right to approve
 
 
 559
 nominees for the Control Yuan. The opposition DPP caucus protesting that the rul-
 ing part was monopolizing NA proceedings boycotted the assemby. Reflecting
 intra-KMT differences between mainstream KMT advocates of direct presidential
 elections and conservatives urging retention of a "proxy" system of presidential elec-
 tions, the KMT deferred action on the manner of selecting the next president. Uni-
 versal suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and over. Voting is voluntary and
 by secret ballot. However vote buying remains rampant, and a study the prestigious
 Academia Sinica released estimated that nearly 3 million voters-a quarter of Tai-
 wan's eligible voters--received either cash or gift bribes from candidates during the
 1991 National Assembly campai
 Originally composed overwhelmingly of mainlanders, the KMTs membership of
 over 2 million is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. (Native Taiwanese of south-
 ern Fujian and Hakka origin comprise an estimated 85 percent of Taiwan's popu-
 lation, with Chinese mainlanders arriving since 1949 and their offspring comprising
 most of the remainder.) The KMT's structure and control mechanisms are based on
 Leninist models; however, the party's operations are considerably more flexible. The
 benefits that the KMT enjoys from ownership of enterprises, access to public funds,
 and assistance from administrative and security agencies give it a sigicant advan-
 tage, and the line between government and party interests is often lurred inprac-
 tice. For example, the Finance Minister concurrently heads the KMTs Special Party
 Branch for Financial Affairs. Similarly, the head of the Vocational Assistance Com-
 mission for Retired Servicemen-a ministerial-level position--concurrently heads
 the KM'rs Special Party Branch for Retired Servicemen, a group which exerts con-
 siderable influence at election time. In July an opposition legislator charged that
 KMT-run banks offered preferential interest rates to customers to induce them to
 contribute to KMT coffers in the year-end Legislative Yuan campaign.
 The passage of the Civic Organizations Law in January 1989 legalized the organi-
 zation of additional political parties. At present, there are 72 registered parties. The
 major opposition party, the DPP, was formed in 1986 in defiance of martial law; it
 registeredas a political party in April 1989. The DPP claims a membership of
 40 000. The other opposition parties are much smaller.
 W1.e role of the opposition, however, is greater than its small numbers might indi-
 cate. Opposition members are vocal, and sometimes disruptive, in elective bodies
 and frequently use interpellation sessions to raise controversial or sensitive issues.
 The opposition parties still face several disadvantages, among them the authorities'
 virtual monopoly of television and radio (see also Section 2.a.). With the exception
 of those whose rights were restored by presidential amnesty, persons convicted of
 sedition were often given additional sentences depriving them of civil rights such
 as voting and holding public office.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Taiwan has two principal human rights organizations: the Chinese Association of
 Human Rights (CAHR) and the Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR).
 CAHR, staffed mostly by retired officials, is regarded as the establishment-oriented
 human rights organ. TAHR is aligned with the opposition. Coordination between the
 two bodies is limited. The Taiwan authorities permit representatives of most inter-
 national human rights organizations to visit Taiwan and meet citizens freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group, less than 2 percent of Taiwan's total
 population, consists of the aboriginal descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already es-
 tablished in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. They face no official
 discrimination but encounter significant cultural and economic barriers. The aver-
 age income of Taiwan's aborigines is only 43 percent of the national average. Spe-
 cially designated seats in both central and provincial legislatures are reserved for
 representatives of these aboriginal people, and the authorities have instituted a
 number of social programs to help them assimilate into the dominant Chinese soci-
 ety. The aboriginal people complain that they are prevented from owning ancestral
 lands in mountain areas under the authorities' control. Furthermore, they are not
 allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on legal documents.
 Aborigine rights activists in April held protests during budget hearings for the
 Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission. They claimed authorities placed undue
 emphasis on Tibetan and Mongolian affairs, despite the fact that only a handful of
 Mongolians and Tibtans reside in Taiwan, while only a small section of the Interior
 Ministry handled affairs of over 340,000 abor-ignes in Taiwan. During the May NA
 session, some aborigine rights activists stgda demonstration and called for ab-
 origine NA members to join a boycott to protest a constitutional revision proposal
 
 
 560
 which referred to aborigines as "mountain comipatriots." The ruling KMT reportedly
 opposed using the term, "original inhabitants on the grounds that this might en-
 courage secessionism.
 The sale of aboriginal girls by their parents into prostitution is a serious social
 problem. Although aborigines constitute under 2 percent of Taiwan's population,
 nearly 20 percent of the child prostitute population consists of aborigines, according
 to reliable statistics.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, and discriminatory sections of the legal code
 relating to divorce, property, and child custody have been eliminated in recent
 years. Taiwan's laws now provide for equitable distribution of conjugal property, as
 well as greater latitude in assigning custody of children in a divorce. However, the
 juvenile welfare law custody provisions apply only to children between 12 and 18
 years of age. Women's rights groups have pressed for passage of a comprehensive
 children's welfare law to expand coverage to include younger children. Enforcement
 of current laws is also a problem. For example while labor laws provide for mater.
 nity leave, employers do not always grant it. Women have also complained of being
 forced to quit jobs because of age or childbearing restrictions, and restrictive quotas
 reportedly exist within certain ministries. A women's rights movement is active and
 growing, however, and women's rights groups formed an alliance during the Decem-
 ber 1992 elections to promote can(idates who support their agenda.
 Women active in politics, human rights, and women's organizations single out
 intrafamily violence as a serious problem, especially wife beating. Social welfare
 groups and municipal governments have established assistance centers to deal with
 this issue, but strong social pressure is sometimes exerted on abused wives to con-
 ceal their treatment to avoid "disgracing" their families. Greater mobility, education,
 and job opportunities are making women less inclined to tolerate such abuse and
 more willing to complain of mistreatment. A somewhat similar situation exists with
 regard to rape, because victims are socially stigmatized. Under Taiwan law, the au-
 thorities may not prosecute for rape; only the victim may file a complaint. Because
 rape trials are public, women are reluctant to prosecute their attackers. However,
 feminist and social welfare organizations have assisted rape victims, and victims are
 now more willing to come forward and press charges.
 The problem of child prostitution continues to receive considerable public atten-
 tion in Taiwan. During a parliamentary hearing in June, a private social welfare
 group presented statistics showing that Taiwan had at least 72,000 female child
 prostitutes. The 1989 Juvenile Welfare Law enables juvenile welfare bodies, pros-
 ecutors, and victims to apply to courts for termination of guardianship of parents
 and the appointment of qualified guardians in cases where parents have forced their
 children into prostitution. In cases where children are engaged in prostitution of
 their own free will and the parents are incapable of providing safe custody, the
 courts may order competent authorities to provide counseling education for not less
 than 6 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal loopholes and cultural
 barriers remain obstacles to prosecution. For example, in cases where both parents
 have sold a child into prostitution, the current law requires the victim to lodge a
 complaint before prosecution is undertaken. In many cases, the child is reluctant-
 or afraid-to do so. According to some reports, violence, drug addiction, and other
 forms of coercion are used by brothel owners to prevent girls from escaping.
 Although the Taiwanese dialect is the mother tongue of most inhabitants of Tai-
 wan, dialect television and radio programming is limited. Taiwan currently has tele-
 vision broadcasts in Mandarin Taiwanese, and Hakka, as well as radio broadcasts
 in Mandarin, Taiwanese, Haka, and aboriginal dialects. The authorities say that
 the percentage of non-Mandarin dialect programming is now determined entirely by
 the marketplace. However, the Broadcasting and Television Law still mandates that
 "stations shall mainly use Mandarin in domestic broadcasts and shall decrease
 gradually the use of dialects. The proportion between Mandarin and dialect broad-
 casts shall be determined by the Government Information Office according to actual
 requirements."
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Labor's right of association is seriously limited by
 a number of laws and regulations. All labor unions must register with the authori-
 ties. Labor unions may draw up their.own rules and constitutions, but these must
 be submitted to the authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved if they do, not
 meet certification requirements, or if their activities disturb public order. According
 to official sources, no unions have been dissolved, although certification has been de-
 nied if there were competing unions. In the latter cases, the unions were asked to
 reconcile their differences and file as a single union. Civil servants, teachers, de-
 fense industry workers, and administrators acting on behalf of employers are pro-
 
 
 561
 hibited from organizing labor unions. The Labor Union Law requires that union
 leaders be elected regularly by their respective membership by secret ballot, and in
 recent years workers have sometimes rejected KMT or management-endorsed union
 slates.
 Unions may form confederations but no administrative district, including cities,
 counties, and provinces, can have competing labor confederations, which effectively
 means there can only be one Taiwan-wide labor federation. The Chinese Federation
 of Labor is closely associated with the KMT and also is affiliated with the Inter-
 national Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Some workers have established inde-
 pendent unions and federations under other names, such as 'friendship organiza-
 tions" and "brotherhood alliances." These groups remain technically illegal under
 present regulations. Independent trade union activist Tseng Mao-shing was sen-
 tenced to 2 months' imprisonment for his involvement in a strike at the Far Eastern
 Textile Company in May 1989, for violation of the "Act Governing Agriculture, Min-
 ing, Industry, and Commerce in the Emergency Period." Tseng was released in May
 1992. In addition, labor activist Yen Kun-chan was sentenced to 22 months' impris-
 onment for allegedly violating the parade and assembly law and with interference
 with official functions for his part in a protest against the Shih-diun and An-chang
 footwear companies, which refused to provide back pay and severance pay after the
 firms were closed. Yen began his sentence in May 1992.
 Revisions of the law governing labor disputes, effective June 1988, recognize Ia-
 bor's right to strike but impose serious restrictions that make legal strikes very dif-
 ficult. Both labor and management are forbidden from disrupting the "working
 order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. Be ore a strike can be
 called, it must be approved by a majority vote of the full membership of the union.
 The authorities have required offici ap roval before such a meeting can be called.
 Applications for arbitration may be mad to the local government. Stiff penalties
 may be levied should no-strike/no-retaliation clauses be violated, but employers have
 sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers without any legal
 action being taken against them. During a July 1992 strike at the Keelung Bus
 Company, the employer locked out workers and closed down all bus routes, even
 though the Taipei county government had announced that the dispute had entered
 the arbitration stage. The drive for independent labor unions lost momentum in re-
 cent years due to tougher tactics on the part of employers and the small scale and
 poor organization of most labor unions. Observers also cite prosecution of labor ac-
 tivists as a factor inhibiting Taiwan's labor movement.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-As of September 1992, some
 3 million workers, approximately 34.3 percent of Taiwan's work force, belonged to
 3,676 officially registered labor unions. Under the Labor Union Law, employers may
 not refuse employment to, dismiss, or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they
 are union members. In practice, however union leaders have sometimes been dis-
 missed without reasonable cause by employers, and authorities have failed to en-
 force this section of the law. Labor laws governing union activities apply equally
 within export processing zones.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the Collective A  ments Law but is
 not mandatory. Only 288 formal collective agreements were inore as of September
 1992, down from 295 the previous year. Since such agreements are made only in
 large-scale enterprises, and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this
 category, the proportion of workers covered is small. Wages are set by market condi-
 tions.  gal restrictions on the right to strike and provisions for involuntary medi-
 ation or arbitration seriously weaken collective bargaining. Most collective actions
 by workers consist of such illegal actions as work stoppages and mass leave-taking.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Labor Standards Law
 forced or compulsory labor isprohibited. Violation is punishable by a maximum jail
 sentence of 6 years. Except or allegations concerning prostitution (see Section 5),
 there were no reports of forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Standards Law stipu-
 lates that the minimum age or employment is 15 (i.e., after compulsory education
 ends), and interaction between this law and a compulsory education law effectively
 keeps child labor at a very low level.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Taiwan Labor Standards Law was enacted
 in 1984 to provide minimum labor standards. According to Taiwan's Labor Ministry,
 the Council of Labor Affairs (CIA), it currently covers some 3.5 million of Taiwan s
 5.8 million paid workers. The law has enjoyed only limited success in several areas,
 and there is a growing sentiment that it and other labor laws should be strength-
 ened and extendd to cover additional workers. By law, the workweek is limited to
 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days per week) with certain provisions for overtime.
 
 
 562
 There is general agreement that the legally established minimum wage is less
 than that needed to assure a decent standard of living-, however, the average manu.
 facturing wage is more than double the legal minimum wage. In addition, most
 large firm provide their employees with allowances for transportation, meals, hous-
 ing, and other benefits which can amount to another 60 to 80 percent of base salary.
 While the 1991 Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarges coverage to include
 workers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and strengthens penalties for
 safety violations, it still provides only minimum standards for working conditions
 and health and safety precautions. Rising labor consciousness and continuing labor
 shortages have resulted in improvements in working conditions.
 The CIA does not effectively enforce many workplace laws and regulations, pri-
 marily because it employs too few inspectors. As of June 1992, there were 267 in-
 spectors for approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational Safety
 and Health Law. Because the new law expanded coverage to include more enter-
 prises, the inspection rate has declined. Because most enterprises are small, family-
 owned operations employing relatives who will not report violations, actual adher-
 ence to the hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to docu-
 ment but is thought to be minimal. Taiwan's occupational injury rate, however, has
 declined steadily from 0.82 percent in 1980 to 0.39 percent in 1991.
 Because of Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there  as been an influx of illegal for-
 eign workers in recent years. The Employment Services Law passed in May pro-
 vids a legal basis for the introduction of foreign workers-around 60,000 so far-
 from the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia. However, estimates of the
 number of illegal workers remaining in Taiwan range from around 20,000 to over
 100 000. Authorities say illegal workers are entitled to the same protection as native
 workers so far as work conditions are concerned. In many cases, however, illegal for-
 eign workers are given board and lodging but have no medical coverage, accident
 insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by local workers. Conditions in many small and
 medium-sized factories which employ illegal labor are poor, with old and poorly
 maintained equipment resulting in a high rate of industrial accidents. These illegal
 workers are vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation of passports, imposi-
 tion of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working hours without
 overtime pay. Various church groups in the Philippines recently have denounced the
 poor worki   conditions of Filipinos employed on board Taiwan fishing vessels, as
 well as squaid conditions foundon offshore Taiwan floating hotels for fishing crews
 working ilegally on Taiwan fishing boats. These groups also have noted that a large
 number of Filipino fishermen have been reported as missing at sea.