 TAIWAN
 The past quarter century has brought significant advances
 in the observance of internationally recognized human
 rights on Taiwan, despite the official position that
 Taiwan is still in a civil war situation. However,
 at the end of 1979, a confrontation between the authorities
 and some oppositionists led to the arrest of certain opposi-
 tion leaders and the suspension of three oppositionist
 magazines.
 Taiwan remains essentially under authoritarian, one-
 party control operating under martial law provisions
 which authorities state are necessary owing tocontin-
 uing confrontation with the People's Republic of China
 (PRC). Taiwan's political and legal practices also
 remain influenced by such traditional Chinese concepts
 as the duty of an individual to be obedient to the state
 and the use of law as an instrument for preserving social
 order rather than a means of protecting individual
 rights.
 The Constitution, which guarantees such fundamental
 human rights ard liberties as personal freedom and free-
 dom of speech, press, religion, petition, and assembly,
 was adopted by the National Assembly of the Republic
 China in 1946. At the height of the Chinese civil war
 in 1948, however, the same body enacted the "temporary
 provisions effective during the period of communist
 rebellion" and a "State of Seige" was declared over Taiwan
 in 1949 bringing martial law into operation. These
 laws, which remain in effect, limit constitutional guaran-
 tees of individual rights and freedoms. Together with
 other emergency legislation, they confer upon the authori-
 ties the right to control the press, censor the mails,
 prohibit strikes, conduct warrantless searches, register
 property, and prohibit meetings. The authorities have
 cited these extraordinary powers as the legal basis
 for most recent human rights violations.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is proscribed by Taiwan law and the authori-
 ties deny it is used. Reports of torture in Taiwan are
 now rare. When such reports appeared in the past, they
 were usually associated with pretrial detention, interro-
 gation, and the extraction of confessions. The Amnesty
 International report on Taiwan for 1978 noted several
 instances in which confessions were reportedly extracted
 under duress.
 Four prominent "oppositionist" political figures
 were reported by anonymous sources in the US to have
 been tortured after being arrested for their involvement
 in the December 1979 "Kaohsiung Incident." Checks into
 (526)
 
 
 these allegations failed to substantiate them. Prior to this
 however, two employees of an opposition magazine, arrested
 while soliciting attendance for an unauthorized political/
 human rights rally were reported by oppositionists to
 have been severely beaten while in police custody.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or runishment
 Imprisonment is the usual form of punishment in
 Taiwan. Those convicted of sedition under provisions
 of martial law can be sentenced to death, but such execu-
 tions have become infrequent. In 1979, one person,
 Wu T'ai-an (also known as Wu Chun-fa) was sentenced to
 death under the "Statute of Punishment for Sedition"
 and his execution was announced on May 28 by the Taiwan
 Garrison General Headquarters after the Supreme Militar '
 Tribunal Appellate Court upheld the sentence. Two of
 his associates were sentenced to life imprisonment on
 the same charge of attempting to overthrow the authorities
 by illegal means. A few individuals convicted on non-
 political crimes such as murder or, in sope cases, armed
 robbery, have also been given the death sentence.
 Prison conditions on Taiwan have been improving re-
 cently but reports alleging inadequate medical care
 continue. There have also been allegations of degrading
 treatment during periods of detention. Last year there
 was a case in which the person detained was subjected to
 continuous interrogation lasting several days without
 opportunities to sleep, bathe, or change clothes. There
 have been no reliable reports this year of such treatment.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 In the 1950's there were reports of people disappear-
 ing without word of their fate. Arbitrary arrests are
 now infrequent, although individuals suspected of "sedi-
 tion" as defined in martial law provisions, have in
 past years been detained and held incommunicado for weeks
 and at times months, without-being formally charged or
 tried. However, in most recent cases, the arrests have
 been announced publicly shortly after they took place
 and persons detained under martial law decrees are either
 indicted after an initial period of investigation or
 released. The code of criminal procedures states that
 a person arrested shall be sent to a procurator and
 released within twenty-four hours unless detention is
 juztified. A suspect may be detained during investi-
 gation for up to a maximum of four months.
 While the authorities do not acknowledge holding
 political prisoners, they stated at the end of 1976 that
 there were 254 persons in prison on sedition charges. Some
 persons have been released and others arrested since that
 time, but this is the most recent figure made public by
 the authorities. Exile groups charge the total is at
 least several times that number. The*Department of State
 has no means to verify the figure. Many of those can
 be considered prisoners of conscience; some were con-
 victed of terrorist acts.
 
 
 528
 The most recent, major example of arbitrary deten-
 tion was the 1978 case of a prominent Taiwanese political
 activist, Ch'en Chu, who was arrested after authorities
 found anti-regime literature in her apartment. She
 was detained for two weeks without access to her family
 or lawyer, after which she was released.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan have been handled under
 the law for the punishment of police offenses which em-
 powers the police not only to arrest but also to pro-
 secute and punish offenders. This law sometimes has
 been invoked against political activists. The authori-
 ties began in 1979 to consider revisions of this highly
 unpopular law, including suggestions that punishment
 be determined by a special court rather than the police.
 d. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 Stringency in the application of martial law has
 varied over time and with individual cases. Opposition
 to basic policy, e.g., expressing views contrary to
 the authorities' claim to represent all China, advo-
 cating accommodation with the People's Republic of China
 (PRC), and supporting an independent legal status for
 Taiwan, are considered seditious and punishable under
 martial law. The authorities continue to try civilians
 suspected of "sedition" in military courts though the
 frequency has diminished in recent years. From July
 1978 to June 1979, 15 cases involving 26 civilian defend-
 ants reportedly were brought before courts martial
 compared to over 100 during a similar period in 1976.
 While due process and normal habeas corpus procedures
 are prescribed for civil trials, such -procedures do not
 appear to be safeguarded or applied in a consistent
 fashion in cases tried under martial law.  In both civil
 and martial law trials, the accused may be detained
 during the investigation and has a right to counsel
 only after the procurator has filed an indictment follow-
 ing his investigation. The right to a lawyer is guar-
 anteed in the Code of Criminal procedure and it directs
 that a public defender be provided free of charge in
 cases where the defendant is indigent and the charges
 bring sentences of three or more years. There is, how-
 ever, no guarantee of free access to counsel in private.
 In the wake of the "Kaohsiung Incident" the authori-
 ties arrested at least 26 individuals, most of whom were
 connected with the organization of a human rights
 demonstration in Kaohsiung which erupted in violence.
 These arrests were viewed by many as politically moti-
 vated because the arrests were for the capital crime
 of "sedition" and seemed far more severe than warranted
 by the incident itself. The "sedition" charge Cnable6I
 enables the authorities to hold the arrestees for as
 as long as four months for investigation before the
 before the prosecutor must file a formal indictment.
 In the recent past, members of the accused's family
 have been allowed to attend the trial and occasionally
 even the press and carefully selected members of the
 public as well. While appeals to higher military courts
 in some cases result in reduced sentences, lower military
 
 
 529
 court convictions have not been reversed.
 A trial which generated much controversy on Taiwan
 in 1979 was that of the 76 year-old former Kaohsiung
 County Magistrate, Yu Teng-fa, who was arrested with
 his son in January 1979 on sedition charges and sentenced
 to eight years imprisonment for "failing to report a
 communist spy" and "propagandizing for the communists."
 With respect to the latter charge, the prosecution sub-
 mitted evidence that Yu Teng-fa had distributed photo-
 copies of a December 1978 Japanese newspaper article
 reporting the PRC National People's Congress message
 to the people on Taiwan. The trial was held in public,
 members of Yu Teng-fa's family and the press attending;
 there was, however, criticism of the military court
 both for failing to subpoena as requested by the defense
 several witnesses'who had provided sworn statements
 against Yu Teng-fa, and for the length of the sentence,
 which was tantamount to life imprisonment for a man
 Yu Teng-fa's age.
 Another case which generated considerable contro-
 versy was the suspension from office of the popularly
 elected Taoyuan County Magistrate, Hsu Hsin-liang. Hsu
 was impeached by the Control Yuan and suspended from office
 for two years by the Judicial Yuan's Conmittee on the
 discipline of public functionaries for campaigning for
 others in the December 1978 elections, signing an "anti-
 government" declaration protesting the arrest of Yu Teng-
 fa, and being absent without leave to participate in
 an unauthorized demonstration concerning the Yu Teng-fa
 case. Following impeachment, Hsu Hsin-liang sent his
 defense in writing to the Committee: The Committee's
 proceedings, however, were not public and did not provide
 further occasion for the accused to rebut the charges.
 Moreover, there was no appeals procedure.
 The district and high courts are under the adminis-
 tration of the Ministry of Justice. The authorities an-
 nounced their intention in April 1979 to transfer this
 court system to the Judicial Yuan within one year. If
 implemented, such a transfer will provide greater judi-
 cial independence from the Executive Branch through separa-
 tion of judges ani procurators.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 In contrast with the situation two decades ago, in-
 vasion of the home is not a common practice in Taiwan.
 The nonviolent searches which do occur are normally,
 though not always, authorized by warrant.
 2. Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of such Vital
 Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care, and Education
 As a result of public policies, the gap between the
 rich and poor is steadily narrowing and in terms of
 income distribution Taiwan's society is one of the
 most egalitarian in the world. The ratio of per capita
 
 
 530
 income between the top 20 percent and bottom 20 percent
 of the population hag been reduced from over five to one
 in 1966 to 4.18 to one in 1978, against a background of
 rapid economic growth in a relatively free market economy.
 Programs have been designed to ensure that rapid indus-
 trialization does not exacerbate the moderate disparity
 that exists between the rural and urban sectors. Tax
 policy is designed to alleviate the direct tax burden
 on lower income groups by emphasizing collection of
 tariffs and sumptuary taxes while maintaining a high
 degree of progressivity in the personal income tax struc-
 ture. The authorities in 1979 also submitted new legis-
 lation, the Social Relief Law, to assist low-income people.
 Rapid and large-scale urbanization results in somewhat
 congested housing in Taiwan's major cities. Nevertheless,
 slum conditions are gradually ameliorating and housing
 in both rural and urban areas is generally adequate.
 In February 1968 it was announced that public housing
 has been included in a list of major new construction
 projects to be undertaken under the first (1976-1981)
 and second (1982-1987) six-year economic development
 plans. An increasing number of families are beginning
 to enjoy modern conveniences and luxury items. For
 instance, in 1968 only about 18 percent of all house-
 holds had TV sets while in 1978, the most recent year
 for which statistics are available, almost all households
 did. In 1978.over 87 percent of all households had'a
 refrigerator and over 63 percent had motorcycles. The
 right to own and hold private property, including land, is
 guaranteed by Article 15 of the Constitution. The only
 exception is a general prohibition, under the terms
 of the 1949 Land Reform program, against holding more than
 7.5 acres of wet farmland or 15 acres of dry farmland.
 Taiwan has developed an effective public health pro-
 gram and a system of health stations throughout the
 island. All major epidemic diseases have been practically
 eradicated. Health promotion programs include maternal
 and child health, family planning, school health, dental
 health, special care for disabled children, communicable
 disease control, and environmental sanitation. Public
 medical insurance covers about 3.2 million civil
 servants and military personnel. According to statis-
 tics, in 1978 Taiwan had one hospital bed for every
 464 people and one physician for every 1,360 people.
 Life expectancy is among the highest in the world.
 Adult literacy on Taiwan is 93 percent. About
 4.5 million people, 26 percent of the population,
 are presently in school. In 1968, free compulsory
 education was extended through junior high school.
 About 60 percent of junior high school graduates pass
 examinations and enter three-year senior high and
 vocational schools. Taiwan's extensive system of univer-
 sities, colleges, junior colleges, and other institutions
 of higher learning currently enrolls, through competitive
 examinations, 317,000 undergraduate and graduate students
 -- about 16 percent of college-aged youth. In 1978 about
 56 percent of the population over the.age of 15 had a
 secondary or college education compared with 43 percent
 in 1969.
 
 
 531
 People in Taiwan enjoy a good diet. Per capita
 calorie and protein intakes have gradually increased
 since the 1950's, reaching in 1978 estimated intakes
 of 2,800 calories and 78.0 grams of protein per day.
 These are among the highest in the world.
 Over the past decade wages have risen in the manufactur-
 ing sector at a compound annual rate of 18 percent
 measured in current U.S. dollars.. The average monthly
 earnings for a worker in the manufacturing sector rose
 from US $34 in 1969 to U.S. $209 in 1979 as the monthly
 hours worked dropped from 238 to 220.
 This fulfillment of vital human needs is not hindered
 by corruption. Cases of corruption involving officials have
 been uncovered, investigated, and prosecuted.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Individuals are not free to question publicly basic political
 policies of the authorities. Martial law and the publi-
 cation law give the authorities the right to limit free-
 dom of speech and freedom of the press, both of which
 are guaranteed in the constitution (See Introduction
 and Section l.d). The authorities conduct post-publi-
 cation censorship and recall articles and publications
 that oppose "basic policy" or which are regarded as
 excessively critical of the leadership. They also
 censor foreign publications, but in recent years have
 lessened restrictions and allowed greater access to
 information on developments abroad, including reports on
 developments in the PRC.
 In the past publications critical of the authorities
 have been banned, and there are credible reports of
 independent newspaper owners being forced to sell out
 to officially sanctioned purchasers. A number of such
 outspoken publications were similarly dealt with this
 year as well, and several writers have been arrested
 on charges ranging from "sedition" to "propagandizing
 for the communists" and publishing unregistered publi-
 cations. Nevertheless, the one-year suspension on registra-
 tions for new magazines announced in 1978 was removed as
 scheduled on March 1, 1979, and a series of new magazines
 has been published. The two most prominent of these
 publications were banned in the aftermath of the
 "Kaohsiung Incident," a demonstration-turned-riot which
 was organized by the magazine Formosa.
 In late December, 1979 the popular oppositionist maga-
 zine The Eighties Monthly was suspended for a year
 after-it published in its seventh issue several car-
 toons depicting the ruling authorities as no less
 oppressive than the communist government in the People's
 Republic of China. Immediately after the ban, the pub-
 
 
 532
 lisher of The Eighties was given permission to put out
 a new magazine called The Asians. The publisher has
 decided, however, to postpone publication of the new
 journal because of the sensitive political situation.
 Freedom to practice religion is respected on Taiwan.
 The predominant religion is a combination of Buddhism,
 Taoism, and Confucianism. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. Some pseudo-Buddhist sects and
 Reverend Sun Myong Moon's Christian Unification Church have
 been banned.
 In 1977 the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (170,000
 members) issued a "Declaration of Human Rights." The
 church leadership reaffirmed its commitment to this
 declaration on its second anniversary in 1979. By call-
 ing for the creation of an "Independent Taiwan," the
 declaration has placed Taiwan's Presbyterians in direct
 opposition to the authorities' basic policy of the
 unity of China. The authorities view the manifesto as
 a highly political document which calls their very legi-
 timacy into question. In 1978 the authorities tried to
 block the reelection of one of the declaration's authors-
 as a moderator of the General Assembly (highest governing
 body) of the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan; and on some
 occasions Presbyterians seeking to travel abroad on
 church business have been denied exit permits.
 There have also been reports of various forms of
 pressure brought against other missionary groups who
 have been active in social work which the authorities
 consider to be unacceptable political activity.
 In early 1979 the authorities indicated they intended
 to legislate a new "Statute on Temples and Churches."
 The current law enacted in 1929 applies only to Buddhist
 and Taoist Temples and is not considered adequate for
 a society which also has various Christian and Moslem
 groups. While authorities said the new law would not
 curtail freedom of religion, the Presbyterians feared
 the law was aimed at them and would give the authorities
 considerable powers which could be used against the
 church. In response.to opposition from religious groups
 on Taiwan and criticism from abroad, the authorities
 indicated in October that because of "differing opin-
 ions" in various quarters the draft was being reviewed.-
 Recent news articles indicate that the authorities are
 preparing to resubmit a new draft law on the administra-
 tion of churches and temples, though there is no indi-
 cation of whether the offending sections will be deleted.
 The constitution provides for freedom of assembly.
 While assembly for nonpolitical purposes has generally
 been permitted, assembly for political purposes, except
 during election periods, has often been curtailed. Martial
 law, which gives a military commander. the right to stop or
 dismiss a meeting, and the law for the punishment of
 police offenses, which requires "groups of people" to
 
 
 533
 obtain approval for gathering in advance, have been
 used to ban or disperse public meetings by those sus-
 pected of dissident views. In one recent instance Taoyuan
 County Magistrate, Hsu Hsin-liang, was suspended from
 office for two years for, among other charges, partici-
 pating in an unauthorized demonstration in January to
 protest the arrest of Yu Teng-fa.  (See section l.d'
 While retaining the right to disapprove public gather-
 ings, until recently the authorities had demonstrated in-
 creasing tolerance by permitting public meetings of
 outspoken political activists making critical speeches.
 The December 10, 1979 "Kaohsiung Incident" is the most
 recent example of the authorities' restriction of freedom of
 assembly. The incident took place in the southern Taiwan
 port city of Kaohsiung. There a group of oppositionist
 activists who publish the popular monthly magazine, Formosa,
 planned a December 10, 1979 rally commemorating Inter-
 national Human Rights Day. These opposition figures had
 previously organized several similar outdoor rallies,
 though the number of demonstrators rarely exceeded
 5,000. The December 10 rally, however, was planned
 to include as many as 30,000 participants.
 As required by law, the rally organizers submitted an
 application for a demonstration permit to the Kaohsiung muni-
 cipal police in mid-November. About two weeks later the
 police declined to approve the permit on the grounds that
 public order would not be maintained with so large a
 number of demonstrators. The oppositionists, however,
 felt that the denial of a parade permit was politically
 motivated and designed to prevent the general public on
 on Taiwan from seeing evidence of public support for
 oppositionist policies. Because of this, the organizers
 went ahead with their rally in spite of lack of appro-
 val. The demonstrators, about 500 in number, broke
 through police lines and proceeded with a torchlight
 march which attracted several thousand onlookers. The
 police were later joined by military riot troops called in
 when the demonstration got out of hand. The demonstration
 broke up six hours after it began. Official sources
 reported that the violence resulted in one civilian
 injured and 182 police casualties; one press account
 immediately after the demonstration listed 47
 police and 92 civilian casualties, both "mild and ser-
 ious." Following the demonstration, the authorities
 began a general crackdown on the leadership of Formosa
 magazine which had organized it. A total of 65 people were
 arrested by military authorities and charged with the
 capital crime of "sedition." One of those arrested
 was the prominent Taiwanese legislator, Huang Hsin-chieh.
 During the sweep, a number of other were detained without
 without warrants in connection with the incident. Some
 were later released after serving short sentences for
 minor offenses. Formosa magazine, along with The Eighties
 Monthly, was suspended for a year though for reasons
 allegedly unconnected with the Kaohsiung demonstration.
 The arrests, and especially the serious charge of "sedi-
 tion" made against those arrested, have caused considerable
 
 
 534
 anxiety among Taiwanese overseas, who have charged that
 the arrests were politically motivated in an attempt
 to eliminate an influential part of the opposition
 in Taiwan.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 The constitution provides freedom of change of resi-
 dence. There is general freedom of internal travel in
 Taiwan except to sparsely populated mountainous areas,
 for which a police pass is required to control entry
 into secure areas and to protect the aborigines from
 exploitation.
 Travel abroad or emigration has become gradually freer,
 except to the People's Republic of China and other communist
 countries. Taiwan has recently announced that business-
 men will soon be permitted to travel to and do business
 directly with certain Eastern European countries.
 As Taiwan's economy has prospered, foreign exchange
 restrictions on travel have been relaxed and the number
 of people traveling abroad and living overseas has in-
 creased dramatically. In January 1979 authorities stopped
 discouraging travel specifically for tourism and began
 to issue passports endorsed for that purpose. Between
 January and October almost 150,000 such passports were
 issued. This new practice has been accomplished by
 some liberalization of passport regulations which led
 to further increases in travel abroad. For defense
 mobilization reasons the new tourist passport measures
 do not apply to servicemen or men between the ages of
 fifteen and thirty.
 There are credible reports of people who have been
 denied exit permits for security reasons or because
 they or their relatives abroad criticized the political
 establishment. A few foreigners have been denied entry
 visas on political grounds.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Reflecting the claim of the authorities on Taiwan to be
 the sole legal government of all China, there are a ser-
 ies of central entities over and above those which per-
 tain solely to the island of Taiwan. Among those are
 the National Assembly, which elects the President and
 Vice President, and the Legislative Yuan, which is the
 central legislature. There have been no general elections
 of these two bodies since 1948, the authorities taking
 the position that such elections cannot be held until
 they reestablish control over the Mainland. Beginning
 in 1969 "supplementary elections" for these central
 bodies have been held in order to choose additional
 officials from Taiwan and adjacent islands. These elec-
 tions, however, have not substantially altered their
 composition. In the 1978 supplementary elections for
 the Legislative Yuan, for example, only somewhat over
 10 percent of the seats still occupied by members
 were up for election.
 
 
 535
 Since 1950, democratic institutions have been es-
 tablished at the provincial and local levels and have
 functioned reasonably well. Universal suffrage exists
 for all citizens twenty years of age or over. Elections
 have been held regularly over the past two decades for
 all local (i.e., Taiwan Province) legislative offices.
 However, the Taiwan provincial governor and the mayors
 of the municipalities of Taipei City and, as of July 1,
 1979 Kaohsiung City are all appointed by the Central
 Authorities, which exercise considerably greater power
 than the local institutions.
 Despite the theoretical existence of two opposition
 parties, Taiwan has effectively a one-party political
 system. Candidates who oppose the Rulint Nationalist
 (Ruomintang or RMT) thus run as independents. Even
 though the majority of candidates elected are from the KMT,
 independent candidates have been increasingly successful
 in the recent past. In the 1977 elections for
 the Taiwan Provincial Assembly such candidates
 won about 30 percent of the seats. KMT candi-
 dates have generally benefitted from prominent
 media coverage and the limitations on civil
 and political rights which handicap opposition. Never-
 theless, during the campaign period of the 1978 "supple-
 mentary elections" speeches, rallies and to some extent
 organization by independent candidates was permitted
 to a greater degree than ever before.
 Although oppositionist activity expanded during 1979 and
 the Taiwan authorities appeared to have adopted a more
 moderate attitude, the December 10, 1979 "Kaohsiung
 Incident," and the subsequent arrests could reverse
 this improvement in the political climate.
 Following President Carter's December 15, 1978
 announcement on the normalization of U.S. relations
 with the People's Republic of China, President Chiang
 Ching-kuo, under martial law provisions, postponed the
 National Assembly and Legislative "supplementary elec-
 tions" scheduled for December 23. Taiwan authorities
 have said they will be rescheduled as soon as Taiwan's
 internal and external situation is considered stable, but
 probably not for twelve months after the termination of
 of the Mutual Defense Treaty with the U.S. on December 31,
 1979. Independent candidates generally supported the
 postponement of the elections.
 The locus of power on Taiwan is the Central Executive
 Branch, which is not subject to direct elections. While
 representation of native "Taiwanese" (descendants of Chinese
 who migrated from the Mainland a century or more ago and
 now constitute about 85 percent of the population) in
 legislative institutions, both local and central, has
 been increasing, Taiwanese have less representation
 in the powerful Executive Branch, which they say is
 dominated by "Mainlanders" (Chinese who came to Taiwan
 in 1949 and their descendants).  There have been recent
 
 
 536
 increases in the number of Taiwanese holding Executive
 Branch positions; including the Vice President, about one
 third of the Cabinet (including the Vice Premier, the
 Minister of Interior, the Minister of Communications, and
 three Ministers without Portfolio) and the Governor
 of Taiwan, among others, are all Taiwanese. Critics
 charge that non6 of these posts is really a key power
 position.
 There is no meaningful tradition of trade unionism on Taiwan,
 and labor unions do not exercise significant influence
 either in the economic or political sphere. While
 labor unions are permitted to organize, walkouts and
 strikes are prohibited under martial law. Collective
 bargaining, 'lthough provided for by legislation, does
 not exist on Taiwan.
 There are few laws that discriminate against women;
 those which do relate mostly to divorce issues and
 inheritance. Women have been active in politics
 and regulations governing elections make some provision
 for guaranteed minimal representation of women in local
 and central legislative institutions. However,
 the Confucian tradition permeates all levels of so-
 ciety and its strong anti-feminism has resulted in
 pervasive and ingrained social patterns that relegate
 women to a clearly subordinate role. Rapid
 industrialization and a gradual liberalizing trend
 throughout society are now changing the status of
 women. The percentage of women in institutions of higher
 learning has increased slightly over the last ten
 years, to approximately 39% during the 1978-1979 school
 year, about 39 percent were women. Women occupy prom-
 inent roles in such professions as business and pub-
 lishing. A fledgling "Women's Rights" movement is
 slowly growing. The authorities are suspicious of
 this movement both because it attacks some of the funda-
 mental tenets of Confucianism amd because they tend
 to see any group which is critical of the established
 order as "subversive."
 4. Attitudes and Record Regarding International and
 Nongovernment Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The authorities on Taiwan have cooperated with out-
 side investigations of human rights conditions.
 International organizations such as Amnesty Inter-
 national have visited Taiwan and met with officials there.
 In 1976 the Premier offered to allow a visiting U.S.
 Congressional Delegation to visit Taiwan prisons, but
 the invitation was declined.
 
 
