 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity is dominated by the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang
 or KMT) in what is essentially a one-party authoritarian system,
 despite a vocal opposition which has a wide range of popular
 support. The Taiwan authorities, who claim to be the government of
 all of China, maintain the full array of central political bodies
 originally established on the Chinese mainland under the 1948
 Constitution. In some ways these are vestigial, but supplemental
 elections and the resultant addition of new, younger members in
 recent years have increased their vitality, particularly that of
 the Legislative Yuan, the central legislative body, which is
 evolving into a forum for questioning policy though lacking power
 to change it. Throughout the past 34 years, Taiwan's authorities
 have promoted economic development while firmly controlling the
 political system to ensure stability. Taiwan's vibrant, largely
 free enterprise economy has been one of the fastest growing in the
 world in recent decades. Its per capita Gross National Product of
 over $2,500 ranks fourth highest in eastern Asia and is accompanied
 by high standards of education, health, and nutrition.
 A range of functioning democratic institutions from the village to
 the province level has been created in Taiwan; nevertheless,
 effective power remains at the central level in the hands of the
 small leadership group from mainland China who came to Taiwan after
 World War II. This aging elite runs the Nationalist Party, the
 military, and the executive bureaucracy. Political control is
 exercised through the security apparatus, which operates under
 martial law provisions enacted in 1949 and which the authorities
 justify as being to counter the threat of military action or
 subversion from mainland China. The majority of the population
 have little input into the political decisions affecting them.
 Political evolution has occurred on Taiwan, but it has not kept
 pace with economic development; human rights are publicly endorsed,
 but incompletely realized. Although tolerated, opposition activity
 is restricted. The expression and publication of opposition
 political views is controlled and the activities of outspoken
 oppositionists are monitored, both at home and, apparently,
 abroad. Native Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese who migrated from
 the mainland in the seventeenth and eighteenth century and who now
 constitute 85 percent of the population, dominate the private
 economy but are still underrepresented at the upper levels of the
 ruling elite. Dissatisfaction of many Taiwanese with mainlander
 domination has resulted in demands for more representative
 government and for policies that focus on the political development
 of the island itself. In the areas of education, foreign travel,
 and information, including access to news from abroad, the
 situation is more favorable, so that the felt need for political
 development is accentuated, particularly among the youth.
 In 1983 the dramatic human rights violations that have often marred
 Taiwan's record in the past were absent, and the slow trend toward
 human rights improvements continued. Although there are strict
 limits to what is acceptable, critics of the political system and
 its policies have some freedom to express their views. The
 authorities continue to recruit increasing numbers of qualified
 Taiwanese to fill important economic and political, military, and
 security posts, a process which should, over time, contribute to an
 increased share of political power by the Taiwanese. The
 expanding, prosperous, educated middle class displays an increasing
 willingness to pressure authorities about human rights issues.
 Although the unresolved conflict with the People's Republic of
 China (PRC) over Taiwan's future fuels local authorities' concerns
 and this, in turn, influences human rights practices, the outlook
 for continued improvement in human rights appears favorable.
 
 (756)
 
 
 757
 Elections of supplemental members of the Legislative Yuan were held
 in December 1983. While involving unfair ground rules, these
 elections did include a campaign in which there was substantial
 freedom of speech, were conducted without violence, allowed freedom
 of choice, and apparently were honestly tabulated. No winners were
 disqualified, even though at least one had made a number of
 statements normally considered 'seditious.' Candidates independent
 from or opposed to the ruling KMT received a substantial percentage
 of the vote but were hampered by restrictive campaign regulations,
 a law preventing the formation of opposition parties, unequal
 access to the mass media, and restrictions on the freedoms of
 speech and the press. In October, a high-level commission of the
 KMT rejected proposals to change the constitutional system so as to
 permit filling by appointments the vacancies in the top elective
 bodies, including the Legislative Yuan. If maintained, this
 decision would, over time, lead to a preponderance of
 Taiwan-elected members in these currently mainlander-dominated
 bodies.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 No killings for political reasons took place in Taiwan in 1983.
 The questionable circumstances surrounding the death in July 1981
 of Carnegie-Mellon professor Chen Wen-cheng and the murder in
 February 1980 of the family members of jailed oppositionist Lin
 Yi-hsiung remain unresolved.
 b. Disappearance
 In recent years, there have been no credible reports of persons
 being abducted or secretly arrested by the security services.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture. The Code of
 Criminal Procedure and the Military Trial Law state that an accused
 shall be 'frankly' examined but that no violence, threat,
 inducement, fraud, or other improper means shall be used. In
 practice, individual members of the police or security forces at
 times resort to physical violence in interrogating criminal
 suspects.
 The May 1982 death in police custody of a Taipei taxi driver, Wang
 Ying-hsien, focused public attention on the use of physical
 violence by police in interrogating criminal suspects. Although
 Wang's death was officially declared a suicide, five policemen were
 eventually brought to trial and sentenced to terms ranging from 16
 months to four and one-half years for illegally arresting Wang and
 causing him bodily harm. On July 4 the Taiwan High Court upheld
 the conviction. In August 1983 Wang's family agreed to accept the
 equivalent of $15,000 compensation from the authorities. However,
 Chao Chun-jung, the highest ranking of the convicted policemen,
 escaped abroad in September while waiting for the Supreme Court to
 hear his appeal, and in November the Supreme Court ordered a
 retrial of the five policemen, none of whom has yet spent any time
 behind bars.
 
 
 758
 Taiwan's civilian prisons are severely overcrowded. In June 1983
 the press reported that, according to a June 25, 1983, Ministry of
 Justice report, civilian prisons, built to accommodate 13,876
 prisoners, were holding 19,817 prisoners--or 5,941 over capacity.
 Because of this overcrowding, prisoners are forced to share cramped
 living quarters and have fewer opportunities forwork, exercise, and
 family visits. Even the opening of additional facilities capable
 of housing 3,874 inmates has not provided adequate space, since the
 prison population is increasing by an estimated 2,000 inmates per
 year. Local officials and observers estimate that up to 40 percent
 of all inmates are serving sentences for writing bad checks. The
 Ministry of Justice reports that it is studying proposals to allow
 these prisoners and others convicted of relatively minor offenses
 to pay fines and serve their terms outside of prison. If enacted,
 these proposals are expected to greatly alleviate the overcrowding
 problem.
 Conditions in the military prisons administered by the security
 police, where political prisoners are confined, are reportedly less
 crowded. Prisoners are said to receive the same food as soldiers
 and to have work and recreation opportunities.
 Conditions for the Kaohsiung-incident prisoners have reportedly
 improved since the time immediately following their imprisonment in
 1980. Eight defendants were convicted in military court and 33 in
 civilian court for their part in the December 1979 Kaohsiung Human
 Rights Day rally which degenerated into a confrontation between
 police and participants.  (Ten others, including Presbyterian
 leader Kao Chun-ming, were also tried in military court for aiding
 and abetting one of the Kaohsiung fugitives.) Relatives of the
 eight defendants convicted by military courts and incarcerated in
 military prisons claim that by and large these prisoners continue
 to be denied access to regular work programs and recreational
 activities, are prohibited certain amenities accorded other
 prisoners, and are isolated from each other. Although they agree
 that the prisoners are being provided sufficient food, relatives
 and their supporters say the health care is inadequate. Local
 authorities deny these charges, noting that curtailed activities
 and contact are aimed at protecting the prisoners from possible
 harm from other inmates; they further argue that medical care is
 the same for all prisoners.
 On October 4, 1983 authorities granted the request of Ms. Lin
 Wen-cheng for "conditional parole for health reasons.' Ms Lin was
 the first of the Kaohsiung prisoners tried in military courts to be
 released. Authorities rejected a similar request from another of
 the eight, Chang Chun-hung, in July 1983 on the grounds that his
 health condition did not warrant early release.
 There is no known discrimination in the treatment of prisoners
 because of class, race, sex, or religion.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Taiwan's 'habeas corpus' law requires that, following an
 individual's arrest, the arresting authorities notify in writing
 the individual and his designated relative or friend within 24
 hours of the reason for his arrest or detention. The Code of
 Criminal Procedure specifies that the authorities may detain an
 accused person for up to two months during investigation prior to
 the filing of a formal indictment, and for up to three months
 during trial. During the investigation phase, however, the
 prosecuting officer may apply to the court for one extension of two
 months. The period of detention may also be extended during the
 trial. In recent cases, including the Kaohsiung incident, the
 
 
 759
 authorities generally have followed these procedures, with
 exceptions occurring more frequently in the military court
 procedure.
 Since the July 1982 revisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
 suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer present during
 interrogation and to legal counsel during the investigation phase.
 In some cases, windows and even closed circuit televisions have
 been installed in police station interrogation rooms to permit
 lawyers (or family members) to view the interrogation without
 hearing the questioning. Lawyers are not permitted to provide
 legal counsel during police interrogation. Individuals arrested by
 security services do not have the right to have a lawyer present
 during interrogation. Furthermore, they do not have the right to
 legal counsel until after they have been formally indicted. Other
 revisions enacted in July 1982 augment police powers, permitting
 the police legally to arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect.
 of committing a crime for which the punishment would be five years
 or more in prison. Police power was further increased to allow
 police to call in suspects or witnesses for questioning without a
 formal summons. The authorities justify the new police powers by
 insisting that the revisions only legalize long-standing police
 practices. The legal establishment, the press, and many
 legislators have criticized these new police powers.
 Many minor crimes in Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute and
 punish offenders. This law sometimes has been used against
 political activists. The provisions of the statute empower the
 police to impose and carry out sentences of up to two-weeks
 imprisonment.
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. In their latest
 statement, issued at the end of 1975, they noted that there were
 254 persons in prison on sedition charges. The authorities define
 sedition as opposition to basic policy and include under that
 definition expressing Communist sympathies, espousing views
 contrary to the authorities' claim to represent all of China, and
 supporting an independent legal status for Taiwan.
 Some persons have been released and others arrested since 1975. In
 December 1982 the authorities disclosed that 92 prisoners convicted
 of sedition and related offenses were being held in the Green
 Island Military Prison. In its August 1983 issue iwhich the
 authorities banned) the opposition magazine Care published what it
 said were the complete lists of prisoners in the Green Island
 Military Prison and the Taiwan Garrison General Headquarters
 Reformatory at Tu Cheng. The article lists 74 prisoners on Green
 Island and 81 in TU Cheng. Most of these are convicted of
 sedition-related activities. Although current statistics have not
 been made available, observers believe that smaller groups of
 sedition prisoners are serving sentences in other prisons. In 1983
 nine Green Island prisoners serving life sentences were paroled.
 Seven of these had been in prison for over thirty years. As of
 October 1983 there were 13 prisoners who had been imprisoned on
 Green Island for more than 30 years for sedition. Many of them
 were reported to be in poor health.
 During 1983 authorities released seven of the 33 Kaohsiung-incident
 prisoners sentenced by civil courts on completion of their
 sentences, leaving 26 still in civilian prisons. With the
 exception of Lin Wen-cheng, those sentenced in military court are
 still in military confinement.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 49
 
 
 760
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 which do not incorporate trial by jury. Under a 1980
 judicialreorganization, district and high courts were shifted from
 the control of the executive branch to the judicial branch, thereby
 formally separating the courts from the prosecution function.
 Taiwan legal circles generally hold that the change has given the
 judiciary somewhat greater independence.
 Under martial law, which has been in effect in Taiwan since 1949,
 civilians who commit certain offenses, including sedition, may be
 tried in military courts.
 Authorities occasionally transfer *important" civilian cases
 (involving such crimes as homicide, kidnapping, and armed robbery)
 to the military courts. The authorities state that the military
 courts' swifter and generally more severe justice acts as a
 deterrent to potential criminals. Sentences meted out in the
 military courts are reviewed only within the Ministry of National
 Defense. Neither civil nor martial law specifically provides the
 defendant with protection from self-incrimination.
 Following the traditional Chinese pattern, in a typical criminal
 court case, parties and witnesses are interrogated by a single
 judge (in high court sessions by the chief judge) but not by a
 lawyer or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear witnesses or
 to consider evidence a party wishes to propose. Court cases are
 generally heard through several brief court sessions. In high
 court appellate proceedings new evidence may be introduced and the
 judge's review of district court judgments covers both fact and
 law. Individuals convicted in cases where the sentence exceeds
 three years have the inalienable right to review by the Supreme
 Court. Those tried in military court do not have this right. The
 Supreme Court reviews the law of the case, not the facts.
 Over one-half of all eligible cases are appealed and reviewed.
 Informed observers characterize the judiciary as basically
 independent, although susceptible to pressure from authorities, on
 whose good will they are dependent for their appointment and their
 careers.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The daily life of an individual not actively engaged in politics is
 subject to only minor interference by authorities. Authorities
 impose limits on the use of the Taiwanese dialect (the mother
 tongue of most inhabitants on Taiwan) on television and radio.
 Romanized Taiwanese versions of the Bible are also not permitted.
 Authorities do not interfere with basic family matters such as the
 right to marry or have children as one chooses. Membership in the
 Kuomintang, the dominant political organization, is a matter of
 free choice. Access to institutions of higher education is based
 entirely on academic achievement.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant is not common
 practice in Taiwan but does occur on occasion. The Code of
 Criminal Procedure generally requires that searches be authorized
 by warrants, signed by a prosecutor or, during a trial, by a
 judge. However, exceptions to this rule have substantially
 increased following the July 1982 revision of the Code to provide
 for warrantless arrests under certain circumstances. When making
 
 
 761
 such arrests, police may also search persons or property without
 prior authority.
 Other types of violations of privacy, such as the monitoring of
 telephone calls, are widely believed to exist. Authorities
 denythat they monitor telephone conversations. In June 1982 the
 authorities justified regular 'selective postal checks' as
 necessary to intercept parcel bombs and illegal correspondence with
 the People's Republic of China.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech. Current martial law
 restrictions, however, limit this right. Individuals are not free
 to question publicly the regime's basic political policy of
 anti-Communism or its claim to sovereignty over all of China.
 Those who are at odds with the KMT regime maintain that the
 security authorities monitor political expression, both in Taiwan
 and overseas.
 Persons who speak favorably of Communism or the People's Republic
 of China, or persons (usually native Taiwanese) who question the
 legitimacy of Taiwan's mainlander authorities by suggesting support
 for 'Taiwan independence", self-determination, or greater power to
 the Taiwan population, can expect to be warned. If they do not
 desist, they are likely to be charged with sedition and tried in a
 military court. Nevertheless, self-determination and a variety of
 other sensitive topics relating to the legitimacy or competence of
 the authorities were debated during the 1983 election campaign, and
 such topics were also raised in the Legislative Yuan itself.
 In January 1983 Yang Huan-hsi, an elderly Taiwanese with U.S.
 resident status, was arrested upon entering Taiwan and charged with
 carrying out espionage for the People's Republic of China. On
 January 28 the Taiwan Garrison General Headquarters released copies
 of two 'incriminating' letters, allegedly written by the accused
 and claimed by the authorities to have been intercepted by KMT
 agents in the People's Republic of China. Although judged guilty
 of collusion with the Beijing regime--an act normally punishable
 with a lengthy prison term--Yang was given the comparatively light
 sentence of three years of 'rehabilitation' and allowed to return
 to the U.S. in September 1983. This comparatively lenient
 treatment was probably due, at least in part, to the vigorous
 reaction to Yang's arrest by U.S. congressional and administration
 officials.
 One other sedition case was reported by the press in 1983. On
 January 3 a military court convicted a Japanese national, Mrs.
 Maeda Mitsui, of sedition and ordered her to be deported. The
 court sentenced two Taiwanese codefendants to three years in prison
 for carrying out seditious activities for the allegedly pro-PRC
 "Taiwan Independence Movement.' One of the defendants, Ko Szu-pin,
 who reportedly did not 'engage in any acts which endangered
 society,' was released under 'supervision' while the other, Lu
 Hsiu-yi, formerly a professor of political science, is serving his
 term.
 All daily newspapers are owned by official agencies, the KMT, or
 high KMT officials; however, there are also a variety of smaller,
 privately-owned, and independent publishers. Control over the
 daily newspapers is often exercised indirectly, through guidance
 from the local authorities' information office and the Kuomintang
 
 
 762
 and through restrictions of the number of newspaper licenses, which
 have been frozen for a number of years. In addition, reporters and
 editors exercise a fair degree of self-censorship. Nevertheless,
 newspapers have expanded their coverage of sensitive subjects, such
 as news from mainland China and controversial views of U.S.
 citizens of Chinese origin.
 Censorship of publications is carried out through provisions of the
 publications law which empower the security police to seize or ban
 printed material that "confuses public opinion and affects the
 morale of the public and the armed forces.' As interpreted by the
 authorities, this covers a wide range of topics including articles
 that discuss possible leadership changes, question the legitimacy
 of the KMT, criticize Taiwan's foreign policy or merely reveal
 behind-the-scenes news that is potentially embarrassing to the
 leadership. The limits of acceptable political criticism are not
 clear-cut. Even periodicals which are cautious in their selection
 of articles for publication have been banned from time to time.
 Oppositionist publishers generally know when an issue of their
 magazine is courting a ban. They select their material cautiously
 in the sense that they carefully tread along the outer limits of
 .acceptable" journalism. These publishers are usually aware when
 an article is straying off into no-man's land but are willing to
 court banning in order to test the limits. Authorities banned the
 August issue of Care magazine and the October 25 issue of Root
 magazine. In each case, the magazine's publisher both prominent
 oppositionists thought that, although the material in question was
 politically sensitive, it would be acceptable.
 There are political, and even sometimes financial, rewards for
 being banned. A ban of a single issue guarantees a sellout, if the
 ban occurs after the magazine has been distributed. Or, if the
 magazine is seized at the printers, the publisher sometimes
 arranges a 'pirate" version of the offensive magazine. Magazines
 banned for longer periods usually come out under a different name.
 Since 1982, the authorities have allowed an increase in the number
 of domestic political opinion magazines, many of which support
 non-KMT politicians and criticize the ruling party. However, in
 1983 the authorities banned five magazines for one year and also
 banned 15 individual issues of these or other magazines. These
 high numbers have prompted publishing and political circles, which
 view such bans as a tactic of harassment, to call for clearer
 publishing guidelines. These guidelines have not been and are
 unlikely to be established.
 In one recent case which received newspaper publicity, it was
 established that confiscation of a magazine issue cost the
 publisher $7,500--a not inconsiderable sum for publishers of
 opposition magazines. However, even banning a periodical for one
 year does not necessarily silence that particular source of
 criticism. Most publishers have several titles registered with the
 authorities so that, in practice, publications so banned are
 quickly resurrected under another title.
 The authorities occasionally ban books. Although the writings of
 pre-World War II Chinese pro-Communist authors are formally banned,
 a few famous works are obtainable. Despite the fact that the
 authorities partially or wholly own all three of the island's three
 television stations, competition among them has led to an expansion
 of their coverage of mainland and other sensitive international
 news.
 
 
 763
 Foreign publications are available but are also subject to some
 censorship. Sometimes pages carrying articles offensive to the
 authorities are removed or blacked out before they are
 distributed. Some foreign publications are available through
 subscription only and are not allowed to be sold on newsstands.
 From time to time an entire issue will be withheld from
 distribution, either through the newsstands or the mail.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the Constitution. In
 practice, permits are generally issued for nonpolitical assembly,
 but public assembly for political purposes, except during
 elections, is often prevented under martial law provisions. During
 the authorized 15-day campaign period preceding the 1983 elections,
 all candidates were allowed to hold rallies, although these were
 closely monitored by the authorities. The second half of the
 15-day period is even more closely controlled, with rallies limited
 to those in which both KMT and opposition candidates participate
 and which are sponsored by the organization that supervises
 elections.
 The revised election and recall law, passed by the Legislative Yuan
 on June 28, 1983, is more stringent in its regulation of campaign
 activities. It prohibits holding campaign rallies in any form
 prior to the authorized 15-day period. The law also outlaws joint
 rallies of two or more candidates during the campaign period,
 except for officially sponsored rallies. Opposition politicians
 have been sharply and openly critical of these new measures,
 claiming they hinder their ability to reach the electorate.
 While a recent survey conducted by National Taiwan University
 reports that 22.5 percent of the labor force holds union
 membership, labor unions do not exercise significant influence
 either in the economic or political sphere. Walkouts and strikes
 are prohibited under martial law. Collective bargaining, although
 provided for by legislation, does not in fact exist. Individual
 factory unions do, however, play an intermediary role in
 facilitating the resolution of disputes. It is generally believed
 that labor unions--especially general federations--have close ties
 with the ruling KMT. Taiwan's largest federation, the Chinese
 Federation of Labor, maintains contact with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees freedom to practice religion. Most
 Taiwan inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism,
 animism, or a combination of beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no state or favored religion.
 Some marginal Buddhist sects and Sun Myong Moon's Unification
 Church have been banned in response. to parents' complaints that
 these groups were exercising a corrupting influence on Taiwan youth.
 Kaohsiung County authorities have been involved since 1980 in a
 dispute with a denomination called the New Testament Church over
 the right of church members to settle on a tract of land in
 southern Taiwan near Kaohsiung. After the authorities evicted
 church officials and followers from a tract of leased public land,
 the church accused them of engaging in religious persecution.
 Kaohsiung county authorities contend that the church violated the
 terms of a 10-year lease, thereby making it necessary to evict
 them. District and high courts have upheld this position. It
 appears that church officials will appeal the case to the Supreme
 Court.
 
 
 764
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity, most notably the predominantly Taiwanese
 Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (approximately 190,000 members). The
 church has frequently reaffirmed its 1977 declaration calling for
 Taiwan's transformation into a "new and independent country," which
 represents the most overt questioning by any group of Taiwan's
 mainlander-controlled political institutions. In 1980 the church's
 General Secretary, Reverend Kao Chun-ming, and several other
 ranking Presbyterians were convicted in a military court of
 harboring the prime Kaohsiung-incident defendant, Shih Ming-te.
 Although tensions between the church and the authorities have.
 relaxed somewhat recently, the authorities have warned church
 members to avoid involvement in opposition political efforts or
 Taiwan independence activities.
 On June 3 the Ministry of the Interior, proposed, for the third
 time since 1979, a 'law for the protection of religions.'
 According to the draft, temples and churches and related
 associations would have been required to register with the Ministry
 of Interior. Registration would include lists of total assets and
 members' names, thus providing the authorities a means of
 controlling the activities of individuals and even of threatening
 them if their religious activities were judged unacceptable for
 some reason. The draft law stipulated that appointments of church
 officers, including pastors, be reviewed and subject to approval by
 the Ministry of the Interior. Those convicted of "national
 security' violations, under criminal indictment, or bankrupt would
 be ineligible to serve. Religious doctrines and the content of all
 evangelical programs would have to conform with 'basic national
 policy." The draft required foreign religious missions to submit
 proof of 'registration' with the Ministry of Interior as well as a
 .pledge" not to engage in nonreligious activities. The Ministry of
 Interior brief in support of the law briefly stated that the draft
 law aims at upholding constitutional guarantees of religious
 freedom and maintained that the law's regulatory powers are
 necessary to ensure that religiousactivities and views do not
 contradict 'basic national policy' or jeopardize Taiwan's 'national
 security.' Taiwan's religious leaders saw the proposed law as an
 attempt by the authorities to determine the policy and practices of
 religious organizations. In response to strong opposition from all
 church groups in Taiwan, authorities shelved the draft law on
 August 11. However, on September 27 the authorities announced
 plans to resubmit a revised draft law at an unspecified date.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence.
 Except for military and other restricted areas, there is general
 freedom of internal travel in Taiwan. Emigration and private
 travel abroad have become freer since 1979. In 1982 640,669
 Taiwanese went abroad for tourism--an 11 percent increase above
 1981. After the last calendar day of the year in which they turn
 15, males may not leave Taiwan until completion of compulsory
 military service. Beginning in 1980, businessmen have been
 permitted to travel to, and do business directly with, certain
 eastern European countries. Although travel to the PRC is
 officially prohibited, the authorities overlook some personal and
 commercial travel to the mainland by people with clear
 anti-Communist credentials who do not publicize their travels.
 
 
 765
 Permission to leave Taiwan may be delayed or withheld for security
 reasons, because of pending legal proceedings, or because the
 individuals involved have criticized the political establishment.
 However, a number of persons critical of the KMT have in recent
 years been permitted to leave Taiwan.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right of repatriation of
 those Chinese holding Taiwan passports who normally reside in
 Taiwan. Those issued "overseas Chinese" passports do not
 automatically have the right to travel to Taiwan for permanent
 residence. In principle, Taiwan will not authorize the entry of
 Chinese between the ages of 16 and 75, even those who have long.
 held Taiwan passports, if they have lived in Communist-controlled
 areas within the preceding five years.
 Since 1976 an estimated 5,183 ethnic Chinese from Vietnam have been
 resettled in Taiwan, and 1,912 small boat refugees have been
 granted temporary refuge. Refugees are not forced to return to
 their countries of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Effective political power resides with the aging KMT leadership
 which fled from the mainland in 1949.
 Reflecting their claim to be the government of all of China, the
 KMT authorities maintain not only a provincial and local government
 system but also an array of political bodies representing the
 pre-1949 national government. The locus of power on Taiwan is the
 presidency and the Exexutive Yuan (central executive branch).
 While representation in local and central legislative bodies of
 native Taiwanese (who comprise 85 percent of the population) and of
 second generation mainlanders has been increasing, these groups are
 underrepresented in the Executive Yuan, where the aging KMT leaders
 who came from the mainland after 1945 hold most of the powerful
 positions. Although Taiwanese hold a number of prestigious
 positions, such as the Vice President, Vice Premier, ministerial
 posts, the governor of Taiwan, and the mayors of Taipei and
 Kaohsiung, their power individually and even their influence
 collectively are limited.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are the
 National Assembly, which convenes every six years to elect the
 President and Vice President, and the Legislative Yuan, which is
 the central legislature. There have been no general elections to
 these two bodies since 1948, when members were elected representing
 all the mainland provinces as well as Taiwan. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats and to
 form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Beginning in 1969,
 periodic "supplementary elections* have been held to choose
 additional representatives from Taiwan and the adjacent islands.
 Nevertheless, only 1,064 out of 2,691 seats of the National
 Assembly are currently filled, including 75 supplemental members.
 Although the supplemental legislators comprise only 71 of the
 Legislative Yuan's current membership of 372 (compared to an
 original membership of 760), they constitute the most active group
 in the Legislative Yuan due in part to the advanced age and
 incapacity of those elected 35 years ago on the mainland. They
 conduct vigorous public and sometimes hostile interpellations of
 central executive leaders, including cabinet ministers.
 
 
 766
 In 1983 as in previous years, the nature of the elective bodies
 sparked calls by both opposition and KMT politicians, academicians,
 journalists, and legal experts to amend the "temporary provisions'
 to make the National Assembly and the Legislative Yuan more
 representative--thereby giving Taiwanese a greater political voice
 and making the institutions more democratic. In the Legislative
 Yuan the situation also sparked proposals to have the 1984 National
 Assembly authorize filling the vacant seats by appointment.
 On October 9 the KMT announced that the party had decided not to
 take any such action. Informed observers from political and
 academic circles have hailed the decision as an important step
 toward making the political system more representative, since
 nonreplacement of vacancies in mainland seats results in the
 supplemental members' seats representing a growing proportion of
 the active membership of elective bodies.
 Democratic institutions have been in operation at the provincial
 and local levels since 1950 although the central authorities
 appoint the Taiwan provincial governor and the mayors of Taipei and
 Kaohsiung. With these exeptions, elections have been held
 regularly for provincial, county, and municipal offices, with
 Kuomintang candidates competing with independents and
 oppositionists. Universal suffrage exists for all citizens 20
 years of age and over. Voter turnout--which is voluntary--runs
 over 70 percent.
 One party, the Kuomintang (KMT), or Nationalist Party, dominates
 Taiwan, as it has since 1949, although two tiny nominally
 independent parties which came from the mainland with the KMT also
 exist. KMT structure and control mechanisms are based on early
 Soviet models, but its operations are considerably more flexible.
 Party organs exist at all levels of the ruling structure, as well
 as in the military, schools, and other public institutions. While
 people who arrived from the mainland after 1945 dominate the
 highest echelons of the KMT, native-born Taiwanese predominate at
 the local levels and are playing an increasingly important role in
 the middle and higher levels. Native Taiwanese comprise more than
 60 per cent of the KMT's total membership of approximately 2
 million. 88 per cent of the KMT candidates for the December 3,
 1983, Legislative Yuan elections were native-born Taiwanese.
 New political parties are forbidden under martial law. Candidates
 who oppose the Kuomintang in elections run as "nonparty"
 candidates. Although not permitted to form a party, the non-KMT
 politicians are organized as a party in some respects. Even though
 the large majority of candidates elected are from the Kuomintang,
 other candidates, who are nearly all Taiwanese, have been
 increasingly successful vote getters in the recent past. The
 oppositionists now occupy five National Assembly seats and six
 Legislative Yuan seats. Their popular influence exceeds their
 limited numbers, since these elective bodies provide one of the few
 forums for the expression of opposition views, often on sensitive
 subjects.
 In the December 3 supplemental Legislative Yuan elections, the KMT
 won slightly over two-thirds of the votes and 61 seats, while
 ,non-partisans,' independents, and KMT candidates without party
 endorsements won the remaining one-third of the votes and 10 seats.
 Oppositionists face several disadvantages in the election process.
 The election law enacted in 1980 forbids the participation of
 students, formerly a prime source of campaign workers for them. It
 limits the campaign period to 15 days before an election and allows
 
 
 767
 only officially sponsored rallies in the last few days before an
 election. All candidates, KMT and opposition, participate together
 in these rallies.
 The revised election and recall law enacted on June 28, 1983
 abolished joint rallies and precampaign period 'get togethers,"
 both campaign tactics favored by oppositionists, who in fact
 attempted to circumvent this restriction in the 1983 campaign. The
 law also places ceilings on campaign expenditures and
 contributionsand restricts the quantity of campaign paraphernalia.
 Oppositionists argue that these provisions further hinder their
 ability to compete with Kuomintang candidates, whoalready enjoy. the
 advantage of a well-financed, well-organized party apparatus. They
 assert that bans on private joint rallies and precampaign "get
 togethers" hinder contact with the electorate. On the other hand,
 if strictly enforced, newly adopted provisions penalizing
 candidates for vote buying and bribery can redound to the
 oppositionists' favor. Nevertheless, the net effect in 1983 of the
 various regulations was to handicap opposition candidates.
 Press self-censorship handicaps the chances of non-KMT candidates
 in elections, as it leads the daily press to give less publicity to
 the views of the oppositionists. Periodicals which have emerged as
 an alternative method for publicizing the views of opposition
 candidates are frequently scrutinized, censored, and occasionally
 banned by the authorities but have not been totally silenced in
 recent years.
 The 1983 revisions to the election law also changed the method of
 indirect election of members to the Control Yuan (which exercises
 powers of impeachment, censure and audit). That body now has two
 non-party representatives out of 74 total members. The new method
 stipulates that electors (members of the Provincial Assembly and
 various county and city councils) must cast their two mandatory
 votes for two separate candidates--thereby making it impossible for
 opposition members to pool their limited votes behind one
 candidate. Supporters of the revision maintain that it will
 eliminate vote buying in the Control Yuan elections since election
 bribery would be too costly and complicated.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Taiwan authorities on occasion have permitted representatives
 of international human rights organizations, as well as private
 individuals interested in human rights issues, to visit Taiwan and
 meet with appropriate officials.
 The strongly anti-Communist Chinese Human Rights Association, which
 in the past has focused its attention primarily on human rights
 questions in the People's Republic of China, has recently devoted
 more of its efforts to human rights in Taiwan. In the past, the
 association has sponsored tours for lawmakers and legal experts to
 examine Taiwan's crowded prisons and has established a free legal
 aid service for Taipei residents. In 1983, the Association
 strongly urged the authorities to release all remaining prisoners
 at the Green Island Military Prison who have served 30-year
 sentences. The Association's efforts in this regard helped obtain
 the release of nine prisoners. The Association also released a
 report on the attitudes of local inhabitants toward the human
 rights situation in Taiwan.
 
 
 768
 In its 1983 report, covering 1982, Amnesty International states
 that it had appealed in 1982 for the release of 90 "prisoners of
 conscience* and for the retrial of others convicted of sedition.
 It also expressed concern about allegations of torture. Freedom
 House, in its 1983 report, rates Taiwan "partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Taiwan has established a healthy economy, one of the strongest in
 Asia. The opportunity to participate in economic benefits is
 available to the population as a whole without discrimination. The
 per capita Gross National Product (GNP) in 1982 was over $2,500.
 Unemployment in 1982 averaged 2.14 percent.
 Riding the upswing in the worldwide economic recovery, Taiwan's GNP
 was projected to grow six to seven percent in 1983. The prospects
 for continuing economic well-being are favorable as the authorities
 attempt to shift the focus of Taiwan's export-based economy from
 labor-intensive to high-technology industries.
 The authorities' fiscal 1983 budget allocated more than 30 percent
 of expenditures to education, science, culture, and social
 programs. Taiwan has developed an effective public health program
 and can boast a system of health clinics throughout the island that
 comprises more than 11,000 medical care facilities. In 1982,
 Taiwan had 7.0 practicing physicians, 8.3 practicing nurses, and 29
 hospital beds for every 10,000 persons. Health promotion programs
 include maternal and child disease control and environmental
 sanitation. The infant mortality rate for 1983 was 21 per 1,000
 live births. Major epidemic disease has been reduced, although
 limited outbreaks still occur. Seventy-eight per cent of the
 population has access to safe water. Because of these public
 health programs and a generally good diet (1981 per capita average
 daily caloric intake was 2,629--the highest in Asia), life
 expectancy at birth has increased to 70 years for men and nearly 75
 years for women.
 Taiwan's population in 1983 stood at 18,810,000. Birth control
 efforts have been successful in bringing the birth rate in 1983
 down to 1.80. This has been crucial in alleviating population
 pressures on the island, where the population density per square
 kilometer exceeds 500--one of the highest in the world. Taiwan,
 however, believes the birth rate must be lowered even more if
 severe population pressures are to be attenuated.
 Education is one of the main concerns of the authorities and the
 population in general.  Statistics show that 90.2 percent of the
 population over age six are literate. Of school-age children, 99.7
 percent are currently in school, and free compulsory education is
 avail-abl-e through junior high school. About 60 per cent of junior
 high school graduates pass examinations and enter three-year senior
 high and vocational school programs. Entry into Taiwan's extensive
 system of higher education is also based on competitive exams, and
 departures from a strict merit system are almost nonexistent. In
 1982, more than 20 per cent of college-age youth were enrolled as
 undergraduate or graduate students.
 The few laws which discriminate against women relate mostly to
 divorce issues and inheritance. In recent years women have taken
 an increasingly active role in local politics and have been
 increasingly successful votegetters. Regulations governing
 elections provide for guaranteed minimal representation of women in
 local and central legislative institutions. Enrollment of women in
 
 
 769
 institutions of higher learning has increased 97 percent since 1952
 to 411,000 in 1982. The number of women employed in ministries and
 other official agencies has increased by 40 percent since 1973. A
 fledgling women's rights movement is slowly growing.
 Taiwan's only non-ethnic Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established in
 Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These aboriginal
 *mountain people" comprise slightly more than one percent of
 Taiwan's total population. There is no official policy of
 discrimination against them, but the barriers created by de facto
 cultural and economic discrimination are frequently difficult to
 surmount. Special designated seats in both central and provincial
 legislative bodies are reserved for aborigine representatives, and
 the authorities have instituted a number of social programs to ease
 their transition into the dominant society.
 
 
 770
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TAIWAN
 1981     1982    1983
 o......................o. .. .... ................ ..........
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......... ......    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  0.0   0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............O...  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B*.FOOD FOR PEACE .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  11-TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP;        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER.* ........... 0.0          0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...........-....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ........ ....     ..  0.0    0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 ................................................ . . ....
 OTHER US LOANS ............   69.5    224.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......      69.5    224.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 ............. ......................................... ....
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1944-83
 o ............................................ . .o......
 TOTAL ........    17.4    38.9      0.0    52311
 IBRO               0.0     0.0      0.0    309.8
 IFC                0.0     0.0      0.0      9's
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0     13j1
 IOB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0     92.4
 AFDB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP              17.4     18.7     0.0     62.4
 OTHER-UN           0.0     20.2     0.0     35.6
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
