TAIWAN
This year's report on Taiwan presents a generally accurate portrait of a rapidly evolving country. The report expresses warranted enthusiasm concerning Taiwan's continuing movement toward a pluralistic, democratic environment. The report should be commended for its improved coverage of aborigines, Taiwan's indigenous peoples. But like last year, the report underplays the continuing plight of foreign laborers, the powerftil influence wielded by the ruling party, the Kuomintang (KMT), through its vast business holdings, and the extent of strife between the KMT and the major opposition party, the Democratic People's Party (DPP).
The report's discussion, new this year, of people with disabilities shrewdly delves behind bureaucratic structures to pinpoint the gap in the actual services available. However, the report fails to distinguish between types of disabilities, leaving it unclear to what extent people with physical disabilities, developmental disabilities or mental ilkiess are treated differently by law or in practice. The report also fails to review due process procedures for involuntary civil commitment of people with mental ilkiess or mental retardation, and the conditions of confinement for persons who are involuntarily committed or otherwise in the care of the state.
As in previous years, the report omits any mention of Taiwan's continuing use of the death penalty. The number of executions carried out in the first nine months of 1993 was down to 13, as compared to 31 during the corresponding period of 1992. However, a July 1993 report by Amnesty Intemational finds that prisoners on death row are treated inhumanely, spending months in special cells with their feet shackled continuously in.metal ankle cuffs attached to chains. These shackles cause constant physical pain and discomfort. The constant use of shackles violates the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Treatment of Prisoners, Articles 33 and 34, and article 7 of the ICCPR. Amnesty Intemational also criticized the "harvesting" of organs fi:om executed prisoners for transplants. This practice inevitably involves a close relationship between medical personnel and executioners, which in effect leads to participation of medical personnel in the execution process. It is also difficult to ascertain whether the condemned prisoners' consent is fi"eely given in the circumstances of execution.
The report mentions in passing that two detainees were beaten to death at separate military reformatories during the past two years. However, it should have described in more detail the beating death of 29-year-old army conscript Chen Shi-wei in July 1993. Chen Shi-wei had previously been imprisoned for refusing to complete his full term of military service due to conscientiously held beliefs. According to an August 1993 report by Amnesty Intemational, Chen reported to his unit on Ilan in July some 36 hours later than permitted. As punishment he was
352
_TAIWAN
assigned to a training unit whose officers were ordered to single him out for punishment. He was handcuffed within the unit, and apparently beaten over a period of more than two days. Chen died from intracerebral bleeding and severe brain damage. His injuries were consistent with the results of beatings with a flexible plastic hose used to inflict corporal punishment in disciplinary army units. Amnesty International also reported that officers of the unit refused to provide a satisfactory account of the circumstances of Chen's death, denying that anything illegal had occurred. As a result of the death, the unit's commanding officer was relieved of his duties, and the officers of the unit have been suspended pending completion of an investigation by military authorities. However, no report of this investigation had been published as of August 1993, and at that time no one had been charged with Chen's murder.
Like its predecessor, the 1993 report fails to note that inequitable working conditions are afforded to legal, as well as illegal, foreign workers. The exact number of foreign workers is not certain. According to one government survey, at least 50,000 foreign laborers work in Taiwan, only half of them legally. Mainland Chinese account for nearly 26,000 illegal workers. According to the cabinet-level Council of Labor Affairs, at the end of June 1993 there were 34,478 legal foreign workers. Church groups, meanwhile, estimate that there are at least 30,000 illegal immigrant workers in the country. Labor activists, and the Catholic Bishops' Commission for Social Development, have complained that some foreign laborers have been imprisoned for up to two years without charges for overstaying their visas. Moreover, the monthly wage for a legal foreign worker is set by the labor council at half of what a local worker earns. According to the Catholic group's survey, foreign laborers have often been forced to work long hours without overtime pay. In addition, government regulations prohibit foreign workers from marrying or living with their spouses while they work in Taiwan. In light of these inequities, the report should also have noted that the government plans to establish a special industrial zone exclusively for foreign workers in offshore Penghu County, that will concentrate manufacturing companies with serious labor shortages in one specialized industrial park.
The report properly describes continuing complaints about telephone wiretaps and other acts of interference with personal privacy by the National Security Bureau. It should also have mentioned the disclosure by the Deputy Minister of Defense that several thousand records of former political prisoners were destroyed on July 5, 1993, following the Ministry of Defense's decision to close the reformatory where they were stored after martial law was lifted. The reformatory had housed prisoners who were sentenced to reformatory education; it was also used for political prisoners convicted of sedition to complete their final two years of political indoctrination. Former prisoners claim that the government desfroyed the records to eliminate proof of its past wrongdoing.
353
CRITIQUE 1993
Soft-pedaling the continuing strife between the KMT and the opposition DPP, the report fails to mention the fierce legislative batde in June 1993 over the budget of a nuclear power plant, which led to 37 people being injured and hospitalized after a demonstration in front of the Legislative Yuan. The DPP claimed that the KMT had brought in organized gangsters to intimidate the DPP and other opponents of nuclear power. It also claimed that pro-nuclear legislator Shih Tai-sheng had hired professional thugs to attack supporters of DPP legislator Huang Chao-hui with iron bars and clubs. This claim is consistent with widespread allegations that the KMT has increasingly close ties to figures in Taiwan's criminal underworld. The KMT, meanwhile, blamed the DPP for the confrontation, which involved two rival groups of 300 to 400 people each.
In the same vein, the report pays insufficient attention to the murder of opposition leader Huang Ching-tsai in Chiayi County. Huang had launched an investigation into complaints that a fishermen's association was corruptly administering govemment fiiel subsidies for fishermen. Opposition leaders claim that the income from illegal extra fees has been used to frmd support for local rural councils and other major posts in county govemment that support the KMT. Residents of Chiayi County have asserted that in investigating Huang's death, the police came under heavy pressure from local officials to keep the scope of the investigation as narrow as possible.
Similarly, the report appears to downplay continued govemment action to quell dissent.. It gives short shrift, for example, to the libel prosecution and conviction of three prominent professors and a church leader. According to Taiwan Communique, the four men led a campaign to boycott the United Daily News, a major newspaper with close ties to the KMT that supports the unification of Taiwan with mainland China. Professor Lin Shan-tien, an expert in criminal law, was sentenced to five months imprisonment. The Reverend Yang Chi-shou, secretary-general of the Presbyterian Church, Dr. Li Cheng-yuan of the Medical Professionals Association and Professor Lin Feng-ching of the Taiwan Professor's Association were each sentenced to 50 days of forced labor.
Although the KMT's extensive business interests are mentioned in the report, more detail is warranted in light of their importance in maintaining the power of the ruling party. The report should have noted that the total worth of the KMT's business holdings amount to an estimated US $15 billion. This wealth derives from some 70 major properties and corporations, including a monopoly of the electronic news media through holdings in three major broadcasting corporations. The report should also have referred to a series of scandals in 1993 in which officials closely linked to the KMT were charged with corruption or fraud. The cases included that of the China Pefroleum Company, in which 15 officials were indicted on charges of accepting kickbacks of some million NT $ 150 (US $6
354
_TAIWAN
million), in return for granting a contract to build a waste-water treatment plant for the company. One of those indicted was a son of former premier Yen Chia-4cen.
In its otherwise detailed discussion of the KMT's control of television and radio, the report omits the fact that the KMT set up a company in 1993 to purchase existing illegal cable companies. In competition with the KMT-owned company is a family business with extremely close ties to the ruling party. According to a commentary in The Economist, smaller operators — whether independent or linked to the opposition — will fmd it difficult to compete freely.
In discussing the KMT's continuing control of television, the report alludes to one television journalist's belief that she is no more than a puppet of the ruling party. It should have recognized that such sentiments are widespread. In a survey by the magazine Global Views Monthly, 33 of 35 television journalists interviewed said they believed that President Lee Teng-Hui intervened in determining the content of broadcasts. The report should have noted that the president names the heads of the three television channels.
Although, as the report notes, the print media are relatively open and competitive, it fails to mention the claim by critics that the press, too, is closely tied to the KMT. Most significant publications are controlled by either the United Daily News group or the China Times group, both of which have close ties to the KMT.
As in previous years, the report does not deal with the issue of legal restrictions on ties with the People's Republic of China, which is a significant barometer of the general environment for human rights in Taiwan. The statute governing individual ties with the mainland has now been revised to allow mainland Chinese to inherit the properly of relatives in Taiwan under certain conditions. Other revisions provide for handicapped veterans to continue receiving pensions even if they resettle on the mainland. At the same time, however, the law was also revised to provide for increased penalties for those who assist mainland stowaways and to allow detainees to be put to work during their detention.
355
CRITIQUE 1993
