 TAIWAN
 Taiwan remains under authoritarian'one-party control
 operating under martial law provisions which authorities
 state are necessary owing to the continued confrontation
 with the People's Republic of China. In 1980 the human
 rights situati6n in Taiwan showed a mixed trend. Taiwan
 continued its impressive record of the past thirty years
 in attending to the people's economic rights. The trend
 of advances in respect to internationally recognized
 political rights by the Taiwan authorities was marred by
 the handling of the confrontation with elements of the
 political opposition. A December 1979 rally which turned
 into a riot in Kaohsiung, referred to as the Kaohsiung
 incident, led to the arrest and conviction for alleged
 sedition of several important oppositionist leaders who
 received prison sentences of from 12 to 14 years, with one
 drawing a life sentence.  Thirty-three other rally organiz-
 er were charged with lesser crimes. Of those, 29 were
 eventually convicted; in the appeals process, 22 sentences
 were reduced. There were allegations of physical abuse
 during the investigation of the incident and some defendents
 claimed that their confessions had been forced. Subsequent-
 ly, the authorities placed increased restrictions on freedom
 of the press and speech.
 "Supplemental Elections" for the National Assembly and the
 Legislative Yuan, which had been postponed following the
 termination of diplomatic relations by the U.S. on
 January 1, 1979, were rescheduled for December 6, 1980.
 Only a small percentage of the total seats in those repre-
 sentative bodies are filled through current elections. Of
 the 146 seats open for election in 1980, 120 were filled by
 candidates of the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) Party, while the
 balance we t to independent (or "non-party") candidates
 including tree who are relatives of the convicted sedition
 defendants in the Kaohsiung incident case.
 1.   Respect~for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Taiwan law specifically proscribes the use of torture.
 Article 98 of the code of criminal procedure states that
 "an accused shall be frankly examined, but no violence,
 threat, inducement, fraud or other improper means shall
 be used." This same language is repeated in Article 109
 of the military trial law. The Taiwan authorities flatly
 deny that torture is now used. The Chiefs of the Taiwan
 Garrison General Headquarters and the Ministry of Legal
 Affairs' Bureau of Investigation in July 1980 declared
 that while some detainees nay have been subjected to
 torture in the past, torture has not been used in any case
 in the past ten years.
 Before the Kaohsiung incident and the subsequent arrests
 and trials, allegations of torture were extremely rare.
 The Amnesty International Report for 1980 -- which did
 not deal with the Kaohsiung Incident cases in detail --
 listed several instances in which prisoners were subjected
 to psychological and physical pressure during interroga-
 tion to obtain confessions. The Amnesty Report said
 prisoners claimed methods used to obtain confessions
 included deprivation of sleep, threats, fraud, intimida-
 tion and violence. Han Lih-wu, President of Taiwan's
 human rights committee, denied these charges, calling this
 report contrary to the facts.
 
 
 584
 Despite the provisions of law and the authorities' specific
 denials, in 1980 there was testimony of severe treatment used
 to obtain confessions. The three sets of Kaohsiung incident
 trials and subsequent appeals brought to the surface claims
 of severe mistreatment by the two groups of eight and
 ten defendants and one group of 33 defendants tried respec-
 tively in military and civilian courts. The defendants'
 testimony of mistreatment centered on the investiqative
 phase of the trial when they claimed they were forced to
 make confessions. During the trials, the overwhelminq
 majority of the accused testified they were subjected to one
 or more forms of mistreatment during interrogation at secu-
 rity services detention centers or police stations, including
 denial of sleep, being forced to stand for long periods of
 time, solitary confinement (especially for the more important
 defendants), and being forced to eat "salted rice" which
 caused severe bloating and constipation. A small number of
 defendants gave testimony that they were beaten by their
 interrogators.
 The courts summarily rejected the defendants's testimony of
 severe mistreatment. For example, the Taipei District
 Court, which tried the 33 defendants not charqed with
 sedition, accepted statements from the Ministry of Legal
 Affairs' Investigation Bureau and the Taiwan Garrison
 General Headquarters that no physical abuse had been used.
 Since the authorities claimed there had been no abuse in
 the cases, the question of publicly reprimanding or punish-
 ing the interrogators did not arise. No evidence was
 produced before the courts hoever, that a complete and
 impartial investiqation of the testimony alleqinq
 mistreatment had been conducted as the defense lawyers
 said customarily was required.
 b.    Cruel, Inhuman or Deqradinq Treatment or
 Punishment
 The death penalty is imposed infrequently with imprison-
 ment beinq the usual form of punishment for both political
 and non-political offenders. There have been no reports of
 summary executions since the 1950's. Executions are carried
 out by the firinq squad.
 Prison conditions reportedly have improved in recent
 years. For the most part, prisoners are reported to re-
 ceive adequate nourishnert and can accept money from
 family members to purchase extra food. An Amnesty Inter-
 national Report on -aiwan observed that medical treatment
 is inadequate, but that prisoners are permitted a daily
 exercise period. In September 19R0, a Taiwan newspaper
 reported on the prison conditions of seven of the
 "Kaohsiunq Eiqht," sayinq they were receivinq good medi-
 cal treatment, were permitted exercise and readinq
 materials, and shared cells with two or three other
 nrisoners. While most reports claim that conditions for
 these prisoners are not had, in some cases adequate food
 and medical treatment apparently has been withheld from
 certain prisoners, and follow-on check-ups for a prisoner
 previously operated on for cancer have been interrupted.
 Most prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment for sedition
 --  includinq one member of the Kaohsiunq niqht -- have
 been sent to the  aiwan Garrison General Headquarters prison
 on Green Island. Conditions there are reported to be
 harsher with poor medical care, isolation of prisoners and
 less access to family members' visits.
 There is no discrimination  in the treatment of prisoners
 because of class, race, sex or reliqion.
 
 
 585
 c.   Disappearances
 In recent years, there have been no convincing reports
 of persons being abducted or secretly arrested by the
 security services. Arrests generally are announced shortly
 after they occur. This procedure was followed during the
 roundup of Kaohsiung incident suspects, whose arrests were
 widely reported in the press. In addition, in accordance
 with the law of habeas corpus, the authorities sent letters
 to immediate relatives of the detained, informing them of
 the arrest and place of detention.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Taiwan's law of habeas corpus (Article 8 of the
 constitution) requires that, following an individual's
 arrest, the arresting authorities must notify in writing
 the individual and his designated relative or friend of
 the reason for his arrest or detention. Notification must
 be given within 24 hours after the arrest takes place.
 Article 108 of the code of criminal procedure specifies
 that the authorities may not detain an accused for more
 than two months during investigation prior to the filing
 of the formal indictment, or three months during trial.
 During the investigation phase, however, the procurator
 (the prosecuting officer) may apply to the court for one
 extension of two months. The period of detention may also
 be extended during the time the accused is on trial. In
 recent cases -- including the Kaohsiung incident -- the
 authorities generally have followed the requirements of
 the above provisions, with exceptions occurring more
 frequently in the military system.
 The Taiwan authorities deny conducting arbitrary arrests
 and holding political prisoners. They stated that, at
 the end of 1975, there were 254 persons in prison on
 sedition charges. Some persons have been released and
 others arrested since that time, but this is the most
 recent figure made public by the authorities. Exile
 groups charge the total is at least several times that
 number. Many of those detained can be considered political
 prisoners, although some were convicted of acts of violence.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan have been handled under the
 law for the punishment of police offenses which empowers
 the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute and
 punish offenders. This law sometimes has been used against
 political activists. The press reported in October 1980
 that the National Police Administration had completed a
 draft law on social peace which would transfer authority
 to try such cases from the police to a newly established
 court. Since some of the penalities available to the
 police were severe and there was no recognized appeal
 procedure, the new system appears designed to limit
 abuses of police power. The proof will lie in the law's
 implementation, when and if it goes into effect.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Effective July 1, 1980, Taiwan reorganized its judiciary,
 with the District and High Courts shifted from the
 Executive Yuan's control to that of the Judicial Yuan.
 The change was aimed at formally separating the courts
 from the prosecution function, both of which fell under
 the Ministry of Justice in the old system. This appears
 to be an improvement but there is skepticism that the
 judiciary will be permitted to follow a truly independent
 course.
 
 
 586
 It is notable, however, that in the first signifi-
 cant case with political overtones which took place
 following the shift of these courts to the Judicial
 Yuan, the Taiwan High Court overturned two convictions
 and reduced the sentences of 22 others in the Kaohsiung
 31 case.
 Under martial law, civilians who commit certain crimes
 nay be tried in military court. Among these crimes is
 sedition. opposition to basic policy (such as express-
 ing views contrary to the authorities' claim to represent
 all China, advocating accommodation with the People's
 Republic of China, and supporting an independent legal
 status for Taiwan) is considered seditious and thus
 punishable under martial law. In October 1980, the
 Executive Yuan aqain beqan authorizinq the transfer of
 certain "important" civilian criminal cases (those
 involving such crimes as homicide, illegal possession
 of weapons, and robbery) to military court. The
 authorities stated that the rationale for this move was
 that the military courts' swifter and generally more
 severe justice would act as a deterrent to potential
 criminals, thereby serving to reduce Taiwan's rising
 crime rate. In October 1980 four persons accused of
 armed robbery, with one murder resulting, were tried,
 found guilty and condemned to death after a half-day
 trial in military court.
 In neither civil nor martial law provides the defendant
 with protection from self-incrimination. He can be inter-
 rogated at length. The defendant nay be detained during
 the investigation phase and has a right to counsel only
 after the procurator has filed an indictment following the
 investigation.
 The riqht to a lawyer is guaranteed in the code of
 criminal procedure. The code directs that a public defender
 be provided free of charge in cases where the defendant is
 indiqent and the charges bring sentences of three or more
 years. There is, however, no guarantee of free access in
 private to counsel.
 In the civilian court system, the accused may appeal a
 conviction to a high court and, depending on the serious-
 ness of the crime, to the Supreme Court. Those convicted
 of most crimes carrying a maximum penalty of three years or
 less may appeal only once and there is the possibility that
 a sentence could be increased by an appeals court.
 Defendants convicted by a military court may file one appeal
 to the Ministry of National Defense's Court of Appellate
 Review. While appeals to the higher military court in some
 cases result in reduced sentences, lower military court
 convictions usually have not been reversed.
 The court cases which attracted the most public attention
 in 1980 were those connected with the Kaohsiunq incident.
 Eight defendants were tried in military court on
 sedition charges, while a civilian court tried another
 group of 33 (and convicted 31) on lesser charges.
 In a related case, ten persons including the Secretary-
 General of the Taiwan Presbyterian Church were charged
 in military court with harboring one of the Kaohsiung
 Eight wanted for sedition. In the Kaohsiung-related
 trials, those convicted received prison sentences ranging
 from 12 years to life.
 
 
 587
 The trials were open to the foreign and local press as well
 as to international observers -- a move that was almost
 without precedent in the case of the courts-martial.
 Criticisms of the first two trials included the failure by
 the courts to subpoena certain witnesses requested by the
 defense, and the courts' acceptance of the defendants'
 allegedly coerced confessions as the major piece of incri-
 minating evidence. Another criticism made of the trial of
 the eight concerned the inability of defense lawyers to
 attend most of the pre-trial hearings. During this phase of
 the hearings, in which the defendants confirmed their confes-
 sions (which they later repudiated during the trial), they
 were represented by a public defender who knew little of the
 specifics of the case.
 The convictions and sentences of the Kaohsiung eight and the
 ten defendants charged with harboring a sedition suspect were
 all affirmed by military appeals courts. As mentioned above,
 however, civilian courts did overturn two convictions and
 reduced the sentences for 22 on appeal in the case of the
 Kaohsiunq 31.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Physical invasion of the home is not a common practice
 in Taiwan. Article 128 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
 requires that searches be authorized by warrants signed by
 a procurator during the investigation of a crime and by
 a judge during trial. The procedure is normally, but not
 always, followed. Allegations of other types of violations
 of the home, such as electronic surveillance, have not been
 verified, but are widely believed io exist.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 In three decades, Taiwan has progressed from a predomi-
 nantly agricultural to an industrially-based society; in
 1980 farming accounted for only about 21% of total manpower.
 Per capita gross national product has risen dramatically from
 $154 in 1952 to a projected   $2200 in 1980. The majority
 of Taiwan's population now lives at the middle income level
 and has access to a wide range of consumer products. In 1979,
 of every 100 households, 59 owned color television sets, 41
 owned black and white television sets, 90 owned refrigerators,
 60 owned washing machines, 41 had telephones, and 70 owned
 motorcycles.
 This record of economic progress continued into 1980. Faced
 with increased prices for imports (particularly petroleum)
 and a recession in its major export market (the United
 States), however, Taiwan's GNP grew only at about 6.5% in
 1980, well below the 1969-1979 average annual rate of 10
 percent. Increased petroleum prices helped boost the
 inflation rate (as measured in consumer prices) to about
 17.4 percent in 1980. Taiwan's unemployment remained remark-
 ably low (1.58 percent in mid-1980), and many employers com-
 plained of a labor shortage. Notwithstanding a picture less
 favorable in 1980 than in 1979, Taiwan's economic performance
 remains impressive.
 
 
 588
 
 Taiwan has established an excellent record of fostering
 the economic rights of its people. Public policies have
 helped promote growth accompanied by a narrowing of the
 qap between the rich and the poor. In terms of income dis-
 tribution, Taiwan society is extraordinarily egalitarian.
 Average income of the top 20% on the income scale is only
 about four tines greater than the average of the bottom
 20%. Tax policy is designed to alleviate the direct tax
 burden on lower iocome groups by emphasizing the collec-
 tion of import tariffs and sumptuary taxes while maintain-
 ing a high degree of progressiveness in the personal income
 tax structure. In 1980, the Taiwan authorities enacted a
 social relief law which is designed to assist lower income
 qroups.
 In the fiscal 1981 budget for all levels of public admini-
 stration the authorities devoted 18.4 percent ($1.96 billion)
 to education, science, and cultural programs and 12.8 percent
 ($1.36 billion) to social affairs. Expenditures on con-
 struction and communication projects (including development
 of economic and social infrastructure) accounted for 24
 percent of the total or $2.6 billion.
 Article 15 of the constitution guarantees Taiwan's
 people the right to own private property. There are some
 limitations on this right, including a general prohibition
 under the terns of the 1949 land reform program against
 holding more than 7.5 acres of wet farmland or 15 acres of
 dry farmland. In the ten-year period from 1969 to 1978 the
 number of farm families owning their own land rose to 83
 percent from 79 percent.   According to official statistics,
 more than 70 percent of families owned their own homes in
 1979.
 Taiwan's low unemployement rate reflects great employment
 opportunities for the population. In mid-1980, average
 monthly wages for employees in the manufacturing sector
 stood at $247, almost double the 1976 level. Rising real
 wages have meant a higher standard of living, although
 in 1980 wages were not able to keep pace with inflation.
 Notwithstanding rising wages and full employment, the
 authorities recognize additional measures are required to
 protect workers, especially in the area of working
 conditions. In some industries, conditions are dangerous
 and hazardous to the health of the workers and increasingly
 unacceptable given Taiwan's standard of living. To provide
 better protection for workers, the authorities currently
 are drafting a new labor law which is due to be completed
 in 1981.
 Taiwan has been very successful in meeting the right
 of its population to a standard of living that is adequate
 for health and well-being. The life expectancy of the
 people on Taiwan is 69 years for men and 74 for women.
 The infant mortality rate is 11.3 per thousand live births.
 Taiwan has developed an effective public health program and
 a system of health stations throughout the island. According
 to 1979 statistics, for every ten thousand persons, Taiwan
 has 6.6 physicians, 6.4 nurses, and 21 hospital beds.
 Health promotion programs include maternal and child health,
 family planning, dental health, communicable disease control
 and environmental sanitation. Thanks to Taiwan's public
 health programs, major epidemic diseases have been for
 the most part eradicated. In addition to access to good
 health care facilities, the people on Taiwan enjoy a good
 diet. In 1979, estimated per capita intake of calories
 reached 2,845, while per capita protein intake rose to 78.7
 grams. Both were up significantly from the level of 30 years
 ago.
 
 
 589
 In the area of housing, the Taiwan authorities have
 included major expenditures for public housinq under a
 1976-1982 development plan. Construction of public
 housing units will help alleviate congested housing condi-
 tions which have resulted from rapid urbanization in
 Taiwan's major cities.   In 1980, the authorities also
 began a program to assist individuals in buying homes; the
 intent is to offset the effects of rising property values.
 Although some persons continue to live in substandard or
 slum conditions, the situation has greatly improved, and
 most people can now afford adequate housing.
 The right to education is one of the main concerns of the
 authorities and the population in general. Statistics show
 that 89.3 percent of the population over 6 is literate.
 About 4.5 million people, or 26 percent of the population,
 are currently in school. Free compulsory education is
 available through junior high school. About 60 percent of
 junior high school graduates pass examinations and enter
 three-year senior high and vocational school programs.
 Entry into Taiwan's extensive system of higher education is
 also based on competitive exam, and departures from a strict-
 ly merit system are almost non-existent. In 1979, about 20.5
 percent of the college-aged youth were enrolled as under-
 graduate or graduate students.
 In general, the enjoyment of economic rights is available to
 the population as a whole without discrimination. Corrup-
 tion, while it exists in the form of abuse of position and
 connections, has not interfered with meeting economic needs.
 Women are becoming an increasingly important part of the
 workforce. However, in terms of wages and advancement,
 women still lag behind their male counterparts. As in many
 societies, gaps exist between conditions in the cities and
 the countryside, but the authorities are attempting to
 reduce these disparities.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Article 11 of the constitution guarantees the freedoms of
 speech and the press. The authorities effectively limit
 these rights, however, through the enforcement of martial
 law provisions. Individuals are not free to question public-
 ly basic political policies of the authorities.
 The Taiwan authorities use seizure and suspension to deal
 with publications that oppose "basic policy" and which are
 regarded as excessively critical of the leadership. The main
 targets of censorship in 1980 were articles relatinq to the
 Kaohsiung incident and to Taiwan's relations with the People's
 Republic of China.
 After permitting extensive reporting in the newspapers of
 the Kaohsiung eight trial, the authorities instituted a
 clamp-down on further debate. They gave approval for
 oppositionist editors of The Eighties magazine (which was
 banned alonq with Formosa in December 1979) to publish
 two successor periodicals -- The Asian (February 1980) and
 the Current (August 1980). Both magazines were suspended,
 the ratter after only one issue. In the case of another
 oppositionist periodical, the Bell Drum Tower, the authorities
 
 
 590
 in August confiscated the first issue as it was being bound
 by the printer because the magazine's special section on
 the Kaohsiung incident would have 'confused public opinion."
 This action was an apparent violation of the publications
 law which prohibits pre-censorship. These bannings left
 Taiwan with no real oppositionist publication of any kind.
 Opposition publications were not the only ones suspended,
 however. In August the authorities paired the suspension
 of the Current with the suspension of the Gust -- an extreme,
 chauvinlisF-pulication which had engaged in--triolic per-
 sonal attacks on oppositionists and even on certain KMT
 members whom it believed too liberal. When Newsweek touched
 the sensitive subjects of the Kaohsiung incident- and Taiwan/
 PRC relations, the authorities banned without explanation
 the April 23 and September 29 issues in which the offending
 articles appeared. Some issues of the International Herald
 Tribune have been censored with black ink or simply not
 delivered. The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong has
 been banned becaiuse-it7iuses the Pinyin 'omanization system
 (used by the PRC) in spelling Taiwan names.
 Freedom to practice religion is guaranteed by Article 13 of
 the constitution.' Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere to
 Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, Animism or a combination of
 two or more of them. Other religions include Christianity
 and Islam. Some psuedo-Buddhist sects and Reverend Sun
 Myong Moon's Christian Unification church have been banned.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion,
 the authorities have brought pressure to bear against
 religious organizations which extend their interpretation
 of religion to what the authorities regard as unacceptable
 political activity. For example, in 1977 the Presbyterian
 church in Taiwan (179,000 members) issued a declaration of
 human rights, to which the church leadership reaffirmed
 its commitment in 1979. By calling for the creation of
 a "new and independent Taiwan," the declaration has placed
 Taiwan's Presbyterians in direct opposition to the
 authorities' basic policy of the unity of China. The
 authorities view the declaration as a highly political
 document which calls their very legitimacy into question.
 In 1979, the authorities tried to block the reelection of
 one of the declaration's authors as moderator of the
 General Assembly, the Taiwan Presbyterian church's hiqh-
 est governing body. In 1980, the dispute cane to a head
 when the Church's Secretary-General, Reverend Kao Chun-
 ming, and several other Presbyterians were convicted in
 military court for harborinq Kaohsiung eight defendant
 Shih Ming-teh.  1hile admitting to assisting Shih, Kao
 denied seditious intent; he declared his religious
 vocation precluded his betraying someone who had sought
 help and permitted him only to advise Shih to give himself
 up. Since the Reverend Rao's conviction, the Presbyterians
 have complained of further harassment.
 In early 1979, the authorities indicated they in-
 tended to legislate a new statute on temples and churches.
 in response to opposition from religious groups
 on Taiwan and criticism from abroad, the authorities
 indicated in October 1979 that, because of "differing
 opinions" in various quarters, the draft was being
 reviewed. Although the authorities reportedly intended
 to submit a new draft law on churches and temples, there
 has been little recent discussion of this issue.
 
 
 591
 Article 14 of the constitution provides for freedom
 of assembly. While assembly for nonpolitical purposes
 generally has not been a problem, assembly for political
 purposes, except during election periods, has often been
 curtailed. Occasionally it has also been restricted during
 elections. Since the Kaohsiung ncident, no opposition
 group has attempted to hold a rally.
 Supplementary elections for the National Assembly
 and the Legislative Yuan were held December 6, 1980.
 During the 15-day campaign period preceding the ballot-
 ing, all candidates, including oppositionists, were able
 to hold rallies. Those rallies, however, were closely
 regulated by the authorities under the election and recall
 law passed in 1980.
 There is no tradition of trade unionism in Taiwan, and labor
 unions do not exercise significant influence either in the
 economic or political sphere. While labor unions are permitt-
 ed to organize, walkouts and strikes are prohibited under
 martial law. Collective bargaininq, although provided for
 by legislation, does not exist in Taiwan. The new labor
 relations law will not address union activities.
 b.   Freedom of Movement within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitution provides for the freedom to
 change residence. There is general freedom of
 internal travel in Taiwan except to military areas and
 to sparsely populated mountainous areas, for which
 police passes are required in order to control entry
 into secure areas and to protect the aborigines from
 exploitation. Travel abroad and emigration have
 become gradually freer, except to the People's Republic
 of China and some other communist countries. In 1980,
 Taiwan announced that businessmen are permitted to
 travel to and do business directly with certain eastern
 European countries. There are credible reports of people
 who have been denied exit permits for security reasons or
 because they or their relatives abroad criticized the
 political establishment. Some Presbyterian leaders
 for example, have been prevented from attendinq church
 meetings overseas. On occasion, foreigners, including
 Overseas Chinese, have been denied entry visas or
 been deported on political qrounds.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right
 of repatriation of Chinese holding Taiwan passports
 who reside in Taiwan. Those issued "Overseas Chinese"
 passports for the most part do not have the right to
 come to Taiwan for permanent residence. In principle,
 Taiwan will not authorize the entry of Chinese, many
 of whom have long held Taiwan passports, if they
 have lived in communist-controlled areas within the
 preceding five years. Exceptions to this rule frequently
 are made, however, for instance for those fleeing the
 mainland who are considered by the authorities to be
 communist defectors and called freedom fighters.
 
 
 592
 
 Taiwan has developed a small program of assistance
 to Indochinese refugees. According to data compiled by
 the Free China Relief Society, Taiwan has granted
 permanent resettlement to 9,985 Indochinese refugees in
 the past three years. Most of these refugees are ethnic
 Chinese, many of whom departed Vietnam directly from
 Saigon on charter flights arranged through the Inter-
 national Red Cross. Taiwan also has offered temporary
 asylum to 1,511 "boat people" and has established a special
 camp in the Penghu Islands to assist them. Taiwan has
 pledged to provide temporary resettlement to all "boat
 people" rescued on the high seas by Taiwan vessels. Taiwan
 has provided substantial amounts of rice (valued at $13
 million) to Southeast Asian countries with large refugee
 populations,and has donated $500,000 to the International
 Rescue Committee for use in its refugee program.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Reflecting the claim of the authorities on Taiwan to be the
 government of all of China, there is a group of central
 political bodies over and above those which pertain solely to
 the island of Taiwan. The focus of power on Taiwan is the
 presidency and the Central Executive Branch, which are not
 subject to direct election. While representation of native
 "Taiwanese" (descendants of Chinese who migrated from
 the mainland a century or more ago and now constitute
 about 85 percent of the population) in local and central
 legislative bodies has been increasing, Taiwanese are under-
 represented in the powerful Executive Branch, in which
 persons from the mainland provinces hold the most powerful
 positions. There have been recent increases in the number of
 Taiwanese holding executive branch positions however.
 The vice president, about one third of the cabinet (including
 the vice premier, the minister of interior, the minister of
 communications, and three ministers without portfolio) and
 the governor of Taiwan, among others, are Taiwanese. Critics
 point out, however, that their power and influence, both
 individually and collectively, are limited.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the National Assembly, which elects the president and vice
 president, and the Legislative Yuan, which is the central
 leqislature. There have been no general elections of these
 two bodies since 1948, the authorities taking the position
 that such elections cannot be held until they reestablish
 control over the mainland. Beginninq in 1969, "supplementary
 elections" for these central bodies have been held
 to choose additional officials from Taiwan and adjacent
 islands. Through these supplementary elections, the
 most recent of which were held December 6, 1980, the
 authorities have increased the membership in the two
 bodies with the effect, in the Legislative Yuan, for
 example, of raising the proportion of total seats open
 for periodic election from 10 percent to 17 percent.
 Given the advanced age of the members elected on the
 mainland in 1948, members elected on Taiwan will now
 probably constitute a majority of those able regularly
 to attend Legislative Yuan sessions.
 
 
 593
 Since 1950, democratic institutions have been esta-
 blished-at the provincial and local levels and have
 functioned reasonably well. Universal suffrage exists
 for all citizens twenty years of age or over. Elections
 have been held regularly over the past two decades for
 local (i.e., Taiwan Province) legislative offices.
 The Taiwan provincial governor and the mayors of the
 two municipalities, Taipei and Kaohsiung, however are
 appointed by the central authorities, which in
 any case exercise considerably greater power than the
 local institutions.
 Despite the existence of two small, nominal opposition
 parties, Taiwan is effectively a one-party system.
 Candidates who oppose the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, or
 KMT) run as independents or "non-party" candidates. Even
 though the large majority of candidates elected are from
 the KHT, independent candidates have increasingly been
 successful in the recent past. There are restrictions
 placed on the civil and political rights of KMT opponents,
 e.g. limitations on free speech, assembly and political
 organization. The press on Taiwan gives great prominence to
 KHT candidates but tends to give little or no publicity to
 the views and positions of the independents. The independents
 in 1980 faced disadvantages in that there were in effect no
 public ati6ns  daily or periodical, which would ensure that
 their views reached the electorate.
 Another factor in the December 1980 elections is that
 several prominent oppositionists who probably would have
 been candidates had been convicted for their roles in
 the Kaohsiung incident. Nonetheless, relatives of three
 of the Kaohsiung eight defendants were elected on "non-
 party" platforms December 6. One received the largest
 number of votes for any candidate in any race.
 There are few laws that discriminate against women; those
 which do relate mostly to divorce issues and inheritance.
 Women have been active in politics, and regulations governing
 elections make some provision for guaranteed minimal
 representation of womein.local and central legislative
 institutions. Rapid industriaX~zation, anc a gradual libera-
 lizing trend throughout society have served to improse. the
 status of women. The percentage of women in institutions
 of higher learning has increased slightly over the past
 ten years, to approximately 39 percent during the 1978-1979
 school year. Women now occupy.prominent roles in such
 professions as business and publishing. A fledgling women's
 rights movement is slowly growing. The authorities, however,
 are suspicious of this movement both because it attacks some
 of the fundamental tenets of traditional Chinese social
 order and because they tend to see any group which is
 critical of the established order as subversive.
 
 
 594
 4.    Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-governmental Investigation
 of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The leadership on Taiwan has permitted limited
 cooperation with outside organizations investigating
 human rights conditions. Representatives of inter-
 national organizations have visited Taiwan and met
 with appropriate officials there. For example, in
 March 1980 an American human rights delegation led
 by Ramsey Clark made a ten-day visit to Taiwan,
 during which time its members were given the opportunity
 to meet with oppositionist, KMT and military
 figures and to tour the prison facility at Green
 Island. In addition, the authorities permitted repre-
 sentatives of Amnesty International, the International
 League for Human Rights, and the World Alliance of Reformed
 Churches to attend the sedition trial of the Kaohsiung
 Eight. Although the authorities have permitted such
 visits, they do not hesitate to attack international
 human rights organizations when the latter make what
 the authorities consider to be unfavorable accusations.
 These visits have had a modest effect in sensitizing many
 in Taiwan to the impact abroad of actions taken in Taiwan;
 some contend that was a factor in the decision to give
 "relatively lenient" sentences to the Kaohsiung prisoners.
 
 
 595
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 TAIWAN
 1978     1979      1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.5
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.0      0.5
 A.AID .   .........             0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTSN.........S..          0.0      0.0      000
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 S.FOOD FOR PEACEE...           0.0      0.0      0.5
 LOANS............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL,.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,...,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .,.o          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.5
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.,...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS.........*...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI .,.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPSS.o *          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTALo..         24.1      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .........          23.5      0.0      0.0
 GRANTSN............          0.6      0.0      010
 A.MAP GRANTS .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS...o         23.5      0.0      00
 C.INTL MILED.TRNG ..o          0.6      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         24.1      0.0      0.5
 LOANSo..............        23.5      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.6      0.0      0.5
 OTHER US LOANS..........       239.4    520.     66.7
 EX-IM BANK LOANS...          239.4    520.7     66.7
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980      1946-G0
 TOTAL.........     0.2       0.1     15.2    466.7
 IBRD                0.2      0.0      0.0    309.e
 IFC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      9.8
 IDA                 0.0      0.0      0.0     13.1
 IDB                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                 0.0      0.0      0.0     92.4
 AFDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                0.0      0.1      8.2     26.2
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      7.0     15.4
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 596
