 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity is dominated by the Nationalist Party
 (Kuomintang or KMT) in an essentially one-party authoritarian
 system. A vocal opposition exists, however, and enjoys a wide
 range of popular support, as well as some freedom of
 expression. The Taiwan authorities, who claim to be the
 government of all of China, maintain the full array of central
 political bodies originally established on the China mainland
 under the 1948 Constitution. In recent years, supplemental
 elections bringing in younger members have increased the
 vitality of these somewhat vestigial organs. The Legislative
 Yuan, the central legislative body, is evolving into a forum
 for questioning policy but still lacks power to change it.
 The small and aging leadership group whose members came to
 Taiwan from the China mainland after World War II runs the
 KMT, the military, the security apparatus, and the executive
 bureaucracy. Political control is exercised through these
 bodies under a Constitution whose major democratic provisions
 have been circumscribed by the martial law provisions enacted
 in 1949. The authorities justify martial law as necessary to
 counter the threat of military action or subversion from the
 People's Republic of China (PRC). Although the people of
 Taiwan enjoy considerable influence in local level
 decisionmaking, they have little input into the major
 political decisions affecting them.
 Throughout the past 36 years, the Taiwan authorities have
 promoted economic development while firmly controlling the
 political system to ensure stability. Although now feeling,
 the impact of the global economic downturn, Taiwan's largely
 free enterprise economy in recent decades has been one of the
 fastest growing in the world. Taiwan's per capita gross
 national product (GNP) of over $3,067 ranks fourth highest in
 East Asia and is accompanied by high standards of education,
 health, and nutrition.
 Political evolution has occurred on Taiwan, but it has not
 kept pace with economic development. Human rights are
 publicly endorsed but incompletely realized. Although
 tolerated, opposition activity is restricted. The expression
 and publication of political views are controlled, and
 opposition activities are monitored, both at home and abroad.
 The confrontation over the issue of press freedom that flared
 in 1984, when proliferating opposition publications printed a
 rash of articles on traditionally sensitive topics, continued
 in 1985. Native Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese who
 migrated from the mainland primarily in the 17th and 18th
 centuries, dominate the private economy. They now constitute
 85 percent of the population but are still underrepresented at
 the upper levels of the ruling elite. The authorities
 continue gradually to recruit increasing numbers of Taiwanese
 to fill important economic, political, military, and security
 posts.
 Notwithstanding the slow trend in recent years toward
 improvement, human rights practices in Taiwan in 1985 charted
 an uneven course. The rights of the work force increased
 significantly as enforcement provisions of the new Labor
 Standards Law went into effect. A revised Civil Code now
 affords women greater rights and protection in disputed areas
 of marriage and divorce. Also, the authorities admitted the
 involvement of some of their senior military intelligence
 officials in the October 1984 murder in California of a U.S.
 
 
 754
 TAIWAN
 citizen of Chinese origin, but they maintain that the crime
 was committed by individuals acting without the knowledge or
 authorization of high-level authorities. Three military
 intelligence officers and two gangsters were convicted in
 military and civil courts, respectively, and have begun
 serving their prison sentences.
 Dissatisfaction of many in Taiwan with mainlander domination
 has, resulted in .demands for more representative government.
 The-increasing prevalence of higher education, foreign travel,
 and access to news from abroad has accentuated the felt need
 for political development, particularly among the youth. An
 expanding, prosperous, and educated middle class displays a
 growing willingness to pressure the authorities about human
 rights issues.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of any killings for political reasons in
 Taiwan in 1985.
 The Taiwan authorities maintain that their highest levels had
 no connection with the October 1984 murder of U.S. citizen
 Henry Liu in Daly City, California, and insist that the Liu
 murder was an act of a few misled individuals in official
 positions. Earlier, when investigation of the Liu murder
 revealed that high-ranking military intelligence officers were
 directly involved, the authorities suspended the head of the
 Intelligence Bureau of the Ministry of National Defense
 (IBMND), vice Admiral Wang Hsi-ling. In April, Wang and two
 of his aides were convicted for their role in the murder.
 Wang was sentenced to life imprisonment; his aides received
 sentences of 2 1/2 years. However, some foreign and domestic
 observers at the trials claim that there are inconsistencies
 in the testimony and that the court's failure to pursue
 pertinent aspects of the case, such as the motive for the
 murder, has left many questions unanswered.
 b. Disappearance
 In recent years, there have been no substantiated reports of
 persons being abducted or secretly arrested by the security
 services.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture,
 individual members of the police or security forces are known
 to resort at times to physical violence in interrogating
 suspects,
 Credible reports indicate that some Green Island Prison
 detainees picked up during the' crackdown on crime are kept in
 leg irons for the first months of their unspecified period of
 detention and are permitted no contact with the outside world.
 Taiwan's civilian prisons are severely overcrowded. According
 to a 1984 Ministry of Justice report, civilian prisons built
 
 
 755
 TAIWAN
 to accommodate 15,983 prisoners were holding 22,908. Because
 of this overcrowding, prisoners are forced to share cramped
 living quarters and have few opportunities for work, exercise,
 or family visits. Even the opening of additional facilities
 has not provided adequate space. The massive influx of some
 2,000 detainees, resulting from the authorities' crackdown on
 crime (which began with "Operation Clean Sweep" in 1984 and
 continued through 1985), has further taxed prison facilities.
 In August 1985 the Ministry of Justice announced plans to
 build 5 new prisons over the next 6 years to accommodate
 12,000 inmates. The Ministry also said that work on new sites
 for the Tainan and Kaohsiung detention houses is under way and
 is expected to be completed by April 1986.
 According to a recent estimate, up to 15 percent of inmates in
 Taiwan prisons are serving sentences for writing bad checks.
 In 1984, the Legislative Yuan considered proposals which would
 have permitted offenders to pay fines in lieu of going to
 prison, a move which could have alleviated prison
 overcrowding. However, action on the bill is unlikely in the
 near term because of heightened concern about bad check
 writing in the wake of the 10th Credit Cooperative banking
 scandal in February 1985.
 The security police-administered military prisons, where
 political prisoners are confined, are reportedly less
 crowded. Prisoners are said to receive the same food as
 soldiers and to have work and recreation opportunities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Taiwan law requires that within 24 hours after an arrest, the
 arresting authorities must notify in writing the individual
 and his designated relative or friend of the reason for his
 arrest or detention. The Code of Criminal Procedure, which
 does not apply to martial law offenses, specifies that the
 authorities may detain an accused person for up to 2 months
 during the investigation phase prior to the filing of a formal
 indictment, and for up to 3 months during the trial.
 Furthermore, during the investigation phase, the prosecuting
 officer may apply to the court for one extension of 2 months.
 The period of detention may also be extended during the
 trial. In recent cases, the authorities generally have
 followed these procedures and extended the periods of
 detention. Exceptions occur more frequently in the military
 courts. Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal
 offenses can, at the judge's discretion, be released on bail.
 Suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer present
 during the interrogation and investigation phases; in some
 cases, windows and even closed circuit cameras have been
 installed in police station interrogation rooms to permit
 lawyers and family members to view the interrogation without
 hearing the questioning. However, individuals arrested by the
 security services do not have the right to legal counsel until
 after they have been interrogated and formally indicted.
 The police may legally arrest without a warrant anyone they
 suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison And may call in suspects or
 witnesses for questioning without a formal summons. Critics
 in the legal establishment, the press, and elective offices
 point out that these powers could easily lead to abuses.
 
 
 756
 TAIWAN
 In July 1985 the Legislative Yuan passed the so-called
 .anti-hoodlum" law, which accords police authorities broad
 powers, including the power to determine whether a person
 should be designated as a hoodlum. The civil courts confirm
 or deny police requests to remand "hoodlums" for reformatory
 education but have no authority to determine the length of
 such education, which may range from 1 to 5 years. Detainees
 can be held incommunicado, and their families need not be
 notified of their arrests. Some critics believe that the law
 may be used to repress dissent, though to date there is no
 evidence to suggest that the law is being applied in this
 manner.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute
 and punish offenders. This law sometimes has been used
 against political activists. The provisions of the statute
 empower, the police to impose and carry out sentences of up to
 2 weeks' imprisonment.
 Taiwan does not allow forced or compulsory labor, and there
 have been no reports of the practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide for trial by jury. Informed observers
 characterize the judiciary as basically independent, although
 susceptible to pressure from the authorities, on whom judges
 -depend for career advancement.
 In 1985 the courts upheld plaintiffs' libel charges against
 opposition magazine publishers and senior editors. The
 defendants contend that both the lawsuits and the verdicts are
 politically inspired.
 Under martial law, in effect since 1949, civilians who commit
 certain offenses, including sedition, may be tried in military
 courts. The authorities occasionally transfer "important"
 civilian cases (involving such crimes as armed robbery) to the
 military courts. The authorities state that the military
 courts' swifter and generally more severe justice acts as a
 deterrent to potential criminals. Sentences meted out in the
 military courts are reviewed only within the Ministry of
 National Defense.
 Following the traditional Chinese pattern, in a typical
 criminal court case parties and witnesses are interrogated by
 a single judge (in high court sessions by the chief judge) but
 not by a lawyer or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear
 witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit.
 Civil, but not martial law, specifically provides the
 defendant with protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases are generally heard through several brief court
 sessions often separated by weeks or months. In high court
 appellate proceedings new evidence may be introduced, and
 judicial review of district court judgments covers both fact
 and law. Persons convicted in cases where the sentence
 exceeds 3 years have the right to review by the Supreme
 Court. Those tried in military court do not have this right.
 The Supreme Court limits its review to the law of the case and
 to specific procedural aspects. Over one-half of all eligible
 cases are appealed and reviewed.
 
 
 757
 TAIWAN
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. Exact
 figures on the number of political prisoners are not
 obtainable; estimates by critics of the regime range from 130
 to 256. According to the Executive Yuan (Cabinet), civilians
 have been tried by military courts for sedition, defined as
 opposition to basic policy. This includes expressing
 Communist sympathies, espousing views contrary to the
 authorities' claim to represent all of China, and supporting
 an independent legal status for Taiwan.
 In March 1985, Ms. Lu Hsiu-lien, and in December 1985, Mr. Lin
 Hung-hsuan, two of eight persons convicted of sedition in 1980
 for their part in the 1979 Kaohsiung Human Rights Day rally,
 were released on medical parole. One of the five persons
 still serving a sentence for his part in the rally, Shih
 Ming-teh, in April 1985 launched a hunger strike to protest
 the authorities' policies and to support his demands for
 implementation of democracy on Taiwan. As Shih's condition
 weakened, the authorities transferred him to a military
 hospital where he was fed intravenously. Shih ended his fast
 on September 1 and was moved to a prison in the Taipei area.
 Conditions for most of the remaining Kaohsiung Incident
 prisoners reportedly have improved over the years, according
 to relatives. Relatives complain, however, that the prisoners
 continue to be denied access to regular work programs and
 recreational activities. They also charge that health care is
 inadequate. The authorities deny these charges, claiming that
 the curtailed activities and contact are aimed at protecting
 the prisoners from possible harm from other inmates and that
 medical care is the same for all prisoners. A key prosecution
 witness in the 1980 trial of the eight Kaohsiung prisoners
 revealed in a book published in July 1985 and banned in Taiwan
 that his testimony was a fabrication of the Investigative
 Bureau of the Ministry of Justice. The witness, Hung
 Chih-liang, disclosed that Investigative Bureau agents forced
 him to implicate opposition leader Huang Hsin-chieh and other
 members of the opposition. The authorities have so far
 refused either to review the case of the "Kaohsiung Eight" or
 to release those Kaohsiung prisoners still in prison, despite
 these charges.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The daily life of an individual not actively engaged in
 politics is subject only to minor interference by the
 authorities. The authorities impose limits on the use of the
 Taiwanese dialect (the mother tongue of most inhabitants on
 Taiwan) on television and radio. Romanized Taiwanese versions
 of the Bible are not permitted. The authorities do not
 interfere with basic family matters such as the right to marry
 or have children as one chooses. Membership in the KMT, the
 dominant political organization, is a matter of free choice.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant is not common
 practice on Taiwan but does occur on occasion. As noted in
 Section l.d., the Code of Criminal Procedure generally
 requires that searches be authorized by warrants, signed by a
 prosecutor or, during a trial, by a judge. However,
 exceptions to this rule have substantially increased following
 the July 1982 revision of the Code to provide for warrantless
 arrests under certain circumstances. When making such
 arrests, police may also search persons or property without
 prior authorization.
 
 
 758
 TAIWAN
 Other types of violations of privacy, such as the monitoring
 of telephone calls, are believed by many to exist. The
 authorities deny that they monitor telephone conversations.
 In July 1982 the authorities instituted "selective postal
 checks" to intercept parcel bombs and illegal correspondence
 from the PRC.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press.
 Current martial law restrictions, however, significantly limit
 these rights.
 Critics maintain that the security authorities monitor
 political expression, both in Taiwan and overseas.
 Individuals are not free publicly to question the regime's
 basic political policy of anti-Communism or its claim to
 sovereignty over all of China. Anyone who speaks favorably of
 Communism or the PRC, or questions the legitimacy of Taiwan's
 mainlander authorities by suggesting support for "Taiwan
 independence," can expect to be warned and, if they do not
 desist, to be charged with sedition and tried in a military
 court. In 1985, the ruling KMT circumscribed the role of KMT
 legislators, particularly in interpellation sessions of the
 Legislative Yuan, reportedly instructing them to refrain from
 going beyond the area of inquiry when posing questions or
 expressing their own ideas in speeches or in their writing.
 Credible reports suggest that Taiwan agents keep tabs on
 persons from Taiwan in the United States suspected of being
 pro-PRC or pro-Taiwan independence. The authorities deny
 charges that political activities of such persons residing in
 the United States are systematically monitored. As noted in
 Section l.a., several persons, including three senior military
 intelligence officials, have been convicted for their
 involvement in the California murder of Henry Liu, a U.S.
 citizen journalist of Chinese origin whose writings had often
 been critical of Taiwan's leadership and KMT governance of
 Taiwan.
 On September 17, 1985 the authorities arrested U.S. permanent
 resident and California Chinese-language newspaper publisher
 Lee Ya-ping, who was visiting Taiwan, on charges of sedition
 for publishing what the authorities claimed were views
 favorable to the PRC. Following a U.S. protest, the
 authorities announced that the charges against Lee stemmed
 from her propagating such views in Taiwan, not in the U.S.
 On September 26 a military court concluded its investigation
 and sentenced Lee to a period of guided probation under the
 terms of which she was released to the custody of her family.
 Lee returned to California in October.
 The number of newspaper licenses is limited to 31. Nearly all
 are owned by the authorities, the KMT, or high KMT officials.
 There are, however, several smaller privately-owned and
 independent newspapers. Control over daily newspapers is
 often exercised indirectly, through guidance from the
 authorities' information office and the KMT. Newspapers have
 gradually expanded their coverage of sensitive subjects, such
 as news from the PRC and controversial views of U.S. citizens
 of Chinese origin.
 
 
 759
 TAIWAN
 Censorship of publications is carried out through provisions
 of the publications law, which empowers the security police to
 seize or ban printed material which "confuses public opinion
 and affects the morale of the public and the armed forces."
 As interpreted by the authorities, this covers a wide range of
 topics, including articles that discuss possible leadership
 changes, question the legitimacy of KMT rule, criticize
 Taiwan's foreign policy, or merely reveal behind the scenes
 news that is potentially embarrassing to the leadership. In
 1985 the independent newspaper Min Chung Jih Pao was suspended
 for 1 week for what the authorities considered to be articles
 favorable to the PRC.
 Although the limits of acceptable criticism are not clear cut,
 opposition publishers generally know when an issue of their
 magazine is courting a ban. In addition, reporters and
 editors exercise a considerable degree of self-censorship.
 Publishers have sometimes been willing to run risks in order
 to test the limits and boost sales. In 1985, the financial
 rewards associated with brisk sales before the authorities
 could confiscate all issues declined as the authorities'
 stepped-up monitoring of both printers and newsstands resulted
 in full, or large-scale, confiscation of banned magazines.
 By the beginning of 1985, there were 10 non-KMT weekly
 magazines and 1 monthly public opinion magazine.  During the
 year, most issues of these magazines were banned. The
 authorities argue that the issues distorted facts and sullied
 the reputation of leading figures. Some magazines were
 suspended for 1 year but by changing the name slightly were
 able to publish under other previously-issued licenses.
 Between June and September five magazines suspended
 publication because confiscations resulted in circulation
 losses and financial problems. Also in i985, publishers of
 several non-KMT magazines were sued for libel. The defendants
 argued that the suits and the court judgments against them
 were politically motivated. A document allegedly leaked by a
 Government Information Office employee revealed that the
 authorities had apparently discussed plans to harass the
 opposition press through various means, including libel suits.
 The authorities occasionally ban books. Although the writing
 of pre-World War II Chinese pro-Communist authors are formally
 banned, a few of their famous works are obtainable.
 The authorities partially or wholly own all three of the
 island's television stations. Nonetheless, competition among
 them, as well as competition with the print media, has led to
 a gradual expansion of the coverage of sensitive topics, both
 domestic and international. Public opinion has also played a
 role in expanding media coverage.
 Foreign publications are available but are also subject to
 censorship. Occasionally pages carrying articles offensive to
 the authorities are removed or blacked out before they are
 distributed. Some foreign publications are available through
 subscription only and are not allowed to be sold on
 newsstands. From time to time an entire issue will be
 withheld from distribution.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the Constitution.  In
 practice, however, public assembly for political purposes,
 
 
 760
 TAIWAN
 except during elections, is often circumscribed by martial law
 provisions. During the first half of the authorized campaign
 period preceding elections, all candidates are allowed to hold
 rallies, although these are closely monitored by the
 authorities. During the second half, campaigning is limited
 to highly structured, officially sponsored rallies in which
 both KMT and opposition candidates participate.
 The 1983 Election and Recall Law prohibits holding campaign
 rallies in any form prior to the authorized period. the Law
 also permits joint rallies of two or more candidates only at
 officially sponsored rallies. Opposition politicians have
 been sharply and openly critical of these measures, claiming
 they hinder their ability to reach the electorate.
 The formation, purposes, and operation of labor unions are
 regulated in considerable detail by the Labor Union Law of
 1929. Unions are supervised by the Ministry of Interior, and
 may be dissolved for "disturbing public peace and order." By
 law, an industrial or craft union must be formed in each
 county or municipality having more than 30 workers in an
 industry, enterprise, or profession. The law also mandates
 union membership for all workers age 16 and above in each
 county or municipality where an appropriate union exists.
 However, enforcement of the law is lax, and, according to a
 1985 report, fewer than one in five Taiwan workers belongs to
 a union. Government employees, teachers, and defense industry
 workers are prohibited from forming or joining unions.
 By and large, labor unions do not exercise significant
 economic or political influence. However, informed observers
 have stated that union officials serving in the Legislative
 Yuan played an important role in negotiating the difficult
 August 1984 passage of the Labor Standards Law.
 Walkouts and strikes are prohibited under martial law.
 Collective bargaining, although provided for by legislation,
 does not in fact take place. Individual factory unions do,
 however, facilitate the resolution of disputes. It is
 generally believed that labor unions, especially general
 federations, have close ties with the ruling KMT. However,
 KMT control is not absolute; for example, the Chinese
 Federation of Labor (CFL) is on record as being critical of
 the ban on strikes. The CFL, Taiwan's largest federation,
 maintains contact with the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees freedom to practice religion.
 This guarantee is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan
 inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism,
 or a combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no state or favored
 religion. Some marginal Buddhist sects and the Unification
 Church have been banned in response to parents' complaints
 that these groups were exercising a corrupting influence on
 Taiwan youth.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (PCT),
 whose approximately 190,000 membership is predominantly
 
 
 761
 TAIWAN
 Taiwanese, has been a prime target. An October 1985 statement
 issued at the conclusion of an interchurch consultation
 convened by the PCT, and attended by foreign delegations from
 Christian churches, confirmed support for earlier PCT
 statements critical of the authorities' policies on national
 affairs and human rights. The statement also expressed the
 PCT's concern over "the difficulties facing the original
 residents of Taiwan" and appealed for a joint effort to
 protect their dignity and human rights.
 Kaohsiung County authorities have been involved since 1980 in
 a dispute with a denomination called the New Testament Church
 over the right of church members to settle on a tract of
 leased public land near Kaohsiung, in southern Taiwan. In
 1985 county authorities continued to harass church officials
 and followers who were evicted from the tract and to press
 charges against them, leading to further accusations by the
 church of religious persecution. County authorities contend
 that the church violated the terms of the lease.
 During 1985, the authorities announced plans to resubmit a
 revised draft of the "Law for the Protection of Religions" as
 part of the fiscal 1986 legislative program. This would mark
 the fourth submission of the law since 1979. Each time,
 strong opposition from all church groups on Taiwan induced the
 authorities to withdraw the draft. Critics note that past
 drafts give the authorities the right to review the
 appointments of church officials, to ensure that religious
 doctrines conform to "basic national policy," and to require
 foreign religious missions to pledge not to engage in
 nonreligious activities. The authorities argue that the law's
 regulatory powers are necessary to ensure that religious
 activities do not jeopardize Taiwan's "national security."
 They have, however, declared that they will consult with
 representatives of Taiwan's various religious denominations
 before submitting the new draft for legislative approval.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel in Taiwan. Emigration and private travel
 abroad have become freer since 1979. In 1984, 750,000 Taiwan
 residents went abroad for tourism. Since 1980 businessmen
 have been permitted to travel to, and do business directly
 with, certain Eastern European countries. Although travel to
 the PRC is officially prohibited, the authorities often
 overlook some discreet travel to the mainland. After the last
 calendar day of the year in which they turn 15, males may not
 leave Taiwan until completion of compulsory military service.
 Permission to leave Taiwan may be delayed or withheld by
 police denial of an exit permit. Although in the past
 outspoken critics have been denied exit permits, in recent
 years a number of persons openly critical of the KMT have been
 permitted to travel overseas.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right of those
 Chinese who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in
 Taiwan, to return from abroad. Those issued "overseas
 Chinese" passports do not automatically have the right to
 travel to Taiwan for permanent residence. In principle,
 Taiwan will not authorize the entry of Chinese between the
 
 
 762
 TAIWAN
 ages of 16 and 75, even those who have long held Taiwan
 passports, if they have lived in Communist-controlled areas
 within the preceding 5 years.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain or revoke the
 Taiwan passport of persons whose behavior violates the
 interests of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order,
 tradition, or Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law
 claim that it gives the authorities the power to revoke the
 passport of any person who makes remarks overseas that are
 deemed inimical to Taiwan's interests. This, they argue,
 places undue restriction on the opposition's right to travel
 and to make its views known outside Taiwan. However, there
 have been no reports of the law having been used in this way
 during 1985. The authorities say the measure is necessary to
 curb the activities of economic criminals--tax evaders,
 persons engaged in illicit activities, and those who have left
 large debts behind in Taiwan.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,500 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled on Taiwan and nearly 2,000
 persons who arrived from Indochina by small boats have been
 granted "temporary" refuge. With the exception of 58 who
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan, all of those arriving
 by small boats have been resettled in third countries. Ninety
 are currently awaiting resettlement. The authorities report
 that there have been no refugee cases from non-Communist
 areas. They advise that any such instances would be dealt
 with on a case-by-case basis. Refugees are not forced to
 return to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Effective political power resides with the aging KMT
 leadership which fled the mainland in 1949. Reflecting their
 claim to be the government of all of China, the authorities
 maintain not only a provincial and local government system,
 but also an array of political bodies identical to those found
 on the mainland prior to 1949. The locus of power on Taiwan
 is the Presidency, the Executive Yuan, and the KMT Central
 Standing Committee. This power is exercised by a small number
 of top figures in these organizations, particularly by the
 President. Although the number of Taiwanese in the Cabinet
 and the Central Standing Committee has been gradually
 increasing, they do not wield significant power within these
 bodies. Hence, although Taiwanese hold a number of high
 positions including those of Vice President, Vice Premier,
 Ministers, Governor of Taiwan, and mayors of Taipei and
 Kaohsiung, their power individually, and even their collective
 influence, is limited. However, as representatives of the
 majority population, their views form an important
 consideration as the leadership decides on major policies.
 Taiwanese have greater effective power at the local level,
 where they hold most of the executive and KMT party positions.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the National Assembly, which convenes every 6 years to elect
 the President and Vice President, and the Legislative Yuan,
 which is the Parliament. There have been no general elections
 to these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats
 and to form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Since
 
 
 763
 TAIWAN
 1969, periodic "supplementary elections" have been held to
 choose additional representatives from Taiwan province and the
 offshore islands (which are considered part of Fukien
 province). Nevertheless, only 989 out of 2,691 seats of the
 National Assembly are currently filled, including 75
 supplemental members. Of the Legislative Yuan's current
 membership of 760, the supplemental legislators number 71 and
 constitute the most active group, due largely to the advanced
 age and incapacity of those elected 37 years ago on the
 mainland.
 The nature of the elective bodies continued to spark calls by
 both opposition and KMT politicians, academicians,
 journalists, and legal experts for more representative
 institutions. The authorities are extremely reluctant to
 adopt any measures that might undercut the mandates of those
 parliamentarians who were elected on the mainland in the late
 1940's, as to do so could call into question the authorities'
 claim that these bodies represent all of China. In 1985 the
 National Assembly did not endorse any proposals to fill the
 vacancies. Leaving vacancies open increases the proportion
 and influence of the elected supplemental members.
 The central authorities appoint the Taiwan Provincial Governor
 and the mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung. Elections for the
 Provincial Assembly and county and other municipal level
 offices have been held regularly since 1950. The November 16,
 1985 election for county and city offices and the Taiwan
 Provincial Assembly was, in general, considered fair, within
 the strictures laid down by the authorities for the conduct of
 elections on Taiwan. Universal suffrage exists for citizens
 20 years of age and over. Voting is voluntary and by secret
 ballot; voter turnout runs over 70 percent.
 One party, the KMT, dominates Taiwan, as it has since 1945.
 There are also two miniscule, nominally independent parties
 which came from the mainland. Although the KMT's structure
 and control mechanisms are based on Soviet models, the party's
 operations are considerably more flexible, Party organs exist
 at all levels of the ruling structure, as well as in the
 military, schools, and other public institutions. People who
 arrived from the mainland after 1945 dominate the highest
 echelons of the KMT. Taiwanese predominate at local levels
 and are playing an increasingly important role in the middle
 and higher levels. Taiwanese comprise more than 60 percent of
 the KMT's total membership of approximately 2 million, and 66
 of the 71 elected supplemental members in the Legislative Yuan
 are Taiwanese.
 In the 1983 Legislative Yuan elections, the KMT won slightly
 over two-thirds of the vote and 61 seats. The opposition and
 independents won six and four seats respectively. The role of
 the opposition is greater than its small numbers might
 indicate. Opposition members are very vocal in elective
 bodies and frequently use interpellation sessions to raise
 controversial or sensitive issues.
 New political parties are forbidden under martial law.
 Candidates who oppose the KMT in elections run as "outside the
 party" (dangwai) candidates. Although not permitted to form a
 party, the dangwai politicians organize "campaign assistance
 groups" to contest elections.
 Dangwai candidates face several disadvantages in the election
 process. The 1980 election law forbids the participation of
 
 
 764
 TAIWAN
 students, formerly a prime source of campaign workers, and
 limits the campaign period before an election, i.e., 15 days
 for National Assembly and Legislative Yuan elections, and 10
 days for local, county, and provincial elections. The revised
 election and recall law enacted in June 1983 abolished joint
 rallies and pre-campaign "get-togethers," campaign tactics
 favored by the opposition. The law also placed ceilings on
 campaign expenditures, political contributions, and the
 quantity of campaign paraphernalia. The opposition argues
 that these provisions further reduce its ability to compete
 with well-financed, well-organized KMT candidates and hinder
 contact with the electorate. Opposition politicians label as
 ineffective the newly adopted provisions penalizing candidates
 for vote-buying and bribery. Press self-censorship and
 banning result in less publicity for the views of the
 opposition, which further handicaps dangwai candidates.
 The 1983 revisions of the election law also changed the method
 of indirect election of members of the Control Yuan (which
 exercises powers of impeachment, censure, and audit). Under
 revised election procedures, electors (members of the
 Provincial Assembly and various county and city councils) must
 cast their two mandatory votes for two separate candidates,
 thereby making it impossible for opposition members to pool
 their limited votes behind one candidate.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In past years, the Taiwan authorities have occasionally
 permitted representatives of international human rights
 organizations and private individuals interested in human
 rights issues to meet with appropriate officials and
 individuals.
 The nominally nongovernmental Chinese Human Rights
 Association, a strongly anti-Communist organization that
 originally focused its attention on human rights questions in
 the PRC, is devoting more of its efforts to human rights on
 Taiwan. The association has sponsored tours for lawmakers and
 legal experts to examine Taiwan's crowded prisons and has
 established a free legal aid service. In 1984, the
 association strongly urged the authorities to release all
 remaining prisoners at the Green Island Military Prison who
 have served 30-year sentences. The association also acted as
 one of the mediators in efforts to resolve the hunger strike
 by Kaohsiung Incident prisoner Shih Ming-teh.
 In December 1984 a group of opposition lawyers,
 parliamentarians, scholars, and doctors established the
 "Taiwan Human Rights Association (THRA)". The authorities
 have stated that the THRA cannot be officially recognized
 because it has not been registered in accordance with the "Law
 Governing the Organization of Civic Bodies During the
 Extraordinary Period." This law permits the registration of
 only one association per organizational function. The
 authorities have noted that the Chinese Human Rights
 Association already has been registered and, therefore, a
 second human rights organization may not legally be
 established. THRA sponsors argue that the civic bodies law is
 unconstitutional because it was promulgated before the
 Constitution was adopted. This issue has not been resolved,
 and to date the THRA has neither been registered nor disbanded.
 
 
 TAIWAN
 In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International stated that it was
 continuing to appeal for the release of 23 prisoners of
 conscience, that it was investigating the cases of some 70
 other political prisoners, and that it was concerned about
 reports of torture and ill-treatment of several prisoners
 detained on criminal charges. Freedom House rates Taiwan
 "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Taiwan's population in July 1985 was 19.1 million with a
 growth rate of 1.4 percent. Taiwan has one of the strongest
 economies in Asia. With the global economic downturn, growth
 began to slow in 1985, but Taiwan's GNP ($3,067 per capita in
 1984) was still projected to grow 5 percent in 1985. Economic
 benefits are widely distributed among the population as a
 whole, and most basic needs are met.
 Prospects for Taiwan's continued economic well-being are good
 as the authorities work to shift the focus of Taiwan's
 export-based economy from labor-intensive to high-technology
 industries. Official unemployment in 1984 averaged 2.4
 percent. However, unemployment has been increasing in recent
 months, and the official rate rose to 4.1 percent in August
 1985. Some estimate that actual unemployment is about double
 the official rate, and underemployment even higher.
 Taiwan's fiscal 1985 budget allocated more than 30 percent of
 expenditures to education, science, culture, and social
 programs. Taiwan has developed an effective public health
 program. It.consists of a health clinic system throughout the
 island that comprises more than 11,000 medical care
 facilities. In 1984, for every 10,000 persons, Taiwan had 7.9
 practicing physicians, 9.0 practicing nurses, and 32.5
 hospital beds. Health promotion programs include maternal and
 child disease control and environmental sanitation. The
 infant mortality rate for 1985 was 19.9 per 1,000 live
 births. Major epidemic disease has been reduced, although
 limited outbreaks still occur. Safe water is accessible to
 77.6 percent of the population. Because of these public
 health programs and a generally good diet (1985 per capita
 average daily caloric intake was 2,818, the highest in Asia),
 life expectancy at birth has increased to 70 years for men and
 75 years for women. Although successful birth control efforts
 have brought the population growth rate down, Taiwan has a
 population density of 528 per square kilometer, the second
 highest in the world, and the authorities remain concerned
 about increasing population pressures.
 Education is a primary concern of the authorities and the
 population in general. Of the population over age six, 91.2
 percent is literate. Of school-age children, 99.8 percent are
 currently in school. Free, compulsory education is available
 through junior high school. About 70 percent of junior high
 school graduates pass examinations and enter 3-year senior
 high and vocational school programs. Entry into Taiwan's
 extensive system of higher education is also based on
 competitive examinations, and departures from a strict merit
 system are almost nonexistent. In 1984, more than 17 percent
 of college-age youths (18-24 years) were enrolled in
 undergraduate or graduate programs.
 The 1984 Labor Standards Law in principle provides for
 improved protection of workers' welfare. According to the
 Ministry of Interior, which is responsible for enforcing the
 
 
 766
 TAIWAN
 law, the law is applicable to about 4 million of Taiwan's 7.5
 million workers, mostly blue-collar workers or those who work
 in public utilities, transportation, and communications. The
 1984 Law improved protection for female and child workers.
 The definition of child worker was raised from a person under
 14 years to one between the ages of 15 and 16, who can be
 employed without special permission but for whom the law
 requires special working conditions (the Labor Standards Law
 prohibits the employment of anyone under age 15 unless that
 person has graduated from junior high school or has obtained
 special permission to work). Women generally earn 40-50
 percent less than men and, although the law now prohibits sex
 discrimination, there is little to suggest that women will
 challenge the status quo. The law also covers working
 hours--Taiwan's workweek is generally 6 days, though many
 companies only work a half day on Saturday--and requires
 employers to give workers annual leave, although these
 provisions have not yet been fully implemented. Taiwan's
 official minimum wage was raised in July 1984 to $154 per
 month.
 Under the law, firms with more than 30 workers must have rules
 of work approved by the central authorities and posted at the
 work site. A major feature of the 1984 law is that now
 individuals, not just corporations, can be punished for
 violations. The same work rules apply to Taiwan's free trade
 zones.
 Enforcement of safety and health standards is frequently
 weak. Over 95 percent of Taiwan's businesses are small,
 family-owned firms which largely employ relatives and friends,
 who are often reluctant to report violations of labor and
 safety regulations. Much of Taiwan's mining industry is to be
 phased out over the next several years due to inadequate
 safety and low profitability, with displaced workers retrained
 for other occupations.
 The few laws which discriminate against women relate mostly to
 divorce issues and inheritance. A revised Civil Code passed
 by the Legislative Yuan in March 1985 provides for more equal
 treatment of women in the areas of marriage and divorce. In
 recent years women have taken an increasingly active role in
 local politics and have been increasingly successful
 votegetters. Election regulations ensure that women hold a
 minimum of 20 percent of elected offices at both the central
 and local levels. Enrollment of women over 18 years of age in
 institutions of higher learning has increased during the past
 30 years from 1,750 students in 1953 (0.3 percent of the total
 number of students enrolled) to 131,297 students in 1983 (9.7
 percent of the total number of students enrolled). A
 fledgling women's rights movement is growing slowly.
 Taiwan's only nonethnic Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established
 in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These
 aboriginal people comprise slightly more than 1 percent of
 Taiwan's total population. There is no official policy of
 discrimination against them, but the barriers created by de
 facto cultural and economic discrimination are frequently
 difficult to surmount, and thus aboriginal "mountain people"
 occupy the bottom rungs of Taiwan's socioeconomic ladder.
 Specially designated seats in both central and provincial
 legislative bodies are reserved for aborigine representatives,
 and the authorities have instituted a number of social
 programs to ease the aborigines' transition into the dominant
 Chinese society.
 
 
 767
