TAIWAN
The report on Taiwan (Republic of China) presents a generally accurate and thorough picture of a country in the midst of political and social change. While fairly balancing a recognition of human rights improvements against continued government abuses, the report nonetheless downplays the seriousness of problems in certain instances.
In the section on torture and other mistreatment, the report notes that there continue to be credible accounts of torture of persons in police custody. No details are provided of the torture inflicted, nor is there mention that torture victims include political prisoners. Political prisoners commonly are interrogated non-stop for periods exceeding 24 hours, thus entailing sleep deprivation. There have also been cases where political prisoners have been beaten, such as that of opposition member of the National Assembly Huang Chao-hui and his brother by the Kaohsiung police, reportedly for their attempts to investigate and protest deaths of prisoners in police custody.
In light of a Supreme Court decision to speed up trials for capital offenses, the report should have noted that a record 69 executions were carried out in the past year (nearly triple the number of 1988). Although these cases involved convictions for violent crimes, the Supreme Court decision raises due process concerns. Furthermore, a temporary law was approved in October by the Legislative Yuan that would impose the death penalty for an expanded number of offenses, some of which are rather vaguely defined. They include such offenses as "destabilizing the economy" by operating unlicensed investment firms, "harming social order," and leading demonstrations that illegally place barricades around factories, a provision that appears aimed at tactics employed by the country's environmental movement.
The report's discussion of freedom of speech and press, while accurately noting that "direct censorship of newspapers and magazines has virtually ended," should point out that certain important opposition publications and their personnel are targeted by the government for extensive harassment and banning. For example, one prominent opposition weekly. Freedom Era Weekly^ had its license suspended 15 times in 1989, requiring it to secure new licenses in order to continue publication. The authorities also banned 25 issues of Freedom Era Weekly from distribution. Its editor, Cheng Nan-jung, was charged with sedition for printing the text of a proposed
213
Taiwan
constitution for an independent Taiwan; as the report notes, Cheng immolated himself rather than submit to arrest.
Similarly, the Democratic Progressive Weekly^ another important opposition weekly, endured the suspension of its license, the confiscation of 5,300 copies and the banning from distribution of five issues. Charges of sedition were brought against a former editor and publisher for an article alleging an attempted military mutiny on Quemoy.
While the report mentions the government's use of libel suits as a tool to control the press, it fails to note that criminal libel charges have resulted in editors and publishers being sentenced to prison for political offenses. In December 1988, the former editor of the Democratic Progressive Weekly, Chen Wei-tu, was sentenced to seven months in prison for reporting that a military officer had used his official position for personal gain. The magazine's publisher, Wu Hsiang-hui, also received a seven month sentence. The State Department did not include this case in either its 1988 or 1989 reports.
The report accurately states that television and radio are tightly controlled by the government and the military. It should have noted that two western radio commentators from the American-run International Community Radio Taipei were suspended from their jobs for a month without pay for broadcasting a telephone interview with a foreign priest expelled in March 1989 for labor activities. They were suspended for failing to give station management advance notice that they planned to "broadcast a program of a sensitive nature."
The thorough discussion of restrictions on academic freedom and the movement toward reform should have noted that university professors' freedom of expression is hampered by the absence of a tenure system.
The report discusses continuing restrictions on peaceful assembly and association under the 1987 Assembly and March Law, and, correcting an omission in the 1988 report, notes that the law allows demonstration organizers to be held responsible for the behavior of participants. While indicating that "most observers believe that prosecutions of oppositionists are often politically motivated," the report should have stated that in no instance where
214
Taiwan
opposition leaders were prosecuted under this provision was there evidence that the defendants either advocated or engaged in violence.
The report makes several significant omissions in its discussion of the Election and Recall Law, which was amended in January, and the December island-wide elections. First, the report fails to note that the positions of governor of Taiwan and mayors of Taipei and of Kaohsiung are still not elected by popular vote, but are appointed by the central government. Second, the report only mentions in passing the practice of vote-buying. While it is not clear to what extent election fraud influenced the December election results, vote-buying was reportedly widespread. Indeed, the practice was common enough to allow tracking of the "market price" of a vote — reported to have tripled in the past three years as a result of the explosion of wealth on the island. The report should also have stated that the complex indirect system for electing the Control Yuan, unchanged by the Election Law revision, leaves it vulnerable to the large-scale vote-buying that occurred in past Control Yuan elections. Finally, the report does not discuss an undoubtedly influential factor in the election; the repeated government warnings to independence supporters that candidates who advocate independence would be prosecuted under the Sedition Laws and could be sentenced to up to seven years in prison. Pro-independence campaign literature was also censored. Although some opposition candidates persisted in openly advocating independence in spite of these threats, the government's attempt to ban discussion of this central issue deserved more discussion than the report gave it.
Another topic that warranted more attention is the discussion of freedom of overseas Taiwanese to return to Taiwan. While the report acknowledges that visas continue to be denied to "a number of overseas critics" for political reasons, human rights monitors believe the actual figure could be as high as several hundred, mainly from the United States and Canada. Moreover, while the report mentions that Canadian citizen Columbus Leo (Luo Yi-shih) was sentenced to 10 months in prison for violating Taiwan's National Security Law, it should have included Columbus Leo's allegation that he was beaten by the police after his arrest.
The report overstates the government's willingness to receive representatives of human rights organizations. The Taiwan authorities do not permit the staff of the publication Taiwan Communique^ published by the International Committee for Human Rights in Taiwan, to enter the country.
215
Taiwan
The section of the report on discrimination based on race, sex, religion, language or social status is good. But it omits any reference to Hakka speakers, who make up about 14% of Taiwan's population. Hakkas claim that their language and culture are facing extinction as a result of the government's policy of the past 40 years of imposing Mandarin as the sole official language, and banning the use of Hakka in cultural activities, education and broadcasting. The report also fails to note that aborigines and Hakka have recently begun demonstrating to press for their rights, resulting in arrests for violations of the assembly and demonstration laws.
In the section on labor's right to organize, the report states that "a foreign priest was abruptly expelled in March because of his involvement in the independent labor movement." The report should also have noted that around the same time, another foreign priest. Father José Ellacuria, who had lived in Taiwan for over 30 years, was given notice that his visa was not being renewed because of his "involvement in labor activities."
216
