 TAIW~AN
 Taiwan in 1989 continued its transition from an authoritarian
 political system dominated by the Nationalist Party (KMT) to a
 more open and pluralistic system.* In January the authorities
 legalized the establishment of opposition political parties.
 The largest opposition group, the Democratic Progressive Party
 (DPP), registered as a legal party in April and vigorously
 contested the island-wide elections in December. The
 elections were the most free and fair in Taiwan's history.
 The Legislative Yuan (LY), Taiwan's lawmaking body, continued
 to expand as a forum for policy debate. DPP and younger
 generation KMT legislators representing Taiwan constituencies
 influenced the policymaking process through interpellations
 and criticism of the Executive Yuan (the Cabinet). The LY is
 gradually becoming a more representative body as elderly
 members representing Chinese mainland constituencies die or
 retire. However, Taiwan's central parliamentary bodies,
 including the National Assembly (the Electoral College) as
 well as the LY, remained constituted under a representational
 formula that maintains the predominant role of the KMT. The
 authorities have initiated reforms to enhance the
 representative nature of these bodies, but changes remain
 controversial, both within the KMT and between the KMT and the
 opposition.
 Native Taiwanese comprise an estimated 85 percent of the
 island's population, with Chinese mainlanders and their
 offspring comprising the remainder. As increasing numbers of
 Taiwanese and younger generation "mainlanders" ascend to
 leading administrative and political positions, including
 within the KMT, the dominant position of old guard KMT
 mainlanders continues to erode. However, leadership of the
 military and security agencies has remained predominantly
 mainlander.
 The military's role in politics has been reduced considerably
 since the lifting of martial law in 1987. However, several
 cases in 1989 raised questions about the military's level of
 tolerance for opposition criticism.
 Taiwan's economy continued to grow at a rapid pace, with per
 capita income reaching a level of approximately $7,000. The
 unemployment rate was under 2 percent, with a resulting demand
 for immigrant labor. While basically a freemarket economy,
 major sectors--including finance, steel, shipbuilding,
 utilities, transportation, and petrochemicals--continued to be
 dominated by state-run enterprises. The trend, however, is
 towards greater economic liberalization. Privatization of
 state-run enterprises remained on the political agenda.
 Human rights, already improved in comparison with the pre-1987
 martial law period, continued to expand in 1989. While the
 trend towards a more open and pluralistic system continued in
 1989 with the legalization of opposition political parties,
 important restrictions still remain. Principal areas of
 concern included restrictions on freedom of speech, press,
 movement, association, the right of citizens to change their
 government, and worker and women's rights. There were also
 concerns about politically motivated prosecutions, selective
 enforcement of the laws, and unfair campaign practices,
 including restrictions on access to the mass media.
 
 
 827
 TAIWAN
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political or extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although Taiwan law expressly prohibits the use of torture,
 there continued to be credible reports of persons subjected to
 torture while in police custody. In some instances the
 authorities paid compensation to victims. There were two
 reported cases in 1989 of seven policemen given suspended
 sentences for such abuses. Ministry of Justice officials
 claim that all interrogations conducted by the Ministry's
 Investigation Bureau are tape-recorded and that all
 allegations of mistreatment are investigated. They also say
 that the right of persons to have an attorney present during
 interrogation is another check on torture. However, criminal
 lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur
 in local police st~tions where interrogations are not recorded
 and that most persons do not have attorneys present at the
 interrogation stage.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Police-may legally arrest without a warrant anyone they
 suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 yeats or more in prison and may call in persons for
 questioning without a formal summons. Critics in the legal
 establishment, the press, and the legislature point out that
 these procedures sometimes lead to abuses. Persons called in
 for questioning by the police aie sometimes arrested without a
 warrant after questioning.
 Taiwan law requires that, within 24 hours after an arrest, the
 arresting authorities must give notice in writing to the
 arrested person and his designated relative or friend, stating
 the reason for the arrest or detention. The code of criminal
 procedure specifies that the authorities may detain an accused
 person for up to 2 months during the investigation phase prior
 to filing a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months during
 the trial. Furthermore, during the investigative phase, the
 prosecuting officer may apply to the court for one extension
 of 2 months. The period of detention during trial may be
 extended twice. The authorities generally have followed these
 procedures and extended the periods of detention, although
 trial usually takes place within 3 months of indictment.
 Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal offenses can be
 released on bail at the judge's discretion.
 The right to have a lawyer present during the investigation
 phase is generally respected, but defense lawyers complain
 that persons often are not advised of their right to have
 legal representation during police-interrogation, and there is
 
 
 828
 no legal requirement that indigent persons be provided with
 counsel.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan-passed the "antihoodlum"
 law, which accords police authorities broad powers, including
 the power to determine whether a person should be designated
 as a "hoodlum." The civil courts confirm or deny police
 requests to remand alleged hoodlums for reformatory
 education. Human rights organizations and defense attorneys
 criticize the law as an extreme departure from appropriate
 standards of due process. Alleged hoodlums can be held
 incommunicado without legal representation, and their families
 need not be notified of their arrests. Attorneys for persons
 charged under the law have no right to examine documents or to
 cross-examine witnesses. There is no appeal from the decision
 to commit someone for reformatory education. Critics say that
 courts simply put a rubber stamp on police decisions.
 Prior to the lifting of martial law, reformatory education for
 "hoodlums" was under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
 military. The process of transferring all nonmilitary
 prisoners to civilian control has been completed. The law
 does not authorize the courts to determine the length of
 reformatory education; police and prison authorities decide.
 The usual term is 3 to 6 months for a first offense. Repeat
 offenders are detained for longer periods and detention may be
 extended up to 3 years, depending on behavior in custody.
 The antihoodlum law replaced a 1984 executive decree that did
 not set a time limit on incarceration. As of the end of 1988,
 authorities acknowledged holding 1,297 persons incarcerated
 under the decree and the succeeding law. This comprised about
 10 percent of the prisoner population at the time.
 Authorities insist that they do not know how many of those now
 in custody are being held under the antihoodlum law.
 many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under the police
 offenses law which authorizes police to punish an offender
 with incarceration of up to 14 days, a fine of no more than
 approximately $11.50, or forced labor of no more than 16
 hours. Despite the 1980 opinion of the Council of Grand
 Justices (theoretically empowered to decide constitutional
 issues) that the statute is unconstitutional, it continues to
 be used, pending the enactment of a law for the maintenance of
 social order now before the legislature.
 Under the executive decree and the police offenses law, the
 authorities reportedly imprisoned some 4,000 people in an
 anticrime sweep in 1984. The authorities say that all these
 have now been released but the laws which fail to provide
 basic due process protection remain on the books. There were
 complaints that police in certain localities threatened
 workers for opposition party candidates in the December 2
 general elections with prosecution under the antihoodlum law
 or similar laws.if they did not refrain from campaigning.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide for trial by jury. All judges are
 appointed by, and responsible to, the Judicial Yuan. Informed
 observers characterize the judiciary as not fully independent
 and as susceptible to political and personal pressure.
 
 
 829
 TAIWAN
 Since the lifting of martial law on July 15, 1987, civilians
 may no longer be tried in military courts. Trials are public,
 -but attendance at trials involving juveniles or politically
 sensitive issues may require permission from the court.
 Defendants have a right to an attorney, but an attorney will
 be assigned by the:court only in serious cases. In all other
 cases, responsibility for obtaining counsel rests with the
 defendant.
 In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge.but not by a defense attorney
 or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to
 consider evidence a party wishes to submit. Civil and
 criminal law specifically provide the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases.generally are heard in several brief court
 sessions, often separated by weeks or months. Persons
 convicted-in cases where the sentence exceeds 3 years have a
 right to review. The Supreme Court limits its review to the
 legal aspects -of-the case and to, specific procedural aspects.
 The National Security Law stipulates, contrary to provisions
 in the original martial law decrees, that convictions under
 martial law cannot be appealed in the postmartial law period.
 In most cases, judicial decisions must be approved by higher
 court authorities before pronouncement. Although this power
 is supposed to be restricted to correcting errors of law and
 usage of legal terms, observers say this dilutes the authority
 of judges and tempts outside interference with the judicial
 process. In 1987 a review of judicial procedures initiated by
 the authorities proposed abolishing this practice. Changes
 have been made in the review procedure, but the practice
 continues.
 The authorities continued to try political opponents on
 charges ranging from "sedition" (defined to include expressing
 sympathy with Communism, espousing views contrary to the
 authorities' claim to represent all of China, and supporting
 an independent legal status for Taiwan) to "harming public
 order" (arising from demonstrations led by the opposition).
 Two prosecutions for sedition were initiated in 1989, and
 three others were appealed or had final appeal denied. In one
 case, a new trial was ordered. In-all cases but one,
 defendants were members or supporters of the opposition DPP.
 The authorities deny holding.political prisoners. However,
 international human rights organizations and pro-opposition
 Taiwan human rights groups have estimated that there are
 between 12 and 25 political prisoners in Taiwan. This figure
 is down from some 90 to 100 political prisoners held in 1986.
 In 1987 and 1988, the authorities granted early releases to
 most political prisoners. Of the eight persons convicted by
 military courts of sedition in 1980 for their role in the 1979
 Kaohsiung Incident, all but one have been released.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Warrantless searches, common before the lifting of martial
 law, are unusual now. A warrant must be obtained before a
 search, except when the search is incident to arrest. The
 exception is car searches which are routinely conducted at
 roadblocks.
 
 
 830
 TAIWANi
 Although the right to privacy is generally respected, members
 of opposition political parties and other political dissidents
 do experience invasion of privacy. Oppositionists allege that
 authorities routinely intercept crrrespondence and telephone
 calls and subject them and their associates to surveillance by
 agents of the security forces. The authorities deny that
 telephone conversations are monitored, or that oppositionists
 are routinely subjected to surveillance.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and
 press, these rights continue to be restricted in practice.
 Nevertheless, the authorities have demonstrated increasing
 tolerance for open debate, even on sensitive issues.
 Security forces continue to monitor political expression, both
 in Taiwan and overseas. Under Taiwan law, people may not
 oppose the regime's basic policy of anticommunism or its claim
 to sovereignty over all of China. Prosecutions for allegedly
 promoting communism are unusual but do occur. In October
 1988, a Hong Kong merchant was convicted of sedition for
 having been a member of the Communist Youth League as a
 student in the early 1970's. He was acquitted by a higher
 court, but the prosecution appealed and a new trial was
 ordered. He was retried in late 1989 and acquitted. In June
 1989, a videocassette seller was sentenced to 7 years in
 prison for showing and selling a tape of a Peoples Republic of
 China (PRC) National Day parade at an opposition party rally,
 even though a local television station, which is partially
 controlled by the armed forces, played the same tape on an
 evening broadcast.
 Those who question the legitimacy of Taiwan authorities by
 supporting independence for Taiwan risk being charged with
 sedition. While many public speeches and articles favoring
 independence go unpunished, the threat of punishment remains
 real. The editor of an antigovernment, proindependence
 magazine, Cheng Nan-jung, was charged with sedition for
 printing the text of a proposed constitution for an
 independent Taiwan. He committed suicide rather than allow
 himself to be arrested. In December Huang Hua, a veteran",
 oppositionist, was ordered to appear at a hearing on possible
 sedition charges in connection with his call for an
 independent Taiwan. He failed to appear at the hearing. At
 year's end a formal indictment was expected. In an
 extraterritorial extension of domestic law, Taiwan convicted
 dissident Hsu Hsin-liang in December of "preparing to use
 illegal methods to overthrow the government" and sentenced him
 to 6 years and 4 months in prison. Evidence for the alleged
 conspiracy included Hsu's published articles and statements
 attributed to him while in the United States.
 Charges of'sedition are brought even in cases other than
 alleged promotion of communism or advocacy of independence.
 An opposition editor was convicted of sedition for printing an
 article accusing a senior military figure of plotting a
 military coup. However, the military tried unsuccessfully to
 persuade the courts to prosecute an opposition-oriented
 newspaper, its publisher and director with sedition for
 publishing an article criticizing alleged waste of public
 money and abuse of power by senior officers.
 
 
 831
 The authorities censor publications through provisions of the
 Publications Law which empower the police to seize or ban
 printed material that commits or instigates others to commit
 sedition, treason, sacrilege, offenses of interference with
 the lawful exercise of public functions, or offenses against
 public order or morals. Since the lifting of martial law,
 publication bans and confiscations declined significantly.
 Although direct censorship of newspapers and magazines has
 virtually ended, the KMT and the Government Information Office
 (GIO) continue to exert some influence over the major daily
 newspapers through guidance, political connections, and
 threats of legal action and revocation or suspension of
 licenses. A number of libel suits were brought by military
 officers alleging defamation by opposition journalists who
 criticized them.
 The authorities have loosened restrictions on publications
 from the Chinese mainland, and the works of many mainland
 authors have been reprinted. However, even nonpolitical works
 by persons in the PRC Government may be deemed unsuitable for
 publication. Before the lifting of -martial law, officials
 routinely censored other foreign publications. They continue,
 sporadically to restrict articles or periodicals they deem
 offensive, but, overall, there is less official interference
 with the free flow of international news than in the past.
 In contrast with the relatively unrestrained and highly
 competitive environment in which the print media now operate,
 television and radio remain.tightly controlled. The
 authorities partially or wholly own all three television
 stations. Television coverage of sensitive political subjects
 is restricted and slanted. Oppositionists charge that the
 military and the authorities control or own 82 percent of the
 radio stations. Requests by opposition politicians to open
 their own radio station have been turned down. The
 authorities' continuing efforts to jam PRC radio broadcasts
 have been ineffectual.
 Restrictions on academic freedom remain. Campus publications
 can be and are censored by school administrators; the severity
 nf censorship varies widely from'campus to campus. Student
 - lmonstrations occur and are tolerated, at least within
 university campuses, but dissident students risk being
 disciplined if they express their opinions too vigorously.
 Male students risk being harassed after graduation when they
 report for military service if their records show dissident
 activity in college. Colleges and universities have
 "education officers," who are military officers seconded to
 the Ministry of Education for the purpose of teaching the
 thought of Sun Yat-sen but who also monitor student attitudes
 and behavior. Teachers are pressured to discourage students
 from taking part in demonstrations. Teachers themselves risk
 being disciplined and harming their careers if they hold
 unorthodox views. Changes, however, are taking place on
 campus, and the trend is to separate professional from
 political activity. In early 1989, the faculty of National
 Taiwan University (NTU), the most prestigious university in
 Taiwan, voted to prohibit faculty members from holding
 concurrent party and university positions. Since the vast
 majority of such cases involve concurrent K4T party positions,
 the effect is to enhance the independence of the faculty from
 political control. NTU also in 1989 recognized an
 independently elected leader of the.student union.
 
 
 832
 TAIWANi
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is provided for in the Constitution but
 was restricted under martial law.. In 1987 the Legislative-
 Yuan passed the Assembly and March Law which allows peaceful
 demonstrations. They must be approved by the authorities and
 must not violate the Constitution or advocate communism or
 Taiwan's separation from China. The DPP and other opposition
 groups have organized and carried out numerous demonstrations
 under the new law.
 The new law provides, however, that demonstration organizers
 may be held responsible for the behavior of participants.
 Oppositionists have been prosecuted for alleged harm to public
 order and interference with public functions resulting from
 demonstrations they organized. In April 1989, DPP legislator
 Chu Kao-cheng was convicted of disturbing public order at a
 demonstration in the previous month and given an 18-month
 suspended'sentence. In June DPP Taipei City Council member
 Hsieh Chang-ting was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment in
 connection with a demonstration outside the LY on June 12,
 1987. DPP National Assembly member Hong Chi-chang was
 sentenced in October to 15 months in the same case and to 18
 months in cpnnection with another demonstration on May 20,
 1988. Prosecutors deny that politics plays a part in
 decisions to lay charges, but most observers believe that
 prosecutions of oppositionists are often politically motivated.
 The Election and Recall Law was amended in January 1989. It
 supports and strengthens the right of assembly by permitting
 political parties to organize, advertise, campaign, raise
 funds, and financially support candidates. The new law
 relaxes restrictions on the types of rallies, the time
 candidates may speak, and the use of loudspeakers. Although
 the new law retains the restriction on campaigning to the
 2-week period before the election, in practice this was not
 observed and no prosecutions were undertaken.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The constitutional provision for freedom to practice religion
 is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan inhabitants
 adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism, or a
 combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel. An exit permit is required for travel
 abroad. Emigration and private travel abroad have become
 freer since 1987 when the authorities began to allow travel to
 mainland China to visit relatives. There are now no countries
 to which civilian residents of Taiwan may not travel.
 Exit permits may be refused for a number of reasons, including
 failure to complete compulsory military service. Under the
 implementing regulations of the 1987 National Security Law,
 
 
 833
 ThAIA
 however, reasons for refusal must be given, and appeals may be
 made to a special board. Although in the past outspoken
 critics have been denied exit permits, no one was denied in
 1989.
 The authorities claim to recognize the right of Chinese who
 hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in Taiwan, to
 return from abroad. Nonresident citizens are usually issued
 "overseas Chinese" passports and require visas to travel to
 Taiwan. The authorities will not authorize the entry of
 Chinese between the ages of 16 and 70, even those who have
 long held Taiwan passports, if they have lived in Communist-
 controlled areas within the preceding 5 years. Exceptions
 include persons of outstanding merit and mainland residents
 coming-because of the serious ilines or death of close
 relatives.
 The authorities continue to deny visas to a number of overseas
 critics for political reasons. These included individuals who
 wanted to observe the December elections. A number of
 dissidents who entered without visas were subsequently either
 deported or prosecuted for illegal entry, including Columbus
 Leo, a Canadian citizen who received a 10-month sentence for
 violating Taiwan's National Security Law.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain persons or
 revoke their passports for behavior which harms the interests
 of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order, tradition, or
 Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law state that it
 gives the authorities the power to revoke the passport of any
 Taiwan citizen who makes remarks overseas that are deemed
 inimical to the interests of the Taiwan authorities. They
 argue that this violates the right of all citizens to return
 to their homeland. This law is not used frequently.
 Increasing numbers of Taiwanese dissidents previously denied
 reentry are now being permitted to return; however, a number
 of overseas Taiwanese dissidents still considered
 "undesirable" by the authorities have been denied entry into
 Taiwan under this legal provision.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,850 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled on Taiwan, and more than 3,000
 persons who arrived from Indochina-by small boats have been
 granted "temporary" refuge. Fifty-nine of the boat-people
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan. The others have been
 resettled in third countries. Although 168 remain officially
 classified as refugees, they have been practically resettled
 in Taiwan, and the refugee camp has been officially closed
 since late 1988. There have been no reports of refugees from
 non-Communist areas; authorities advise that such instances
 would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. Indochinese
 refugees are not forced to return to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Taiwan has taken some significant steps away from its
 authoritarian political system to a more pluralistic one, but
 the people do not yet have the ability to change their
 government through democratic means. Political power still
 resides with the KMT, which established itself in Taiwan after
 the defeat of the Japanese in 1945. Reflecting their
 constitutional claim to be the government of all of China, the
 authorities maintain not only a provincial and local
 
 
 834
 TAIWAN
 government system but also an array of central-level political
 bodies identical to those found on the mainland prior to
 1949. In the past, centers of power on Taiwan have been the
 Presidency, the Executive Yuan, the military and security
 apparatus, and the K1.T Central Standing Committee. Today,
 power is increasingly being shared with the Legislative Yuan
 which, in turn, is increasingly representative.
 Mainlander control of political power, however, has been
 gradually diminishing as more Taiwanese have taken over
 important leadership jobs. Taiwanese Lee Teng-huils accession
 to the Presidency and the KMT chairmanship, after President
 Chiang Ching-kuo's death in January 1988, was a particularly
 visible indicator of this trend. Native Taiwanese now
 comprisd a majority in the Cabinet and the Central Standing
 Committee. As a result of these changes, Taiwan's top
 decisionmakers are gradually becoming more representative of,
 and more responsive to, their constituents. This trend also
 reflects the impact of political reforms in fostering
 accountability as well as generational changes in which
 younger and more highly educated leaders of both Taiwan and
 mainland origin have been appointed to positions of authority.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the Legislative Yuan (the highest lawmaking body) and the
 National Assembly, which convenes every 6 years to elect the
 President and Vice President. There have been no general
 elections to these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue in office and form
 the majority of these bodies. Additional representatives from
 Taiwan province and the offshore islands have been chosen
 since 1969 in periodic "supplementary elections."
 Nevertheless, of the 768 National Assembly seats filled as of
 the end of 1989, only 84 are supplemental members. Of the 250
 Legislative Yuan seats filled as of the end of 1989, 67 were
 supplemental legislators elected in Taiwan. These 67 were the
 most active members in the legislature, due largely to the
 advanced age and incapacity of those elected four decades ago.
 In the face of persistent and growing calls for more
 representative institutions, the KT has committed itself to
 rejuvenating the central parliamentary bodies. Elections on
 December 2, 1989, increased elected legislative seats to 101.
 Plans have been announced to triple the number of elected
 National Assembly delegates by 1992. There is also a draft
 retirement plan for aging mainlander representatives to
 encourage them to step down voluntarily. The authorities,
 however, have refused to adopt any comprehensive measures to
 end the mandates of those parliamentarians, believing that it
 would call into question their claim that these bodies
 represent all of China. Suspicious that the KMT is seeking
 unfairly to prolong its majority, the DPP is calling for the
 complete reelection of all central parliamentarians by the
 people of Taiwan. Even some supplemental KMT legislators call
 for the retirement of members serving indefinite terms.
 The KMT continues to be the dominant political party in
 Taiwan, as has been the case since 1945. Originally composed
 overwhelmingly of mainlanders, its membership of over 2
 million is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. There are also
 two miniscule, nominally independent, parties which came from
 the mainland. The KMT's structure and control mechanisms are
 based on Leninist models; however, the party's operations are
 considerably more flexible. In 1988 the KMT began to remove
 
 
 835
 TAIWANR
 formal party organs from the military and the school systems
 and to democratize its party structure.
 The passage of the Civic Organizations Law in January 1989
 legalized the organization of political parties. The major
 opposition party, the DPP, was formed in 1986 in defiance of
 martial law; it registered as a political party in April
 1989. The Labor Party was formed in 1987 and the Workers
 Party, an offshoot of the Labor Party, in March 1989. At
 present there are 38 registered parties.
 The DPP claims a membership of 25,000. The other opposition
 parties are much smaller. The role of the opposition is
 greater than its small numbers might indicate. Opposition
 members are very vocal in elective bodies and frequently use
 interpellation sessions to raise controversial or sensitive
 issues. Their activities have spurred some KMT legislators to
 criticize regime policies openly.
 Opposition candidates still face several disadvantages in the
 election process, principally the authorities' virtual
 monopoly of television and radio. The Central Election
 Commission remains under the control of the Executive Yuan.
 Half its membership of 14 is KMT, one is DPP, and the
 remainder are independent. The Control Yuan (the highest
 supervisory organ) continues to be indirectly elected under a
 voting system that guarantees KMT domination. Persons
 convicted of sedition under martial law, including some of the
 best known figures of the opposition, continue to be barred
 from voting, holding public office, and practicing certain
 professions. The benefits the KMT enjoys in terms of access
 to public and private funds and assistance from administrative.
 and security agencies give it an unfair advantage according to
 opposition politicians. Finally, although the law prohibits
 vote-buying and bribery, critics of the electoral system say
 that the law is ineffective in preventing such practices.
 Nevertheless, the December elections were an important
 milestone in Taiwan's evolution to a more democratic system.
 The KDT won about 58 percent of the overall popular vote, down
 from 70 percent in 1986, and the DPP increased its popular
 vote from about 23 to 30 percent.
 Universal suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and
 over. Voting is voluntary and by secret ballot; voter turnout
 in the December elections ieached about 75 percent.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Taiwan-authorities permit representatives of international
 human rights organizations, including Amnesty International
 and Asia Watch, to visit and meet Taiwan citizens freely.
 Taiwan has two principal human rights organizations: the
 Chinese Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the Taiwan
 Association for Human Rights (TAHR). The CAHR, staffed mostly
 by retired officials, is regarded as the establishment-
 oriented-human rights organ. The TAHR is aligned with the
 DPP. The effectiveness of the two associations is limited,
 however, by the fact that they do not coordinate activities
 and, in fact, have contact only when representatives of
 international human rights organizations visit Taiwan.
 
 
 836
 TAIWAN
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of
 aboriginal descendants of Malayo-Polynesians, slightly more
 than 1 percent of Taiwan's population, who were already
 established in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers
 arrived. They face no official discrimination but significant
 cultural and economic barriers. Specially designated seats in
 both central and provincial legislatures are reserved for
 representatives of these aboriginal people, and the
 authorities have instituted a number of social programs to
 ease their transition into the dominant Chinese society. The
 aboriginal people complain that they are prevented from owning
 ancestral lands in mountain areas under the control of the
 authorities. Furthermore, they are not allowed to use
 non-Chinese personal names on legal documents. Some complain
 of economic exploitation by commercial or tourist concerns.
 The sale of aboriginal children into prostitution is a serious
 social problem.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, but it exists both de
 facto and de jure. There are still some laws that
 discriminate against women, relating mostly to divorce issues
 and inheritance, but a revised Civil Code passed by the
 Legislative Yuan in March 1985 provides for more equal
 treatment of women in the areas of marriage and divorce.
 Women have cqmplained of being forced to quit jobs because of
 age or childbearing restrictions, and restrictive quotas exist
 within certain ministries to control the number of women who
 may be hired even after passing the rigorous civil service
 examination. A women's rights movement is active and growing.
 Although data on violence against women are not available,
 women active in politics, human rights, and women's
 organizations single out intrafamily violence as a serious
 problem, especially wife beating. There is a tradition.of
 tolerance for wife beating and strong social pressure for
 abused wives to conceal their treatment to avoid "disgracing"
 their families. The critics of this violence believe that
 greater mobility, education, and job opportunities are making
 women less inclined to tolerate such abuse and more willing to
 complain of mistreatment, but it is not known if the number of
 actual complaints filed increased in 1989. A somewhat similar
 situation exists with regard to rape, since the victims are
 still socially stigmatized. Under Taiwan law, the authorities
 may not undertake a prosecution for rape; only the victim may
 make a complaint. Because rape trials are public, women are
 reluctant to prosecute their attackers. Rape counseling
 services are not yet available, but feminist and human rights
 organizations have assisted rape victims, and victims are now
 more willing to come forward and press charges.
 In 1989 the problem of child prostitutes received considerable
 public attqntioh. Women's rights activists criticized police
 for not closing down brothels and judicial authorities for
 allowing parents to sell their daughters, sometimes
 repeatedly, into prostitution. According to some reports,
 violence and coercion are used by brothel owners to prevent
 girls from escaping.
 Although the Taiwanese dialect is the mother tongue of most
 inhabitants of Taiwan, the authorities forbid its use in the
 educational system and impose limits on its use in broadcast
 
 
 837
 media--Mandarin Chinese broadcasting must not be less than 55
 percent on A.1 radio and 70 percent on FM radio and television.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor's right of association is seriously limited by a number
 of laws and regulations. One of these requires organizers to
 seek the approval of the authorities to establish unions.
 Labor unions may draw up their own rules and constitutions,
 but these must be submitted to the authorities for review.
 Unions may be dissolved by the authorities if they do not meet
 legal requirements for certification or if their activities
 disturb public order. According to official sources, no
 unions have been dissolved, although certification has been
 denied where there were competing unions. In the latter
 cases, the unions were asked to reconcile their differences
 and file as a single union. Civil servants, teachers, defense
 industry workers, and administrators acting on behalf of
 employers are prohibited from organizing unions. Public
 employees particularly guard their political views for fear of
 jeopardizing job benefits or opportunities for promotions.
 Most of Taiwan's 3,300 unions are controlled by the KMT, but
 the DPP and Labor Party organizers have made inroads as
 workers have grown increasingly restive over salary issues and
 working conditions. In the last 3 years, workers have
 sometimes rejected KMT or management-endorsed union slates.
 The authorities in 1988 moved to strengthen laws regarding
 workers' right to strike. Revisions of the labor disputes
 law, which became effective in June 1988, recognize labor's
 right to strike but place serious restrictions on it. Both
 labor and management are forbidden from disrupting the
 "working order" when either mediation or arbitration is in
 progress. Before a strike can be called, it must be approved
 by a vote of the full membership of the union. The
 authorities have required official approval before such a
 meeting can be called. Applications for arbitration may be
 made to the local government. The authorities have, in at
 least one case, not waited for such an application but deemed
 the dispute to be in arbitration in order to avoid a strike.
 Stiff penalties may be levied should no-strike/no-retaliation
 clauses be violated, but critics say that employers have
 ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers without
 any legal action being taken against them. Regardless of
 legal limitations on the right to strike, however, workers
 have struck or staged slowdowns with increasing frequency.
 Unions may form confederations but no administrative district,
 including cities, counties, and provinces, can have more than
 one labor confederation. The Chinese Federation of Labor, the
 only legal union federation on Taiwan, is closely associated
 with the K?T and is affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Taiwan is not a member of
 the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 As of September 1989, 2.488 million workers, or approximately
 30.13 percent of Taiwan's paid employees, belonged to 3,336
 unions. Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse
 employment to, dismiss, or otherwise unfairly treat workers
 because they are-union mefbers. There have been occasional
 
 
 838
 TA.IWAN
 reports, however, of antiunion discrimination in labor
 disputes. The Chairman of the Workers Party was fired in May
 for union activity, and a foreign priest was abruptly expelled
 in March because of his involvement in the independent labor
 movement. Laws governing union activities apply equally
 within export processing zones.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the collective
 agreements law but is not mandatory. Only about 341
 collective agreements were in force as of March 1989. Since
 such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises and
 less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this
 category, the proportion of workers covered by them is small.
 Legal restrictions on the right to strike and provisions for
 involuntary mediation or arbitration seriously weaken
 collective bargaining.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Taiwan law does not allow forced or compulsory labor, except
 as punishment for crime. However, the police offenses law
 permits compulsory labor up to a total of 16 hours as
 punishment for minor crimes without recourse to judicial due
 process. There have been reports of women and girls being
 forced into prostitution or prevented from leaving brothels.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 15, and interaction between
 the law stipulating this and a compulsory education law
 effectivelykeeps child labor to a very low level.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law, promulgated in 1984, was
 enacted to provide minimum labor standards. It covers some
 3.5 million of Taiwan's 5.6 million paid workers. The law has
 enjoyed only limited success in several areas, and there is a
 growing sentiment that it and other labor laws should be
 strengthened and extended to cover additional workers.
 By law, the workweek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day,
 6 days per week) with certain provisions for overtime. Taiwan
 in 1988 increased the basic wage, which functions essentially
 as a minimum wage, to approximately $342 per month. There is
 general agreement that the basic wage is less than that needed
 to assure a decent standard of living; however, the average
 manufacturing wage is over $633 per month. Most large firms
 provide their employees with allowances for transportation,
 meals, housing, and other benefits which can amount to another
 60 to 80 percent of base salary. There are minimum standards
 for working conditions and health and safety precautions.
 Unemployment insurance is being studied and may be offered to
 a small segment of workers in a pilot program.
 The authorities' efforts to increase workers' awareness of
 their rights through union education programs and the
 establishment of complaint channels appear to be bearing some
 fruit. In 1988 there were 67 lawsuits filed involving
 management and labor.
 Despite the establishment of the Council on Labor Affairs,
 many provisions of labor legislation have not been enforced
 because the number of inspectors is far too small. There are
 272 inspectors for approximately 123,000 enterprises covered
 
 
 839
 TIAN
 by the Labor Standards Law. In 1988, 13,655 enterprises, 10.6
 percent of the total, were inspected. Since most enterprises
 are small, family-owned operations employing relatives who
 will not report violations, actual adherence to the hours,
 wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to
 document but is thought to be minimal.
 
 
 840
