TAIWAN
 Taiwan is evolving toward a more open society. A
 quarter century of peace, political stability, economic
 growth and extensive contact with the West has brought
 about significant advances in the observance of inter-
 nationally recognized human rights. Nonetheless, Taiwan
 remains essentially a one-party state operating under
 martial law provisions which the authorities state are
 necessary owing to the continuing confrontation with the
 People's Republic of China (PRC). Human rights viola-
 tions continue to occur but their frequency has diminsh-
 ed as Taiwan has shown increasing sensitivity to human
 rights concerns in recent years.
 The Constitution, which guarantees such fundamental-human
 rights and liberties as personal freedom and freedom of
 speech, press, religion, petition and assembly, was
 adopted by the National Assembly of the Republic of
 China in 1946. In 1948, however, the same body enacted
 the "Temporary Provisions Effective During the Period of
 Communist Rebellion" and declared martial law. These
 laws suspend indefinitely all the Constitution's guar-
 antees of individual rights and freedoms. They also
 confer upon the authorities the right to control the
 press, censor the mails, prohibit strikes, conduct
 warrantless searches, register property, and prohibit
 meetings.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is proscribed by Taiwan law and its use is denied
 by the authorities. Reports of torture in Taiwan are now
 rare; none came to the attention of the United States
 Government during 1978. When such reports appeared in
 the past, they were usually associated with pretrial
 detention and the extraction of confessions. The
 
 (415)
 
 
 416
 Amnesty International Report on Taiwan for 1977 re-
 marked that torture was used in some instances during
 interrogation. While mistreatment may still occur
 occasionally, it is very difficult to verify.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Imprisonment is the usual form of punishment in Taiwan.
 While those convicted of sedition under provisions of
 martial law can be sentenced to death, only one person
 has been executed on sedition charges in recent years.
 A few individuals convicted of non-political crimes
 such as murder or, in some cases, armed robbery have
 also been given the death sentence. Prison conditions
 on Taiwan have been improving lately but reports al-
 leging inadequate medical care continue. There have
 also been allegations of degrading treatment during
 periods of detention. Such treatment has reportedly
 consisted of continuous interrogation lasting several
 days without opportunities for the detainee to sleep,
 bathe or change clothes. The Department of State does
 not have enough information to make a judgment on the
 validity of these reports.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 In the 1950s there were reports of people disappearing
 without word of their fate. Arbitrary arrests are now
 infrequent, although individuals suspected of "sedition",
 as defined in martial law provisions, have in past years
 been detained and held incommunicado for weeks and at
 times months without being formally charged or tried.
 However, in most cases, persons detained under the
 martial law decrees are either indicted after an initial
 period of detention or released. Under provisions of
 the Criminal Code, the length of the detention period
 in such cases may be as long as four months.
 The major example of arbitrary detention in 1978 was
 the case of a prominent Taiwanese political activist,
 Chen Chu, who was arrested in June after the authori-
 ties found anti-government literature in her apartment.
 She was detained for two weeks without access to her
 family or lawyer, after which she was released.
 
 
 417
 
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Stringency in the application of martial law has varied
 over time and with individual cases. Opposition to
 "basic policy", e.g., expressing views contrary to the
 authorities' claim to represent all China, advocating
 accommodation or contacts with the People's Republic of
 China and supporting independence for Taiwan, are consi-
 dered seditious and punishable under martial law. The
 authorities continue to try civilians suspected of
 "sedition" in military courts. Normal habeas corpus
 procedures do not appear to be applied in a consistent
 fashion in such cases, although the accused is repre-
 sented by counsel once the trial begins. In the recent
 past, members of the accused's family have been allowed
 to attend the trials and occasionally even carefully
 selected members of the public as well. While appeals
 to higher military courts in some cases result in
 reduced sentences, lower military court convictions have
 not been reversed.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 In contrast with the situation two decades ago, invasion
 of the home is not a common practice in Taiwan. The
 non-violent searches which do occur are normally, though
 not always, authorized by a warrant. Warrantless
 searches, like those properly authorized, have been con-
 ducted in an effort to obtain incriminating evidence.
 2.   Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such Vital
 Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 The authorities on Taiwan have an impressive record in
 helping to fulfill the basic needs of their people.
 The gap between the rich and the poor is steadily narrow-
 ing and in terms of income distribution Taiwan's society
 is one of the most egalitarian in the world. The ratio
 of per capita income between the top twenty percent and
 bottom twenty percent of the population has been reduced
 from about five to one in 1966 to about four to one in
 1976, against a background of rapid economic growth in
 a relatively free market economy. Programs have been
 designed to ensure that rapid industrialization does not
 exacerbate the moderate disparity that exists between
 
 
 418
 the rural and urban sectors. Tax policy is designed to
 alleviate the direct tax burden on lower income groups
 by emphasizing collection of tariffs and sumptuary taxes
 while maintaining a high degree of progressivity in
 the personal income tax structure. Rapid and large-
 scale urbanization results in somewhat congested housing
 in Taiwan's major cities. Nevertheless, slum conditions
 are gradually ameliorating and housing in both rural
 and urban areas is generally adequate. In February 1978
 it was announced that public housing has been included
 in a list of major new construction projects to be under-
 taken under the first (1976-1981) and second (1982-1987)
 six-year economic development plans. An increasing number
 of families are beginning to enjoy modern conveniences
 and luxury items. For instance, the number of TV sets
 per 1,000 households increased from 175 in 1968 to 878
 in 1975.
 Taiwan has developed an effective public health program
 and a system of health stations throughout the island.
 All major epidemic diseases have been brought under
 control. Health promotion programs include maternal and
 child health, family planning, school health, dental
 health, special care for disabled children, communicable
 diseases control and environmental sanitation. According
 to United Nations statistics, in 1977 Taiwan had one
 hospital bed for every 444 people and one physican for
 every 1,377 people. Life expectancy is among the highest
 in the world. Adult literacy on Taiwan is 93 percent.
 About 4.5 million people, 27 percent of the population,
 are presently in school.  In 1968, a nine-year free
 education system was instituted. Six years of elementary
 school and three years of junior high school are com-
 pulsory for all children over the age of six. About sixty
 percent of junior high school graduates pass examinations
 and enter three-year senior high and vocational schools.
 Taiwan's extensive system of universities, colleges,
 junior colleges and other institutions of higher learning
 currently enrolls, through competitive examinations,
 almost 300,000 undergraduate and graduate students.
 People in Taiwan enjoy a good diet. Per capita calorie
 and protein intakes have gradually increased since the
 1950s, reaching in 1977 estimated intakes of 2,780 calories
 and 76.5 grams of protein per day. These are among the
 highest in the world.
 
 
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, In-
 cluding:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Individuals are not free to question publicly basic
 policies of the authorities. Martial law gives the
 authorities the right to limit freedom of speech and
 freedom of the press, both of which are guaranteed by
 the Constitution.  (See Introduction and Section l.d.)
 The authorities conduct post-publication censorship and
 recall articles and publications that oppose "basic
 policy" or which are regarded as excessively critical
 of the leadership. They also censor foreign publica-
 tions, but in recent years have lessened restrictions
 and allowed greater access to information on develop-
 ments abroad.
 Several outspoken publications have been suspended or
 banned by the authorities, and there are credible
 reports of independent newspaper owners being forced
 to sell out to officially sanctioned purchasers. The
 papers then change political orientation. The
 Government Information Office announced in March 1978
 that a one-year suspension of registrations for new
 magazines would be effective immediately. It also
 announced that no books, pictorial matter, speeches or
 biographies concerning officials could be
 published without pre-publication screening by either
 the official involved or the Government Information
 Office. A serious recent violation of freedom of the
 press occurred in March when police and internal
 security forces seized a new book critical of establish-
 ment efforts to defeat independent oppositionist
 candidates in the November 1977 local elections.
 Copies of the printed but still unbound book were
 confiscated as they were being assembled at a
 publishing house in Taipei.
 The labor force on Taiwan is composed of 68 percent
 men and 32 percent women. In 1970 the figures were
 70 and 30 percent, respectively, and in 1965 they
 were 74 and 26 percent. There is no meaningful
 tradition of trade unionism, and labor unions do not
 exercise significant influence in either the economic
 
 
 420
 or political sphere. While labor unions are permitted
 to organize, walkouts and strikes are prohibited under
 martial law. Labor organizations have, however, been
 moderately successful in gaining concessions from
 management. Slowdowns to voice workers' demands have
 been successfully employed; and there have been
 instances of threats of violence against management
 and destruction of company property. A shortage of
 workers in the manufacturing sector has also forced
 employers to heed labor's demands for higher wages,
 increased fringe benefits and better working conditions.
 The average monthly earnings for a worker in manu-
 facturing rose from US $34 in 1969 to US $168 in 1978
 as the average monthly hours worked dropped from 238
 to 223.
 The authorities on Taiwan consider themselves the
 upholder and defender of the ancient Chinese Confucian
 tradition, a tradition which permeates all levels of
 society. There are few laws biased against women, and
 those which are relate mostly to divorce issues and
 inheritance. However, Confucianism's strong anti-
 feminism has resulted in pervasive and ingrained
 social patterns that relegate women to a clearly
 subordinate role. Rapid industrialization and a
 gradual liberalizing trend throughout society are now
 changing the status of women. A fledgling "women's
 rights" movement is slowly growing. The authorities
 are suspicious of this movement both because it
 attacks some of the fundamental tenets of Confucian-
 ism and because they tend to see any group which is
 critical of the established order as "subversive".
 Insofar as purely theological dogma is concerned,
 there is freedom of religion on Taiwan. The pre-
 dominant religion is a combination of Buddism and
 Taoism. Other religions include Christianity and
 Islam. Some pseudo-Buddhist sects and Reverend
 Sun Myung Moon's Christian Unification Church have
 been banned. The bans .appear to reflect the
 authorities' concern about the social policies of
 these sects rather than their religious beliefs.
 In 1977 the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (100,000
 members) issued a "Declaration on Human Rights".
 This document has become controversial in Taiwan,
 
 
 421
 and has placed Taiwan's Presbyterians in direct opposi-
 tion to the authorities' basic policy of the unity of
 China, by calling for the creation of an independent
 Taiwan. The authorities view the manifesto as a highly
 political document which calls their very legitimacy into
 question. In the spring of 1978 they attempted to block
 the reelection of Reverend Kao Chun-ming, one of the
 Declaration's authors, as Moderator of the General
 Assembly (highest governing body) of the Presbyterian
 Church in Taiwan. The Presbyterians claim the
 authorities have denied exit permits to Presbyterians
 travelling on General Assembly or church business,
 demanding that they apply as individuals instead.
 Reportedly, the authorities have also attempted to*
 seize church records listing deacons and other church
 officers, and haveI seized bibles printed by the
 Presbyterians which have been romanized in Taiwanese
 (that is, bibles transliterated.in the Taiwanese
 dialect and printed in roman script; the island's
 official language is Mandarin Chinese).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of assembly, but
 martial law powers have been used to ban public meet-
 ings by those suspected of dissident views.
 b.   Freedom of Movement within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is general freedom of internal travel in Taiwan
 except to sparsely populated mountainous areas, for
 which a police pass is required to control entry into
 secure areas and to protect the aboriginies from ex-
 ploitation.
 Travel abroad or emigration has gradually become
 relatively free, except to mainland China and other
 communist countries. As Taiwan's economy has
 prospered, foreign exchange restrictions on travel
 have been relaxed and the number of people travelling
 abroad and living overseas has increased dramatically.
 Until very recently, travel specifically for tourism
 was officially discouraged and occasionally prohibited.
 In November 1978, however, the authorities announced
 that beginning January 1, 1979, passports would be
 issued for the purpose of tourism. This should lead
 
 
 422
 to further increases in travel abroad, although the
 measure does not apply to servicemen or men between
 the ages of fifteen and thirty.
 There are credible reports of people who have been
 denied exit permits for security reasons or because
 they or their relatives abroad have criticized the
 political establishment. A few foreigners have been
 denied entry visas on political grounds.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 Since 1950, democratic institutions have been establish-
 ed at the provincial and local levels and have function-
 ed reasonably well. Universal suffrage exists for all
 citizens twenty years of age and over. Elections have
 been held regularly over the past two decades for all
 local (i.e. Taiwan Province) legislative offices and
 for the chief executives of cities, counties and villages
 on Taiwan. However, the governor of Taiwan Province
 and the mayor of Taipei City are both appointed by the
 central authorities.
 Since the authorities on Taiwan maintain their claim
 to be the sole legal government of all China, there
 are a series of central entities over and above those
 which pertain solely to the island of Taiwan. Among
 these are the National Assembly, which elects the
 president and vice president, and the Legislative
 Yuan, which is the central legislature. There have
 been no general elections to these two bodies since
 1948, the authorities taking the position that such
 elections cannot be held until they reestablish
 control over the mainland. Since 1969 "supplementary
 elections" for these central bodies have been held in
 order to choose additional officials from Taiwan and
 adjacent islands. These elections have not sub-
 stantially altered the composition of the central
 bodies.
 Despite the theoretical existence of two opposition
 parties, Taiwan is effectively a one-party state.
 Candidates who oppose the Nationalist Party
 (Kuomintang, of KMT) run as independents. Even
 though the majority of the candidates elected are
 
 
 423
 from the KMT, independent candidates have increasingly
 been successful in the recent past. The success of KMT
 candidates rests partly on general approval of the
 political establishment's economic and social programs
 and partly on the restrictions placed on the civil and
 political rights of its opponents, e.g., the limitations
 on free speech, assembly and political organization.
 The press on Taiwan gives great prominence to KMT
 candidates but tends to give little or no publicity
 to the views and positions of the independents.
 On December 15, 1978 President Carter announced that
 on January 1, 1979, the United States would establish
 diplomatic relations with the PRC and sever diplomatic
 and other official relations with Taipei. Taiwan's
 President Chiang Ching-kuo subsequently cancelled the
 National Assembly and Legislative Yuan supplementary
 elections which had been scheduled for December 23, 1978.
 At the same time, stricter controls on the press were
 introduced and more rigorous censorship was applied
 to publications entering Taiwan from abroad. President
 Chiang took these actions under martial law provisions
 which allow him to "take emergency measures to avert
 imminent danger to the security of the state...."
 The Taiwan authorities have said that the elections
 will be rescheduled for an as yet unspecified future
 date.
 4.   Attitudes and Record Regarding International
 and Non-government Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 International organizations such as Amnesty Interna-
 tional have visited Taiwan and met with officials there.
 In 1976 the Premier offered to allow a visiting U.S.
 Congressional delegation to visit Taiwan prisons, but
 the invitation was declined. President (then Premier)
 Chiang Ching-kuo, in his December 1976 address to the
 National Assembly, stated that "we want the world to
 know the truth and we shall be glad to cooperate with
 the investigation [of Taiwan prisons] by any
 international organization that is based on good will
 toward us." Thus far, this offer has not been-taken
 up.
 
 
