 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity is dominated by the Nationalist Party, the
 Kuomintang or KMT, in an essentially one-party authoritarian
 system. In April a 12-man group from the KMT Central Standing
 Committee was tasked with studying sensitive political issues
 and reforms, such as lifting martial law and ending the ban on
 the formation of new political parties. In September the
 opposition, in defiance of the martial law ban on the
 establishment of new political parties, announced the
 formation of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). Though
 the DPP is technically illegal, the authorities have taken no
 action against it, and did not interfere with the convening of
 its first party congress in November. DPP candidates
 campaigned under their new party's banner in the December 6
 election.
 The Taiwan authorities, who claim to be the government of all
 of China, maintain the full array of central political bodies
 originally established on the China mainland under the 1948
 Constitution. In recent years, supplemental elections have
 brought in younger members and have increased the vitality of
 these somewhat vestigial organs. The Legislative Yuan, the
 central legislative body, is evolving into a forum for
 questioning policy but still lacks power to change it.
 The small and aging leadership group, whose members came to
 Taiwan from the China mainland after World War II, runs the
 KMT, the military, the security apparatus, and the executive
 bureaucracy. political control is exercised through these
 bodies under a constitution whose major democratic provisions
 have been circumscribed by the martial law provisions enacted
 in 1949. The authorities had been justifying martial law as
 necessary to counter the threat of military action or
 subversion from the People's Republic of China (PRC), but
 recently they have announced their intention to rescind
 martial law in the near future. Although the people of Taiwan
 enjoy considerable influence in local-level decisionmaking,
 they have little input into the major political decisions
 affecting them.
 Political evolution has occurred on Taiwan, but it has not
 kept pace with economic development. Human rights are
 publicly endorsed but incompletely realized. Although
 tolerated, opposition activity is restricted. The expression
 and publication of political views are controlled, and
 opposition activities are monitored, both at home and abroad.
 The confrontation over the issue of press freedom that flared
 in 1984, when proliferating opposition publications printed a
 rash of articles on traditionally sensitive topics,
 intensified in 1986. Several opposition politicians and
 magazine publishers and editors were imprisoned or sentenced
 to prison for violating the libel or election laws or both.
 The opposition and some independent observers charge that
 these cases were politically inspired.
 A vocal opposition exists and enjoys a wide range of popular
 support, as well as some freedom of expression. With the
 mediation of scholars, the KMT and the opposition met twice
 during the spring to conduct a dialogue. In October the
 Committee announced its decision to lift martial law and
 replace it with a national security law, and to revise current
 laws to permit the legalization of new political parties.
 Draft legislation is currently being prepared in both
 areas,and the authorities have announced their intention to
 lift martial law officially early in 1987. However, arguing
 
 
 699
 TAIWAN
 that current laws are sufficient for Taiwan's security needs,
 oppositionists maintain there is no need for a new security
 law. New legislation is expected to continue some of the
 martial law restrictions on civil liberties. Military courts'
 jurisdiction over civilians, however, will be ended.
 Native Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese who migrated from the
 mainland primarily in the 17th and 18th centuries, dominate
 the private economy. They now constitute more than 80 percent
 of the population but still are underrepresented at the upper
 levels of the ruling elite. Although the authorities continue
 gradually to recruit increasing numbers of Taiwanese to fill
 important economic, political, military, and security posts,
 dissatisfaction of many in Taiwan with mainlander domination
 has resulted in demands for more representative government.
 The increasing prevalence of higher education, foreign travel,
 and access to news from abroad has accentuated the felt need
 for political development, particularly among the younger
 generation. An expanding, prosperous, and educated middle
 class displays a growing willingness to pressure the
 authorities about human rights issues.
 Throughout the past 37 years, Taiwan authorities have promoted
 economic development vigorously. In recent decades, Taiwan's
 largely free-market economy has been one of the fastest
 growing in the world. Its estimated per capita gross national
 product (GNP) of over US$3,672 ranks fourth highest in East
 Asia and is accompanied by high standards of education,
 health, and nutrition.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of killings for political reasons.
 b. Disappearance
 In recent years, there have been no substantiated reports of
 persons being abducted or secretly arrested by the security
 services.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture. There
 are credible reports, however, that individual members of the
 police or security forces have resorted at times to physical
 violence in interrogating suspects.
 Taiwan civilian prisons are severely overcrowded. According
 to a 1986 Ministry of Justice report, at the end of May 1986
 civilian prisons built to accommodate 28,917 prisoners were
 holding 34,222. Because of this overcrowding, prisoners are
 forced to share cramped living quarters and have few
 opportunities for work, exercise, or family visits. In April
 the Ministry announced that under its 6-year plan, reported in
 1985, some facilities would be replaced, others expanded, and
 still others constructed to increase inmate capacity by
 12,000. Two new detention facilities, in Tainan and
 Kaohsiung, are already in use.
 
 
 700,
 TAIWAN
 According to the Ministry, at the end of 1984 about 13 percent
 of the inmates in Taiwan prisons were serving sentences for
 writing bad checks. In 1986 the Legislative Yuan passed a
 bill, to come into effect on January 1, 1987, that changed
 this from a criminal offense to a civil one, thus eliminating
 the prison sentence. This move could alleviate prison
 overcrowding. According to the Cabinet, some 300 persons
 serving sentences for writing bad checks may be paroled by the
 end of 1986.
 The military prisons administered by the security police,
 where political prisoners are confined, are reportedly less
 crowded. Prisoners are said to receive the same food as
 soldiers and to have work and recreation opportunities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Taiwan law requires that within 24 hours after an arrest, the
 arresting authorities must give notice in writing to the
 arrested person and his designated relative or friend, stating
 the reason for the arrest or detention. The Code of Criminal
 Procedure, which does not apply to martial law offenses,
 specifies that the authorities may detain an accused person
 for up to 2 months during the investigation phase prior to the
 filing of a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months during
 the trial. Furthermore, during the investigation phase, the
 prosecuting.6fficer may apply to the court for one extension
 of 2 months. The period of detention may also be extended
 during the trial. In recent cases, the authorities generally
 have followed these procedures and extended the periods of
 detention. Exceptions occur more frequently in the military
 courts. Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal
 offenses can be released on bail at the judge's discretion.
 Suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer present
 during the investigation phase. The Taipei Bar Association
 has complained, however, that defense lawyers are sometimes
 barred by prosecutors from visiting their clients during this
 phase. Persons arrested by the security services do not have
 the right to legal counsel until after they have been formally
 indicted.
 The police legally may arrest without a warrant anyone they
 suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison and may call in suspects or
 witnesses for questioning without a formal summons. Critics
 in the legal establishment, the press, and elective offices
 point out that these powers could easily lead to abuses.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan passed the so-called
 'anti-hoodlum" law, which accords police authorities broad
 powers, including the power to determine whether a person
 should be designated as a hoodlum. The civil courts confirm
 or deny police requests to remand hoodlums for reformatory
 education but have no authority to determine the length of
 such education, which is determined by the military; the
 length may range from 1 to 5 years. Detainees can be held
 incommunicado, and their families need not be notified of
 their arrests.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute
 and punish offenders. The provisions of the statute empower
 the police to impose and carry out sentences of up to 2 weeks
 imprisonment.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 701
 TAIWAN
 Taiwan does not allow forced or compulsory labor, and there
 have been no reports of the practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide for trial by jury. Informed observers
 characterize the judiciary as basically independent, although
 susceptible to pressure from the authorities on whom judges
 depend for career advancement.
 In 1986 the courts sentenced a number of opposition
 politicians and magazine publishers and editors to jail for
 violating the election or libel laws. With regard to these
 cases, both the opposition and some independent observers have
 raised doubts about the impartiality of the judiciary.
 Under martial law, in effect since 1949, civilians who commit
 certain offenses, including sedition, may be tried in military
 courts. The authorities occasionally transfer "important'
 civilian cases (involving such crimes as armed robbery) to the
 military courts. Three cases involving a total of 6 people
 were transferred from the civilian to military courts during
 1986. The authorities state that the military courts' swifter
 and generally more severe justice acts as a deterrent to
 potential criminals. The military courts' sentences are
 reviewed only within the Ministry of National Defense.
 Trials, including those held in military courts, are public,
 but attendance at trials involving juveniles or persons
 considered politically sensitive may require permission from
 the court. Defendants have a right to an attorney, at public
 expense if needed. Following the traditional Chinese pattern,
 in a typical criminal court case parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge (in High Court sessions by the
 Chief Judge) but not by a lawyer or prosecutor. The judge may
 decline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party
 wishes to submit. Civil, but not martial, law specifically
 provides the defendant with protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases generally are heard through several brief court
 sessions, often separated by weeks or months. In High Court
 appellate proceedings, new evidence may be introduced, and
 judicial review of District Court judgments covers both fact
 and law. Persons convicted in cases where the sentence
 exceeds 3 years have a right to review by the Supreme Court.
 Those tried in military court do not have this right. The
 Supreme Court limits its review to the law of the case and to
 specific procedural aspects. More than one-half of all
 eligible cases are appealed and reviewed.
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. Critics of
 the regime have estimated, however, that there are about 90 to
 100 political prisoners. According to the Executive Yuan
 (Cabinet), civilians have been tried by military courts for
 sedition, defined as opposition to basic policy. This
 includes expressing Communist sympathies, espousing views
 contrary to the authorities' claim to represent all of China,
 and supporting an independent legal status for Taiwan.
 In February 1986, Chen Chu, one of the eight persons convicted
 of sedition in 1980 for their role in the 1979 Kaohsiung Human
 Rights Day rally, was released on parole. Thirteen other
 prisoners serving sentences for sedition were released with
 her. Another 13 prisoners convicted of sedition were paroled
 
 
 702
 TAIWAN
 in October. Shih Ming-teh, one of the 4 persons still serving
 a sentence f6r his part in the Kaohsiung rally, launched a
 hunger strike in March to demand that the authorities release
 his fellow Kaohsiung Incident prisoners. In April Shih was
 transferred to a military hospital where he was fed
 intravenously and was reported also to be taking liquids and
 some fruit. To mark the centenary of the birth of the late
 Chiang Kai-Shek, the Ministry of National Defense announced on
 October 30 the parole of 147 prisoners convicted of various
 offenses under martial law, including 13 prisoners convicted
 of sedition. None of the four remaining Kaohsiung Incident
 prisoners was included.
 According to relatives, conditions for most of the remaining
 Kaohsiung incident prisoners have improved over the years.
 They complain, however,-that the prisoners continue to be
 denied access to regular work programs and recreational
 activities. They also complain that health care should be
 better. The authorities deny these charges, claiming that the
 curtailed activities and contact are aimed at protecting the
 prisoners from possible harm from other inmates and that
 medical care is the same for all prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The daily life of a person not actively engaged in politics
 is subject only to minor interference by the authorities.
 Authorities impose limits on the use of the Taiwanese dialect
 (the mother tongue of most inhabitants of Taiwan) on
 television and radio. Romanized Taiwanese versions of the
 Bible are not permitted. The authorities do not interfere
 with basic family matters such as the right to marry or have
 children as one chooses. Membership in the KMT, the dominant
 political organization, is a matter of free choice.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant, while not
 common, does occur occasionally. As noted in Section 1.d.,
 the Code of Criminal Procedure generally requires that
 searches be authorized by warrants, signed by a prosecutor or,
 during a trial, by a judge. However, exceptions to this rule
 have increased substantially following the July 1982 revision
 of the Code to provide for warrantless arrests under certain
 circumstances. When making such arrests, police also may
 search persons or property without prior authorization. Other
 types of violations of privacy, such as the monitoring of
 telephone calls, are believed by many to exist. The
 authorities deny monitoring telephone conversations. In July
 1982, the authorities instituted "selective postal checks" to
 intercept parcel bombs and correspondence from the People's
 Republic of China (PRC), receipt of which is prohibited by law.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are guaranteed by the Constitution
 but martial law restrictions significantly limit these rights.
 Critics maintain that security authorities monitor political
 expression, both in Taiwan and overseas. People are not free
 publicly to question the regime's basic political policy of
 anti-Communism or its claim to sovereignty over all of China.
 Those who speak favorably of Communism or the PRC, or question
 the legitimacy of Taiwan's mainlander authorities by
 
 
 703
 TAIWAN
 suggesting support for "Taiwan independence," can expect to be
 warned and, if they do not desist, to be charged with sedition
 and tried in a military court. Credible reports suggest that
 Taiwan agents keep tabs on persons from Taiwan in the United
 States suspected of being pro-PRC or pro-Taiwan independence.
 The authorities deny charges that the political activities of
 such persons residing in the United States are systematically
 monitored.
 A debate over the immunity of locally elected legislators
 arose in September when a district court, citing the
 interpretation of the Council of Grand Justices, ruled that an
 opposition Taipei municipal councilman did not enjoy immunity
 from prosecution for remarks he made during a session of the
 municipal council, because those remarks were not germane to
 the business of the council. Some political observers felt
 that remarks made by locally elected legislators in their
 respective legislative bodies should enjoy absolute immunity.
 The number of newspaper licenses is limited to 31. Newspapers
 are not allowed to increase the number of pages beyond the
 current maximum of 12. Nearly all are owned by the
 authorities, the KMT, or senior KMT party leaders. There are,
 however, several smaller privately owned and independent
 newspapers. Control over daily newspapers is often exercised
 indirectly, through guidance from the Government Information
 Office and the KMT. Newspapers gradually have expanded their
 coverage of sensitive subjects, such as news from the PRC and
 opposition activities and views. However, the authorities
 have at times threatened strong action when coverage of
 sensitive events displeased them.
 Shortly after publishing its first issue, Taiwan's first
 opposition daily publication was suspended on May 21, 1985 for
 a year. The opposition planned to resume publication in
 mid-September 1986, but in early September publication was
 suspended for another year.
 Censorship of publications is carried out through provisions
 of martial law and the Publications Law, which empowers the
 security police to seize or ban printed material that
 "confuses public opinion and affects the morale of the public
 and the armed forces." As interpreted by the authorities,
 this covers a wide range of topics, including articles that
 discuss possible leadership changes, question the legitimacy
 of KMT rule, criticize Taiwan's foreign policy, or merely
 reveal behind-the-scenes news that is potentially embarrassing
 to the leadership.
 Although the limits of acceptable criticism are not clear-cut,
 opposition publishers generally know when an issue of their
 magazine is courting a ban. In addition, reporters and
 editors exercise a considerable degree of self-censorship.
 Publishers sometimes have been willing to run risks in order
 to test the limits and boost sales. In 1986 the financial
 rewards associated with brisk sales prior to confiscation
 continued to decline as the authorities' stepped-up monitoring
 of both printers and newsstands resulted in full or
 large-scale confiscation of banned magazines.
 Censorship of opposition periodicals intensified in 1986. In
 1985 about 75 percent of all issues were banned. In 1986
 virtually every issue of opposition magazines was banned and
 forced underground. The authorities argue that the magazines
 distorted facts and sullied the reputation of leading
 
 
 704
 TAIWAN
 figures. Licenses of at least 5 magazines were suspended for
 1 year but at least 2 of these were able to publish under
 other, previously issued licenses by changing their names.
 The license of one magazine was withdrawn permanently, the
 heaviest sentence imposed to date. An estimated total of 9
 opposition magazines were published in mid-1986.
 In 1986 several opposition magazine publishers and editors
 were imprisoned for violating the Libel Law. The defendants
 and their supporters argue that the court judgments against
 them were politically motivated. A Government Information
 Office employee was given a suspended sentence of 10 months in
 November 1985 and subsequently demoted by 2 steps for
 allegedly leaking a document in 1984 which revealed that the
 authorities had apparently discussed plans.to harass the
 opposition press through various means, including libel suits.
 The authorities occasionally ban books. Although the writings
 of pre-World War II pro-Communist Chinese authors are formally
 banned, a few of their famous works are obtainable.
 The authorities partially or wholly own all three of the
 island's television stations. Television coverage of
 sensitive political subjects is even more restricted than
 coverage by the print media.
 Foreign publications are available but are also subject to
 censorship. Occasionally pages carrying articles offensive to
 the authorities are removed or blacked out before they are
 distributed. Some foreign publications are available through
 subscription only and are not allowed to be sold on
 newsstands. From time to time an entire issue will be
 withheld from distribution.
 The security forces announced in 1986 that facsimile
 transmission (fax) machines have been classified as restricted
 telecommunication equipment. Since September 1, 1986, their
 import or sale requires a license.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the Constitution. In
 practice, however, public assembly for political purposes,
 except during elections, is often circumscribed by martial law
 provisions. During the first half of the authorized campaign
 period preceding elections, all candidates are allowed to hold
 rallies, although these are closely monitored by the
 authorities. During the second half, campaigning is limited
 to highly structured, officially sponsored rallies in which
 both KMT and opposition candidates participate.
 The 1983 Election and Recall Law prohibits holding campaign
 rallies in any form prior to the authorized period. The Law
 also permits joint rallies of two or more candidates only at
 officially sponsored rallies. Opposition politicians have
 been sharply and openly critical of these measures, claiming
 they hinder their ability to reach the electorate.
 Nevertheless, oppositionists have been able to hold a number
 of rallies, demonstrations, and lectures outside the
 authorized campaign period without official sanction.
 Civil servants, teachers, defense industry workers, and
 administrators acting on behalf of employers are prohibited
 from organizing unions.  Unions are permitted in many other
 
 
 TAIWAN
 fields, however, and 19.4 percent of Taiwan's work force
 belong to unions.
 Unions do not play a strong role in Taiwan. Their power is
 sharply curtailed by the prohibition on walkouts and strikes
 under martial law. Unions focus primarily on employee welfare
 and benefits rather than on higher salaries. Collective
 bargaining, although legal, does not take place. Unions do
 have a role in monitoring compliance with labor laws and
 educating workers as to their legal rights.
 Union leaders have a close and friendly working relationship
 with the authorities. Most top union officials are members of
 the KMT. However, KMT control is not absolute; for example,
 the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL), Taiwan's national labor
 organization, is on record as being critical of the ban on
 strikes. The CFL maintains contact with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees freedom to practice religion.
 This guarantee is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan
 inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism,
 or a combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (PCT),
 whose approximately 210,000 membership is predominantly
 Taiwanese, has been a prime target.
 Kaohsiung County authorities have been involved since 1980 in
 a dispute with a denomination called the New Testament Church
 over the right of church members to settle on a tract of
 leased public land near Kaohsiung, in southern Taiwan. In
 October the Ministry of the Interior announced a relaxation of
 the restrictions on access to the disputed area and the
 planned approval for 17 members to take up residence within
 the area. Seven members were sentenced to 5 months in prison
 in June after a court found them guilty of beating policemen
 and disrupting order at the Chiang Kai-shek International
 Airport in December 1985; they were protesting the decision by
 local immigration authorities to deny entry to a Malaysian
 member of the sect. In October the authorities loosened
 control over access to the disputed land and also pledged to
 resolve expeditiously other problems involving church members'
 resettlement and lease of land in the area. Initially, church
 leaders appear to be taking a wait-and-see attitude. Unlike
 previous years, the authorities did not resubmit in 1986 a
 revised draft of the "Law for the Protection of Religions."
 (This proposed legislation has been criticized in past years
 by observers who felt that it would restrict the rights of
 religious groups.)
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel. Emigration and private travel abroad have
 
 
 706
 TAIWAN
 become freer since 1979. In 1985, 847,000 Taiwan residents
 went abroad for tourism. Since 1980 businessmen have been
 permitted to travel to and do business directly with certain
 Eastern European countries. In August 1986, a women's
 basketball team competed in the Moscow World Cup games, the
 first trip by local athletes to the Soviet Union. Although
 travel to the PRC is officially prohibited, the authorities
 often overlook some discreet travel to the mainland via other'
 countries. After the last calendar day of the year in which
 they turn 15, males may not leave Taiwan until completion of
 compulsory military service. Permission to leave Taiwan may
 be delayed or withheld by police denial of an exit permit.
 Although in the past outspoken critics have been denied exit
 permits, in recent years a number of persons openly critical
 of-the KMT have been permitted to travel overseas.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right of those
 Chinese who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in
 Taiwan, to return from abroad. Those issued "Overseas
 Chinese" passports do not automatically have the right to
 travel to Taiwan for permanent residence. In principle, the
 Government is suspicious of and will not authorize the entry
 of Chinese between the ages of 16 and 75, even those who have
 long held Taiwan passports, if they have lived in
 Communist-controlled areas within the preceding 5 years.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain or revoke the
 Taiwan passport of persons whose behavior violates the
 interests of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order,
 tradition, or Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law
 state that it gives the authorities the power to revoke the
 passport of any person who makes remarks overseas that are
 deemed inimical to Taiwan's interests. They argue that this
 places undue restriction on the opposition's right to travel
 and to make its views known outside Taiwan. The authorities
 say the.measure is necessary to curb the activities, of
 economic criminals: tax evaders, persons engaged in illicit
 activities, -nd those who have left large debts behind in
 Taiwan. There was one widely publicized occurrence of the law
 having been used during-1986 when a U.S. permanent resident
 tried to return to Taiwan in early December, just 5 days
 before the elections. Despite being wanted in Taiwan for
 alleged seditious activity, he was denied entry into Taiwan by
 the authorities.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,670 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled on Taiwan and more .than 2,000
 persons-who arrived from Indochina by small boats have been
 granted "temporary" refuge. With the exception of 58 who
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan, all of those arriving
 by small boats have been resettled in third countries. More
 than 100 are currently awaiting resettlement. The authorities
 report that there have been no refugees from non-Communist
 areas. They advise that any such instances would be dealt
 with on a case-by-case basis. Refugees are not forced to
 return to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Effective political power resides with the aging KMT
 leadership, which fled the mainland in 1949. Reflecting their
 claim to be the government of all of China, the authorities
 maintain not only a provincial and local government system but
 
 
 TAIWAN
 also an array of political bodies identical to those found on
 the mainland prior to 1949. The locus of power on Taiwan
 is the Presidency, the Executive Yuan, the military and
 security apparatus, and the KMT Central Standing Committee.
 This power is exercised by a small number of top figures in
 these organizations, particularly by the President. Although
 the number of Taiwanese in the Cabinet and the Central
 Standing Committee gradually has been increasing, they do not
 yet wield significant power within these bodies. Hence,
 although Taiwanese hold a number of high positions, including
 those of vice President, Vice Premier, Ministers, Governor of
 Taiwan, and Mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung, their power
 individually, and even their collective influence, is
 limited. As representatives of the majority population,
 however, their views form an important consideration as the
 leadership decides on major policies. Taiwanese have greater
 effective power at the local level, where they hold most of
 the executive and KMT party positions.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the National Assembly, which convenes every 6 years to elect
 the President and Vice President, and the Legislative Yuan,
 which is the parliament. There have been no general elections
 to these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats
 and to form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Since
 1969, periodic "supplementary elections" have been held to
 choose additional representatives from Taiwan province and the
 offshore islands (which are considered part of Fukien
 province). Nevertheless, only 970 out of 2,691 seats of the
 National Assembly are currently filled, including 76
 supplemental seats. Of the Legislative Yuan's current
 membership of 320, the supplemental legislators number 71 and
 constitute the most active group, due largely to the advanced
 age and incapacity of those elected 38 years ago on the
 mainland.
 The nature of the elective bodies continues to spark calls by
 both opposition and KMT politicians, academicians,
 journalists, and legal experts for more representative
 institutions. The authorities are extremely reluctant to
 adopt any measures that might undercut the mandates of those
 parliamentarians who were elected on the mainland in the late
 1940's, as to do so could call into question the authorities'
 claim that these bodies represent all of China. However, a
 blue-ribbon 12-person group of KMT Central Standing Committee
 members has been empowered to study the issue of the
 rejuvenation of the central parliamentary bodies.
 The central authorities appoint the Taiwan Provincial Governor
 and the mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung. Elections for the
 provincial assembly and county and other municipal level
 offices have been held regularly since 1950. Universal
 suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and over. Voting
 is voluntary and by secret ballot; voter turnout runs over 60
 percent.
 One party, the KMT, dominates Taiwan, as it has since 1945.
 There are also two minuscule, nominally independent parties
 which came from the mainland. Although the KMT's structure
 and control mechanisms are based on Soviet models, the party's
 operations are considerably more flexible. Party organs exist
 at all levels of the ruling structure, as well as in the
 military, schools, and other public institutions. People who
 arrived from the mainland after 1945 dominate the highest
 
 
 708
 TAIWAN
 echelons of the KMT. Taiwanese predominate at local levels
 and are playing an increasingly important role in the middle
 and higher levels. Taiwanese comprise more than 60 percent of
 the KMT's total membership of approximately 2 million.
 New political parties are forbidden under martial law. In the
 past, candidates who opposed the KMT in elections ran as
 independents, referring to themselves as "outside the party"
 (dangwai) candidates. Although not permitted to form a party,
 dangwai politicians organized in 1984 a "Dangwai Public Policy
 Research Association" which they have described as a
 protopolitical party. In 1986, 13 branch offices were opened
 throughout Taiwan. Dangwai politicians have also organized ad
 hoc "campaign assistance groups" to nominate candidates for
 elections. In defiance of martial law, the opposition
 announced on September 28, 1986, the formation of the
 Democratic Progressive Party. Although the new party is
 technically illegal, the authorities have taken no action
 against it. The DPP successfully fielded candidates in the
 December 6 election. The authorities are also in the process
 of revising current laws in order to permit the legal
 establishment-of political parties.
 In the 1986 Legislative Yuan and National.Assembly elections,
 the KMT won just under 70 percent of the popular vote, down
 slightly from the results in previous elections. It picked up
 59 (out of 73) Legislative Yuan seats and 68 (out of 84)
 National Assembly seats. The new Democratic Progressive
 Party, with over 20 percent of the vote, won 12 Legislative
 Yuan seats and 11 National Assembly seats. The 1986 elections
 were conducted in a peaceful and orderly fashion. The role of
 the opposition is greater than its small numbers might
 indicate. Opposition members are very vocal in elective
 bodies and frequently use interpellation sessions to raise
 controversial or sensitive issues.
 Opposition candidates face several disadvantages in the
 election process. Television, state-owned, ignores opposition
 campaign activity. The 1980 election law limits the campaign
 period before an election to 15 days for National Assembly and
 Legislative Yuan elections and 10 days for local, county, and
 provincial elections. The law-also stipulates who may speak
 at rallies, and under what circumstances. The revised
 election and recall law enacted in June 1983 abolished joint
 rallies and precampaign "get-togethers," campaign tactics
 favored by the-opposition. The law also placed ceilings on
 campaign expenditures, political contributions, and the
 quantity of campaign paraphernalia. The opposition argues
 that these provisions further reduce its ability to compete
 with well-financed, well-organized KMT candidates and hinder
 contact with the electorate. Opposition politicians label as
 ineffective the newly adopted provisions penalizing candidates
 for vote-buying and bribery. Press self-censorship and
 banning result in less publicity for the views of the
 opposition, which further handicaps dangwai candidates.
 The 1983 revisions of the election law also changed the method
 of indirect election of members of the Control Yuan (which
 exercises powers of impeachment, censure, and audit). The
 opposition charges that the changes were aimed at making it
 impossible for the opposition to pool their limited votes
 behind one candidate.
 
 
 709
 TAIWAN
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In past years, the Taiwan authorities have occasionally
 permitted representatives of international human rights
 organizations and private persons interested in human rights
 issues to meet with appropriate officials and other persons.
 A delegation from the Asia Watch Committee went to Taiwan in
 August to examine the human rights situation.
 The nongovernmental Chinese Human Rights Association, a
 strongly anti-Communist organization that originally focused
 its attention on human rights questions in the PRC, is
 devoting more of its efforts to human rights on Taiwan. The
 Association has sponsored tours for lawmakers and legal
 experts to examine Taiwan's crowded prisons and has
 established a free legal aid service.
 In December 1984, a group of opposition lawyers, scholars,
 parliamentarians, and doctors established the Taiwan Human
 Rights Association (THRA). The authorities have stated that
 the THRA cannot be officially recognlzed because it has not
 been registered in accordance with the "Law Governing the
 Organization of Civic Bodies During the Extraordinary
 Period". This Law permits the registration of only one
 association per organizational function. The authorities have
 noted that the Chinese Human Rights Association already has
 been registered and, therefore, a second human rights
 organization may not legally be established. THRA sponsors
 argue that the civic bodies law is unconstitutional because it
 was promulgated before the Constitution was adopted. This
 issue has not been resolved, and to date the THRA has neither
 been registered nor disbanded.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established
 in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These
 aboriginal people comprise slightly more than 1 percent of
 Taiwan's total population. There is no official policy of
 discrimination against them, but the barriers created by de
 facto cultural and economic discrimination are frequently
 difficult to surmount; thus aboriginal "mountain people"
 occupy the bottom rungs of Taiwan's socioeconomic ladder.
 Specially designated seats in both central and provincial
 legislative bodies are reserved for aborigine representatives,
 and the authorities have instituted a number of social
 programs to ease the aborigines' transition into the dominant
 Chinese society.
 Women generally earn 40 to 50 percent less than men and,
 although the law now prohibits sex discrimination, there is
 little to suggest that women will challenge the status quo.
 The few laws that discriminate against women relate mostly to
 divorce issues and inheritance. A revised Civil Code passed
 by the Legislative Yuan in March 1985 provides for more equal
 treatment of women in the areas of marriage and divorce. In
 recent years, women have taken an increasingly active role in
 local politics and have been increasingly successful
 vote-getters. Election regulations ensure that women hold a
 minimum of 20 percent of elected offices at both the central
 
 
 710
 TAIWAN
 and locallevels. Enrollment of women over 18 years of age in
 institutions of higher learning has increased during the past
 30 years from 1,750 students in 1953 (0.3 percent of the total
 number of students enrolled) to 131,297 students in 1983 (9.7
 percent of the total number of students enrolled). A
 fledgling women's rights movement is growing slowly.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law, promulgated in 1984, was
 "enacted to provide a minimum standard for labor conditions,
 protect workers' rights and interests, improve worker-employer
 relationships and promote social and economic development."
 It is applicable to about 4 million of Taiwan's 7.8 million
 workers, mostly in blue-collar jobs, public utilities,
 construction, agriculture, transportation, and
 communications. The law has enjoyed relative success in
 several areas. The minimum age for employment is 15, and a
 combination of this law and a strict compulsory education law
 assure that few children are employed on Taiwan.
 Other areas covered by the law have not been easily enforced.
 The workweek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days
 per week) with certain provisions for overtime. The monthly
 minimum wage is approximately US$154 and a proposal to raise
 it by about 12 percent is pending in the Executive Yuan. Most
 larger firms provide their employees with allowances for
 transportation, meals, housing, etc., which can amount to 60
 to 80 percent of base salary. There are minimum standards for
 working conditions and health and safety precautions.
 Enforcement of these provisions is difficult because the
 number of. inspectors is far too small to ensure regular checks
 on compliance. Routine inspections of-any given business may
 be held as seldom as every 11 years, and action is rarely
 taken unless a worker complains formally to the authorities.
 Further, with only half of the work force covered by the Labor
 Standards Law, and with most companies being small,
 family-owned operations employing relatives who will not
 report violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage, and
 safety sections of the Law is hard to document and thought to
 be minimal.
 
 
 711
