Taiwan
This year's report on Taiwan presents a fairly accurate picture of a society undergoing rapid political liberalization. It is to be commended for particularly strong treatment of human rights violations against women and children. In addition, the report corrects a past weakness by including a detailed discussion of the issues facing Taiwan's aborigines. However, the report underplays the extent of the authorities' continuing efforts to suppress dissent.
Although the report accurately states that freedom of religion is generally observed, as in other years the report fails to mention that the Presbyterian Church continues to be targeted by the authorities for its active support of democracy and human rights, including open support for Taiwan independence. According to Taiwan Communiqué, approximately 1,000 church members participated in a February 23 pro-independence demonstration in Taichung. Prior to the demonstration, the secret police drafted a forged letter sent to some 1,000 Presbyterian Church members in the area stating that the Church's participation in the demonstration had been called off due to lack of funds. This also should have been mentioned in the report's coverage of interference with privacy by police and security agencies.
The report details the poor conditions for illegal foreign laborers. However, it should also have described the unfair conditions imposed on legal foreign contract workers under the Employment Services Bill, based on labor guidelines promulgated by the Council on Labor
Affairs. Critics of the scheme, including leaders of the National Federation of Independent Trade Unions and church social workers, state that the regulations impose unreasonable standards that are impossible to enforce humanely. These standards include a strict behavior code that allows for deportation of workers who have social relations with local people. For example, a group of Thai construction workers was sent home for having local girlfriends. At some construction sites, foreign workers are required to register before leaving company dormitories at night as a way of discouraging local contacts. The contract laborers are also paid 50% or less of wages paid to local workers for the same job. A worker can be expelled if he arrives with dependents, marries, fails to pass a physical exam, becomes ill or injured, takes a part-time job or violates social order and "good customs."
While the report should be commended for mentioning the imprisonment of trade unionists Tseng Mao-shing and Yen Kun-chan, it also should have noted the extent of this type of prosecution. According to the World Organization Against Torture, in the past few years 17 unionists in four separate labor disputes have been prosecuted for "disrupting public order." In addition, an estimated 300 union leaders and members have been dismissed by their employers for union activities.
The report describes the 1992 dismantling of the Taiwan Garrison Command, noting that critics are skeptical that the change will have much practical
374
Taiwan
effect. However, the report understates the extent of continued surveillance of dissidents by the authorities and the extent to which the former functions of the Garrison Command have simply been transferred to civilian authorities. For example, the budget item for the Ministry of Transportation and Communications for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1992 allocated NT $100 (US $4 million) to continue tapping telephones and mail. In addition, the "re-education camps" which are military prisons for people detained under the anti-hoodlum law, will now be administered by the Ministry of Justice. The law allows authorities to detain without warrant anyone suspected of a serious crime and place him in a "reform program" for up to three years.
By small inaccuracies and omission of detail, the report underplays the continued harshness of authorities toward pro-independence activists. In discussing the April beatings by plainclothes policemen of opposition participants during a street protest, the report states that hospital records showed that three of the 28 persons admitted for treatment required hospitalization. But according to Taiwan Communiqué, 17 of the 28 required hospitalization. The report also should have noted that many suffered head wounds as a result of being beaten by police clubs. A bodyguard for Hsu Hsin-liang, chairman of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), was in critical condition when taken to the hospital, and Liao Feng-chin, Hsu Hsin-liang's secretary, suffered a concussion and was hospitalized. In addition, National Assembly woman Wu Ching-kuei of the DPP was beaten and kicked in the abdomen by police while resisting arrest, and an assis-
tant to DPP National Assembly-woman Ong Chin-Chu was badly beaten by five policemen with batons.
Similarly, while acknowledging the continued credible reports of abuse of prisoners in custody by police, the State Department report should have discussed the case of Chuang Chieu-fong, elder brother of prominent independence activist Chuang Chieu-hiong. The elder Mr. Chuang, age 62, was arrested and beaten by police on October 25 during a pro-independence demonstration inTaichung, after he attempted to stop the beating of another marcher. Mr. Chuang was detained in prison for a month with untreated contusions and internal injuries, and was deprived of his medication for diabetes and high blood pressure. After considerable international pressure on authorities and two petitions from his family, he was released on medical bail. Three of nine other persons who were arrested at the same demonstration were made to appear in court in Taichung on November 16 without their lawyers' having been informed.
By scattering its discussion of the case of George Chang (Chang Tsan-hung) throughout several sections of the report, the report lessens the impact of this example of the continued targeting of certain political activists by the authorities. In the account of Chang's trial, the report should have noted that Chang is considered by some to be the most prominent leader of the overseas Taiwanese community, and that he is chairman of the World United Formosans for Independence (WUFI). The report also should have mentioned that the release of Chang on medical bail in October came only
375
Taiwan
after increasing international criticism of the authorities, and after a U.S. physician examined Chang and concluded that improper medical treatment was placing his life at risk.
The report underplays the extent to which the ruling party continues to restrict expression of certain political views. The report fails to mention that in October the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) party announced a policy of taking action against any KMT legislators or candidates for the year-end parliamentary election who publicly advocated independence. The ruling party's "discipline and evaluation committee" requested all provincial and municipal offices to send in all of the candidates' campaign literature for examination. In December, the KMT Central Committee passed a resolution expelling KMT member Chen Che-nan from the party for advocating Taiwan independence.
The report accurately portrays the virtual elimination of the blacklist of overseas dissidents subsequent to the revision of Article 100 of the Criminal Code as a huge step forward. However, the report should also have qualified its assessment by noting that overseas dissidents reportedly continue to face obstacles in entering the country. According to Taiwan Communiqué, during the second half of September the authorities delayed granting permission to travel to Taiwan to three prominent members of the World United Formosans for Independence. Hsu Shi-kai, former chairman of WUFI, Huang Chao-tang, chairman of the Japan chapter, and Chi Mei-ling, member of the central committee of the Japan chapter, were told that their applications had to be
reviewed by the Ministry of the Interior in Taipei, and that it would take several months to receive a decision. Ho Kang-Mei, head of WUFI's European chapter, was similarly subjected to long delays after applying for a visa to return to Taiwan from Europe.
Like last year's report, this year's lacks detail regarding the continuing evolution of the right to visit between mainland China and Taiwan, an important indicator of the gradual improvement in the human rights situation in Taiwan. Under rules promulgated to enforce the National Security Law in October, mainland government employees, Chinese Communist Party officials and military officers and soldiers are barred from entering Taiwan. However, they will be allowed to visit Taiwan to attend conferences or activities sponsored by intergovernmental or semi-official international organizations approved by the Taiwan authorities. The Bureau of Entry and Exit has the final say regarding entry applications filed by mainlanders. The authorities also approved measures allowing outstanding mainland academics, athletes, performers, journalists, democracy activists and students to visit Taiwan for up to two months in order to cover news, shoot films, visit people and conduct cultural exchanges. Each visit may be extended to no more than six months per year. Mainland visitors in Taiwan to visit relatives, attend relatives' funerals and for other "humanitarian reasons" such as serious illness of a family member will be allowed to stay in Taiwan for two months with an extension of one month.
The authorities also have decided to allow mainland Chinese fishermen to
376
Taiwan
work on deep-sea fishing vessels and offshore fishing boats. Moreover, the new Statute on Civilian Relations Across the Taiwan Straits permits mainlanders to work in Taiwan for up to one year with government permission. Other liberalizations of restrictions include revision of the Taiwan Mainland Relations Act to allow mainland professionals to work in Taiwan's educational or governmental institutions if approved by the Executive Yuan or invited by the Ministry of Economic Affairs. In addition, immigration of mainland Chinese for political reasons will be permitted beginning in 1993 with a quota of 12. This expands the policy that went into effect in January permitting 240 spouses each year to immigrate from the mainland to Taiwan.
Regarding Taiwan residents' right to visit mainland China, although civil servants are now allowed to visit the mainland for cultural and educational exchange programs, they are restricted when doing so by a "code of conduct" promulgated by the Taiwan authorities that prohibits them from discussing various political matters with Chinese Communists, bringing along family members and using study groups as a cover to tour the mainland.
Another improvement in personal privacy and political freedom not mentioned by the report is the revision of the Household Law. The law no longer requires people to identify themselves by "extraction," i.e., as native Taiwanese or mainlander. Formerly both immigrants and their descendants born on Taiwan identified themselves by these categories. Under the revised statute, only place of birth will be recorded in official docu-
ments like resident identification cards and domicile records.
While faithfully detailing the authorities' control over television, the report fails to mention that in October the authorities announced that for the first time since banning new radio stations in 1 960, applications will be accepted for FM radio stations in April 1993 and for AM outlets in 1994. In addition, the authorities will allow cable television systems, with considerable restrictions. Taiwan already has a huge illegal network of cable systems.
The report on the election is generally accurate. However, while the election was the fairest in 40 years, problems remain. Due to the control of the three television stations by the authorities, the television stations generally did not allow opposition candidates to present their views on the issues, and usually portrayed the opposition in a negative light. This problem was discussed in a different section of the report that gave it less prominence than it deserved. Television and radio reporters stated that they were told by authorities to play down the issue of Taiwan independence. In addition, opposition candidates were denied access to military camps where large numbers of votes are mobilized for the ruling party.
Although vote-buying was mentioned, the extent of vote-buying in the 1992 election should have been more thoroughly documented. For example, a poll in Kaohsiung, the second largest city in Taiwan, found that 65% of the voters had been offered bribes.
Like last year, the report did not
377
Taiwan
mention the harsh treatment authorities have given environmental protesters. On May 26, a protest by 300 residents of the Talin area of Kaohsiung was broken up by police and riot troops, resulting in dozens of injuries. The residents were protesting the pollution caused by the Talin Oil Refinery, which is run by the state-owned Chinese Petroleum Company. The plant has been fined many times for violating pollution control standards. On July 18, the authorities sentenced the leader of the demonstration to a prison term of four and a half years for "obstructing official duty" for leading resistance to police and riot troops. Five other men received prison terms ranging from one year and six months to two years. One woman was sentenced to six months' imprisonment. The prosecutor stated that he recommended the heavy prison terms because the protesters had openly challenged the government's authority.
378
