 TAIWAN
 In 1987 Taiwan undertook a major effort to reform its political
 system after four decades of martial law. This effort and
 proposals for further change are extensive, touching upon the
 rights of persons to assemble, organize, and express themselves
 freely. Fundamental issues concerning the structure of the
 legislative system and political representation are being
 addressed, and restrictions on travel to and from Taiwan are
 being eased.
 While Taiwan's polity is still dominated by the Nationalist
 Party (the Kuomintang or KMT) in a highly authoritarian
 system, the authoritias exhibited greater flexibility in
 dealing with the political opposition during 1987. For the
 first time since-lq49, the authorities in 1986 allowed an
 authentic ptlitical party, the Democratic Progressive Party
 (DPP), td be formed; Although the DPP is not legally
 recognized by the authorities, the KMT has opened direct
 communications-with it within the Legislative Yuan (the
 central'legislative body) to discuss legislative issues. In
 1987 DPP and KMT legislators openly disagreed with Executive
 Yuan (cabinet) positions on fundamental policy issues and more
 closely sctutinized-and infludnced proposals submitted by the
 authorities.
 The atmosphere of political liberalization was also manifested
 by a series of prisoner releases, in which 58 political
 prisoners were freed in 1987. Martial law, in effect since
 1949, was lifted on July 15, and, under the provisions of the
 newly enacted National Security Law, civilians are no longer
 tried by military courts. The authorities have announced
 plans to revise the conditions under which persons in Taiwan
 may publicly assemble or demonstrate, organize political
 parties, strike, reprint mainland China publications, and
 publish newspapers. The 1979 ban on direct tourist travel
 from Taiwan to Hong Kong and Macau was lifted, and many
 overseas Taiwanese political dissidents previously denied
 reentry to the island are now being permitted to return.
 Prohibitions have been eased on personal travel to the China
 mainland.
 This process of reform and transition, both actual and
 planned, has been recognized both internationally and in
 Taiwan as a step toward political pluralism in a society which
 already enjoys a free market economy. Demographically, native
 Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese who migrated from the
 mainland primarily in the 17th and 18th centuries, dominate
 the private economy. They now constitute more than 80 percent
 of the population but still are underrepresented at the upper
 levels of the ruling elite. Although the authorities continue
 to recruit increasing numbers of Taiwanese to fill important
 economic, political, military, and security posts,
 dissatisfaction of many in Taiwan with mainlander predominance
 has fueled the demands for more representative government.
 Controls oyer media programming and the educational system
 limit the broadcast and teaching of the Taiwanese dialect.
 Mainlanders complain they themselves face discrimination in
 the private sector. Native Taiwanese-held companies often do
 restrict or disallow hiring Chinese of mainland origin.
 Though the legislature is more vigorous than heretofore,
 Taiwan's central parliamentary bodies still remain constituted
 under a representational formula which assures continued KMT
 control. Restrictions on campaign activities favor KMT
 incumbents. The offices of Taiwan provincial governor and
 
 
 681
 TAIWAN
 mayor in Taipei and Kaohsiung remain appointive. While the
 K14T has committed itself to revising the formula for
 legislative representation, a formal proposal has yet to be
 tabled. Although there has been more tolerance of political
 criticism in publications, occasional confiscations or bans
 underscore the authorities' continued restrictive powers over
 the press. Local and international human rights groups also
 criticize other conditions they believe limit or violate human
 rights such as the authorities' continued control of the
 judiciary, mass media, labor, and professional groups.
 Finally, abuses are still sometimes committed in the
 interrogation and prosecution of suspects.
 In 1987 Taiwanauthorities took, or developed plans for, steps
 to deal with a wide range of issues related to individual
 freedoms. Many of these reform initiatives are still being
 debated, and much uncertainty remains as to what the final
 results will be.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of killings for political reasons.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture. There
 are credible reports, however, that individual members of the
 police or security forces resort at times to physical violence
 and torture in interrogating suspects. The authorities have
 been criticized in the Legislative Yuan and in the Provincial
 Assembly for using electric prods and other devices of torture
 in the questioning of criminal suspects and during their
 imprisonment. Deaths of persons in police custody have been
 reported, and five police investigators have been charged by
 the authorities with using water torture, beatings, or
 electric shock during interrogations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The police legally may arrest without a warrant anyone they.
 suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison and may call in suspects or
 witnesses for questioning without a formal summons. Critics
 in the legal establishment, the press, and the legislature
 point out that these procedures sometimes lead to abuses.
 Suspects called in for questioning by the police are sometimes
 arrested after questioning without a warrant.
 Taiwan law requires that within 24 hours after an arrest, the
 arresting authorities must give notice in writing to the
 arrested person and his designated relative or friend, stating
 the reason for the arrest or detention. The Code of Criminal
 Procedure specifies that the authorities may detain an accused
 person for up to 2 months during the investigative phase prior
 
 
 682
 TAIWAN
 to the filing of a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months
 during the trial. Furthermore, during the investigative
 phase, the prosecuting officer may apply to the court for one
 extension of 2 months. The period of detention may also be
 extended during the trial. In recent cases, the authorities
 generally have followed these procedures and extended the
 periods of detention. Persons indicted for relatively minor
 criminal offenses can be released on bail at the judge's
 discretion.
 Suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer present
 during the investigative phase. The Taipei Bar Association
 has complained, however, that defense lawyers are sometimes
 barred by prosecutors from visiting their clients during this
 phase and that suspects often are not advised of their right
 to have legal representation during police interrogation.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan passed the "antihoodlum"
 law, which accords police authorities broad powers, including
 the power to determine whether a person should be designated
 as a hoodlum. The civil courts confirm or deny police
 requests to remand alleged hoodlums for reformatory education.
 The reformatory facilities, however, remain under the
 jurisdiction of the military, and the law does not authorize
 the courts to determine the length of such education. The
 duration of reformatory education therefore is determined by
 the military; it may range from 1 to 5 years. Alleged
 hoodlums can be held incommunicado without legal
 representation, and their families need not be notified of
 their arrests.
 Similarly, a 1984 executive decree permits the jailing of
 persons suspected of criminal activity; unlike the 1985 law,
 the 1984 decree did not set time limits on the period of
 incarceration for those arrested. Many prisoners arrested and
 jailed under the provisions of the 1984 decree are still
 imprisoned with no determinate sentence. There are reported
 to be approximately 2,000 persons arrested under the 1985 law
 and the 1984 decree currently in Taiwan jails. The Ministry
 of Justice decided to transfer these inmates to civilian
 prisons after the outbreak of protests and rioting in late
 1987.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute
 and punish offenders. The provisions of the statute empower
 the police to impose and carry out sentences of up to 2 weeks'
 imprisonment. Despite the 1980 opinion of the Councii of
 Grand Justices (theoretically empowered to decide
 constitutional issues) that the statute is unconstitutional,
 it continues to be widely used.
 Taiwan does not allow forced or compulsory labor, and there
 have been no reports of the practice. However, compulsory
 prison labor has been required for many years. Taiwan law
 considers'prison labor desirable, and 6 to 12 hours of daily
 work is required, except in cases where a person's physical or
 mental condition does not permit it. Compulsory labor is also
 required of military prisoners.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide for trial by jury. Informed observers
 characterize the judiciary as not fully independent and
 
 
 683
 TAIWAN
 susceptible to pressure from the authorities, on whom judges
 depend for desirable assignments and career advancement.
 In 1987 the courts tried a number of political activists on
 charges of disturbing the peace or interfering with official
 duties. With regard to these cases, both the opposition and
 some independent observers have raised doubts about the
 application of the law and impartiality of the judiciary.
 Since the lifting of martial law on July 15, civilians may no
 longer be tried in military courts. Trials, including those
 held in military courts, are public, but attendance at trials
 involving juveniles or persons considered politically
 sensitive may require permission from the court. Defendants
 have a right to an attorney, at public expense if needed.
 In a typical criminal court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not by a lawyer or
 prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to
 consider evidence a party wishes to submit. Civil and
 criminal law specifically provide the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases generally are heard through several brief court
 sessions, often separated by weeks or months. Persons
 convicted in civilian court cases where the sentence exceeds 3
 years have a right to review by the Supreme Court. The Supreme
 Court limits its review to the law of the case and to specific
 procedural aspects. The new National Security Law stipulates,
 contrary to provisions in the original martial law decrees,
 that convictions under martial law cannot be appealed in the
 postmartial law period. Human rights groups have criticized
 the lack of impartiality of military court judges and have
 reported instances in which persons received martial law
 sentences for engaging in peaceful political activity.
 Prosecutors and judges are allowed to switch roles pending the
 approval of a special committee of the Judicial and Executive
 Yuan representatives. Attorneys complain that this practice
 weakens the independence of the judiciary. Furthermore,
 judicial decisions must be approved by higher court
 authorities before they are pronounced. Observers of the
 court system say this dilutes the authority of judges and
 tempts outside interference with the judicial process. A
 review of judicial procedures recently initiated by the
 authorities has proposed abolishing this practice.
 Although the authorities deny holding political prisoners,
 critics of the regime have estimated that there remain about
 30 political prisoners, reduced from an estimated 90 to 100 in
 1986. While civilians can no longer be tried by military
 courts for sedition, sedition remains'a crime subject to
 normal civilian criminal procedures. It has been interpreted
 to include expressing Communist sympathies, espousing views
 contrary to the authorities' claim to represent all of China,
 and supporting an independent legal status for Taiwan.
 In 1987 the authorities decided to grant early releases to
 many political prisoners. Of the eight persons convicted by
 military courts of sedition in 1980 for their role in the 1979
 Kaohsiung Human Rights Day rally, all but one have been
 released. Since January 1987, approximately 50 other
 political prisoners serving sentences for sedition or other
 crimes under martial law have been released.
 
 
 684
 TAIWAN
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The daily life of a person not actively engaged in politics is
 subject only to minor interference by the authorities. The
 authorities impose limits on the use of the Taiwanese dialect
 (the mother tongue of most inhabitants of Taiwan) on television
 and radio. The authorities do not interfere with basic family
 matters such as the right to marry or have children as one
 chooses. Membership in the KMT, the dominant political
 organization, is technically a matter of free choice. Party
 membership, however, is considered an unwritten requirement
 for advancement in the military, the government, and academia.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant, while not
 common, does occur. As noted in Section l.d., the Code of
 Criminal Procedure generally requires that searches be
 authorized by warrants, signed by a prosecutor or, during a
 trial, by a judge. However, exceptions to this rule have
 increased substantially, following the July 1982 revision of
 the Code to provide for warrantless arrests under certain
 circumstances. When making such arrests, police also may
 search persons or property without prior authorization. Other
 types of violations of privacy, such as the monitoring of
 telephone calls, are believed to occur. The authorities deny
 monitoring telephone conversations. In July 1982, the
 authorities instituted "selective postal checks," supposedly
 to intercept parcel bombs and correspondence from the People's
 Republic of China (PRC).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are assured by the Constitution,
 but statutory restrictions significantly limit these rights.
 Security authorities monitor political expression, both in
 Taiwan and overseas. People have not been free publicly to
 question the regime's basic political policy of anticommunism
 or its claim to sovereignty over all of China. Those speaking
 favorably of communism or the People's Republic of China, or
 who question the legitimacy of Taiwan's mainlander authorities
 by suggesting support for "Taiwan independence," could expect
 to be warned and, if they did not desist, to be charged with
 sedition. With the July 15 lifting of martial law, regime
 critics have been emboldened to raise previously taboo
 political subjects publicly, including "Taiwan independence."
 The authorities have repeated warnings that advocacy of Taiwan
 independence cannot be tolerated. While many public speeches
 and articles favoring independence have gone unpunished, in
 one case two leaders of a political prisoners' association,
 Tsai Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh, were arrested and charged with
 sedition for proposing that language supporting Taiwan's
 independence be incorporated in the association's charter.
 The proposal was adopted, and the subsequent arrests of Tsai
 and Hsu have become a concern of human rights groups in Taiwan
 and elsewhere.
 The number of newspaper licenses is limited to 31, nearly all
 owned by the authorities, the KMT, or senior KMT party
 leaders. The size of each issue is also regulated, and
 newspapers are not allowed to increase the number of pages
 beyond the current maximum of 12. There are several smaller
 privately owned and relatively independent newspapers. In
 
 
 685
 TAIWAN
 what may prove to be a significant move towards lifting press
 controls, the ruling party in 1987 announced intentions to
 lift the limits on the number of newspapers and loosen
 restrictions on the number of pages by the beginning of 1988.
 Censorship of publications is carried out through provisions
 of the Publications Law, which empowers the police to seize or
 ban printed material that commits or instigates others to
 "commit sedition, treason, offenses of interference with the
 lawful exercise of public functions or against public order."
 In the past, this covered a wide range of topics, including
 articles that discussed possible leadership changes, questioned
 the legitimacy of KMT rule, criticized Taiwan's foreign policy,
 or merely revealed behind-the-scenes news that was potentially
 embarrassing to the leadership. Since the lifting of martial
 law, however, publication bans have fallen off dramatically,
 and even oppositionists agree that restrictions on content are
 not being as strictly enforced.
 Control over daily newspapers remains, however, and is often
 exercised indirectly, through guidance from the Government
 Information Office and the KMT. Newspapers and magazines
 gradually have expanded their coverage of sensitive subjects,
 such as news from the PRC and opposition activities and
 views. However, the authorities at times have threatened
 strong action when coverage of sensitive events displeased
 them, as in the case of two Taiwan reporters who defied the
 regime's ban on travel to the mainland to report openly on the
 situation there. Upon their return to Taiwan, the authorities
 moved to prosecute the two reporters and their newspaper's
 director. Censorship of opposition periodicals continued in
 1987, but fell off sharply after the lifting of martial law on
 July 15. In 1985 about 75 percent of all issues were banned.
 In 1986 virtually every issue of opposition magazines was
 banned and forced underground. Although bans continued
 through the first half of 1987, there was only one locally
 published magazine banned by the authorities after martial law
 was lifted. Monitoring of newsstand publications, however, is
 reportedly continuing.
 The authorities have begun to loosen restrictions on
 dissemination of mainland publications. On August 27, the
 Government Information Office announced the formation of
 screening committees to consider applications for reprinting
 mainland publications in Taiwan. The use of the mainland
 system of simplified Chinese characters, however, remains
 prohibited in Taiwan.
 The authorities partially or wholly own all three of the
 island's television stations. Television coverage of
 sensitive political subjects is even more restricted than
 coverage by the print media. Oppositionists charge that the
 military and the governing authorities control or own 82
 percent of the radio stations in Taiwan. Requests by
 opposition politicians to open their own radio station have
 been turned down by the authorities. The reason cited is that
 there are no frequencies available.
 Before the lifting of martial law, foreign publications also
 were subject to censorship. Occasionally pages carrying
 articles offensive to the authorities were removed or altered
 before distribution. This practice, however, appears to be
 diminishing. Longtime residents of Taiwan notice less
 official interference with the free-flow of international
 news, particularly regarding Taiwan and the China mainland.
 
 
 686
 TAIWAN
 Delays in delivery of foreign magazines have occurred, however,
 when articles or covers have displeased the authorities. In
 one case, the September 14, 1987 issue of Newsweek was banned
 for its cover story on Taiwan's mainland policy.
 On university campuses, students have complained that campus
 publications are censored by university administrators under
 provisions of the University Law. Students have also protested
 punishments, ranging from demerit points to expulsion, for
 being too outspoken on certain issues. The same restrictions
 apply to their teachers, and there have been reports of
 pressures placed on teachers and even firings because of
 extracurricular political activities. The University Law is
 scheduled for liberalization, however, and is expected to be
 taken up by the Legislative Yuan in 1988.
 The security forces announced in 1986 that facsimile
 transmission machines have been classified as restricted
 telecommunication equipment. Since September 1, 1986, their
 import or sale requires a license. The use of computer modems
 is also controlled.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is assured by the Constitution. Until
 July 15, however, when Martial Law ended, public assembly for
 political purposes (except during election periods) was
 legally circumscribed. Since the lifting of martial law,
 political opponents have been permitted to hold public marches
 after getting approval from the authorities. Under the
 current University Law, student rights to assemble and to
 organize island-wide associations are curtailed. The
 legislature is currently considering a new law on assembly and
 public demonstrations. The draft of this law does not allow
 demonstrations at or near a number of government and military
 sites and prohibits any demonstration which violates the
 Constitution or advocates communism or Taiwan's separation
 from China. It also details the requirements for registration
 and approval of public demonstrations.
 The 1983 Election and Recall Law prohibits holding campaign
 rallies in any form prior to the "authorized period", about 2
 weeks before balloting. During the first half of the
 authorized campaign period, all candidates are allowed to hold
 rallies, although these are closely monitored by the
 authorities. During the second half, campaigning has been
 limited to highly structured, officially sponsored rallies in
 which both KMT and opposition candidates participate. The Law
 also limits joint rallies of two or more candidates only to
 these officially sponsored rallies. Opposition politicians
 have been sharply and openly critical of these measures,
 claiming they hinder their ability to reach the electorate.
 Nevertheless, the opposition has been able to hold a number of
 rallies, demonstrations, and lectures outside of the
 authorizea campaign period without official sanction.
 Nonelection year political rallies have also been held
 frequently in the past. Whereas the authorities had
 previously attempted to discourage opeh-air rallies, it
 appears that since 1986 this restriction has been eased.
 During 1987 opposition politicians held numerous rallies
 throughout the island without interference from the
 authorities. Some of these rallies even have included public
 debates between KNT andDPP elected officials.
 
 
 687
 TAIWAN
 In 1967, due to the lifting of restrictions formerly imposed
 on labor under martial law and a concern for labor's potential
 political role, the authorities moved to clarify Taiwan's
 labor laws regarding workers' right to strike and to bargain
 collectively. Changes to the labor laws are still under study
 and are expected to be enacted early in 1988.
 At the end of 1986, there were 1.72 million union members,
 constituting approximately 33 percent of Taiwan's paid
 employees. Collective bargaining is provided for under the
 Collective Agreements Law. While some 260 collective
 agreements were in effect in 1987, the right to strike is
 seriously curtailed by involuntary mediation and arbitration
 as well as by other legal provisions. While many of these
 provisions are now being reviewed, under current laws and
 practices meaningful collective bargaining does not exist in
 the internationally recognized definition of the term. Union
 organization in Taiwan is significantly restricted or
 controlled by the authorities. Civil servants, teachers,
 defense industry workers, and administrators acting on behalf
 of employers are prohibited from organizing unions. These
 employees particularly guard their political views for fear of
 jeopardizing job benefits or having promotional opportunities
 curtailed. In some cases, authorities have fired or threatened
 to fire employees for their political views, or because of the
 political views of a family member.
 Unions traditionally have not been vigorous in Taiwan. Their
 power is sharply curtailed by restrictions on walkouts and
 strikes under current law. Although the authorities intend to
 clarify the conditions under which workers may strike, it is
 not clear how far the new law will go in liberalizing current
 restrictions. Furthermore, most union'leaders are members of
 the ruling KMT, and party control over the labor movement
 remains very strong. Unions focus primarily on employee
 welfare and benefits rather than on higher salaries. Unions
 do have an important role in monitoring compliance with labor
 laws and educating workers as to their legal rights.
 KMT control over labor unions, however, is not absolute. The
 Chinese Federation of Labor, Taiwan's national labor
 organization, maintains contact with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and is on record as having
 been critical of the ban on strikes when martial law was in
 effect. In 1987 company workers sometimes rejected KMT or
 management-endorsed union slates, and some strikes have, in
 fact, taken place. Furthermore, workers of different companies
 are for the first time banding together to establish emergency
 funds in anticipation of future strikes or lawsuits. Strong
 economic growth and a tight labor market are improving the
 conditions of labor in Taiwan by way of market mechanisms.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom to practice religion.
 This provision is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan
 inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism,
 or a combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. This pressure eased somewhat in 1987.
 
 
 688
 TAIWAN
 The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, whose approximately 210,000
 members are predominantly Taiwanese, has been a prime target.
 In early 1987, copies of the church's weekly newspaper were
 confiscated and destroyed because 6f an article considered to
 be politically sensitive. After church protests, however, the
 authorities reprinted the issue, including the offending
 article, and returned the copies to the church.
 Presbyterian church leaders in self-exile abroad, who had been
 denied entry to visit Taiwan for many years, were permitted to
 return in 1987. During their visits, the authorities allowed
 them to see whomever they wanted and did not interfere in
 their travels. These church leaders even met with high
 ranking. KMr officials to voice encouragement and support for
 the ruling party's continued denocratization of Taiwan.
 Many Presbyterian church members are actively involved in
 opposition politics, and the church has voiced concern about
 those facing criminal prosecution. National Assembly member
 Hung Chi-chang, a Presbyterian, along with four other persons
 (two of them oppositionists), are being tried for their part
 in a June 12 public disturbance. Tsai Yu-chuan, a Presbyterian
 minister, has been indicted for sedition in connection with
 his alleged advocacy of Taiwan independence. The church
 maintains that neither man espoused violence and supports the
 right to free political expression.
 Kaohsiung County authorities have been involved since 1980 in
 a dispute with a denomination called the New Testament Church
 over the right of church members to settle on a tract of
 leased public land near Kaohsiung in southern Taiwan. The
 conflict had led to physical evictions from the tract with
 destruction of church members' homes and crops. In 1987 the
 authorities made several conciliatory moves including
 compensation for destroyed crops, access to a mountain these
 church followers consider sacred, and allowing the listing of
 the mountain on their identity papers.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel. An exit permit is required for travel
 abroad. Emigration and private travel abroad have become
 freer since 1979. A major development in 1987 was the
 announcement that travel to the mainland to visit relatives
 would henceforth be permitted. Although travel to the PRC,
 other than to visit relatives, still is officially prohibited,
 the authorities generally overlook discreet personal travel to
 the mainland via other countries. Since 1980 businessmen have
 been permitted to travel to and do business directly with
 certain Eastern European countries.
 Exit permits may be refused for a number of reasons. For
 example, after the last calendar day of the year in which they
 turn 15, males may not leave Taiwan until completion of
 compulsory military service. Permission to leave Taiwan may
 be delayed or withheld by police denial of an exit permit.
 Under the implementing regulations of the 1987 National
 Security Law, however, reasons for refusal must be given, and
 appeals may be made to a special board. Although in the past
 outspoken critics have been denied exit permits, in recent
 years this has become less of a problem.
 
 
 689
 TAIWAN
 The authorities claim to recognize the right of those Chinese
 who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in Taiwan,
 to return from abroad. Nonresident citizens, usually issued
 "Overseas Chinese" passports, require visas to travel to
 Taiwan. The authorities are suspicious of and will not
 authorize the entry of Chinese between the ages of 16 and 75,
 even those who have long held Taiwan passports, if they have
 lived in Communist-controlled areas within the preceding 5
 years.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain or revoke the
 Taiwan passport of persons whose behavior violates the
 interests of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order,
 tradition, or Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law
 state that it gives the authorities the power to revoke the
 passport of any person who makes remarks overseas that are
 deemed inimical to Taiwan's interests. They argue that this
 places undue restriction on the opposition's right to travel
 and to make its views known outside Taiwan. The authorities
 say the measure is necessary to curb the activities of economic
 criminals: tax evaders, persons engaged in illicit activities,
 and those who have left large debts behind in Taiwan. This
 law is not used frequently; however, there has been one widely
 publicized application of the law involving a U.S. permanent
 resident who tried, once in December 1986 and again in October
 1987, to return to Taiwan. Despite the authorities' claim
 that he was "wanted" in Taiwan for alleged seditious activity,
 he was denied entry into Taiwan by the authorities.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,670 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled on Taiwan, and more than 2,000
 persons who arrived from Indochina by small boats have been
 granted "temporary" refuge. With the exception of 58 who
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan, all of those arriving
 by small boats have been resettled in third countries. More
 than 100 are currently awaiting resettlement. The authorities
 report that there have been no refugee cases from non-Communist
 areas. They advise that any such instances would be dealt
 with on a case-by-case basis. Refugees are not forced to
 return to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Effective political power resides with the aging KMT
 leadership, which fled the mainland in 1949 and which
 continues to place significant restrictions on the right of
 Taiwan's citizens to change their government. Reflecting
 their claim to be the government of all of China, the
 authorities maintain not only provincial and local government
 systems but also an array of political bodies identical to
 those found on the mainland prior to 1949. The locus of power
 on Taiwan is the Presidency, the Executive Yuan, the military
 and security apparatus, and the KMT Central Standing
 Committee. This power is exercised by a small number of top
 figures in these organizations, particularly by the President.
 The number of Taiwanese in the Cabinet and the Central
 Standing.Committee gradually has been increasing, and they
 comprise a significant force within these bodies. Three of
 the 8 Ministers& and I& of- thc 31 KhlT Ceral_ Standing rammittee
 members are Taixmnese  As representativ  aF the maari:y
 population- their v-kew form air impartan  c nsi+ratirnm as th
 leadership deciffes- on maja pocies. HawnevE althaufL
 Taiwanese  halds .mish  cE hifgh 96sitians7 _incmffn% those of
 
 
 690
 TAIWAN
 Vice President, Vice Premier, Ministers, Governor of Taiwan,
 and Mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung, their power individually,
 and even their collective influence, is limited. Taiwanese
 have greater effective power at the local level, where they
 hold most of the executive and KMT party positions.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the Legislative Yuan, which is the Parliament, and the
 National Assembly, which convenes every 6 years to elect the
 President and Vice President. There have been no general
 elections to these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats
 and to form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Since 1969
 periodic "supplementary elections" have been held to choose
 additidnal representatives from Taiwan province and the
 offshore islands (which are considered part of Fukien
 province). Nevertheless, only 948 out of 2,691 seats of the
 National Assembly are currently filled, including 84
 supplemental members. Of the Legislative Yuan's current
 membership of 315, the supplemental legislators number 73 and
 constitute the most active group, due largely to the advanced
 age and incapacity of those elected 39 years ago on the
 mainland.
 The nature of the elective bodies continues to spark calls by
 both opposition and KMT politicians, academicians, journalists,
 and legal experts for more representative institutions. The
 authorities have been reluctant to adopt any measures that
 might undercut the mandates of those parliamentarians who were
 elected on the mainland in the late 1940's, as to do so could
 call into question the authorities' claim that these bodies
 represent all of China. However, a blue-ribbon group of KMT
 Central Standing Committee members has been empowered to study
 the issue of the rejuvenation of the central parliamentary
 bodies, and it is reportedly considering methods of replacing
 aging members through elections.
 The central authorities appoint the Taiwan provincial Governor
 and the Mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung. Elections for the
 Provincial Assembly and county and other municipal level
 offices have been held regularly since 1950. Universal
 suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and over. Voting
 is voluntary and by secret ballot; voter turnout runs over 60
 percent.
 One party, the KMT, dominates Taiwan, as it has since 1945.
 There are also two minuscule, nominally independent parties
 which came from the mainland. Although the KMT's structure
 and control mechanisms are based on Soviet models, the party's
 operations are considerably more flexible. Party organs exist
 at all levels of the ruling structure, as well as in the
 military, schools, and other public institutions. People who
 arrived from the mainland after 1945 dominate the highest
 echelons of the KMT. Taiwanese predominate at local levels
 and are increasingly significant at the middle andhigher
 levels. Tiwanese comprise more than 70 percent of the KMT's
 total membership of approximately 2 million.
 The lifting of martial law removed the ban on new political
 parties; however, full legalization of new parties awaits new
 laws which currently are being considered by the Legislative
 Yuan. In the past, opponents of the KMT ran in elections as
 independents. Prior to the lifting of martial law, the
 opposition acted in defiance of it and announced on September
 28, 1986 the formation of the Democratic Progressive Party
 
 
 691
 TAIWAN
 (DPP). The authorities took no action against it. The DPP
 successfully fielded candidates in the December 6 legislative
 election, winning over 20 percent of the vote. In 1987 the
 KMT initiated a series of meetings with DPP legislators to
 discuss important post-martial law legislation, thereby
 according de facto recognition to the new party. In the
 meantime, other groups have declared or are preparing to
 declare political parties, hoping to represent constituencies
 they believe to be overlooked by both the KMT and the DPP.
 The role of the opposition in the elected bodies is greater
 than its small numbers might indicate. Opposition members are
 very vocal in elective bodies and frequently use interpellation
 sessions, during which legislators pose questions to executive
 branch officials, to raise controversial or sensitive issues.
 Their activities have probably spurred tendencies within the
 ranks of the IMT, particularly among KMT supplemental
 legislators, to criticize regime policies openly. They have
 also accentuated the theoretical distinction, long blurred in
 actual practice, between the KMT party and the governmental
 structure.
 Opposition candidates face several disadvantages in the
 election process. Television, under firm state control,
 generally ignores opposition campaign activity or activities
 during council or legislative sessions that would help
 oppositionists gain greater public exposure. The 1980
 election law limits the campaign period before an election to
 15 days for National Assembly and Legislative Yuan elections
 and 10 days for local, county, and provincial elections. The
 law also stipulates who may speak at rallies, and under what
 circumstances. The revised Election and Recall Law enacted in
 June 1983 abolished joint rallies and precampaign "get-
 togethers," campaign tactics favored by the opposition. The
 law also placed ceilings on campaign expenditures, political
 contributions, and the quantity of campaign paraphernalia.
 The opposition argues that these provisions further reduce its
 ability to compete with well-financed, well-organized KMT
 candidates and hinder contact with the electorate. Opposition
 politicians label as ineffective the newly adopted provisions
 penalizing candidates for vote-buying and bribery. At least
 up until now, press self-censorship and banning have resulted
 in less publicity for the views of the opposition, which
 further handicaps opposition candidates.
 The 1983 revisions of the election law also changed the method
 of indirect election of members of the Control Yuan (which
 exercises powers of impeachment, censure, and audit). The
 opposition charges that the changes were aimed at making it
 impossible for the opposition to pool their limited votes
 behind one candidate. One incumbent opposition candidate,
 however, was reelected in the 1987 Control Yuan election,
 despite an attempted boycott of the vote by the DPP.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In past years, the Taiwan authorities occasionally have
 permitted representatives of international human rights
 organizations and private persons interested in human rights
 issues to meet with appropriate officials and other persons.
 In 1987 representatives from Amnesty International were
 allowed to visit and meet freely with whomever they wished to
 see in examining Taiwan's human rights situation. The
 
 
 692
 TAIWAN
 nongovernmental Chinese Human Rights Association, a strongly
 anti-Communist organization that originally focused its
 attention on human rights questions in the PRC, is devoting
 more of its efforts to human rights on Taiwan. The
 Association has sponsored tours for lawmakers and legal
 experts to visit Taiwan's prisons and has established a free
 legal aid service.
 In December 1984, a group of opposition lawyers, scholars,
 parliamentarians, and doctors established the Taiwan Human
 Rights Association (THRA). The authorities have refused to
 recognize the THRA because it has not been registered in
 accordance with the "law governing the organization of civic
 bodies during the extraordinary period," which allows only one
 association per organizational function. This issue has not
 been resolved, but the practical effect appears limited since
 the THRA continues to carry out its activities in Taiwan.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established
 in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These
 aboriginal people comprise slightly more than 1 percent of
 Taiwan's total population. There is no official policy of
 discrimination against them, but the barriers created by de
 facto cultural and economic discrimination are frequently
 difficult to surmount; thus aboriginal "mountain people"
 occupy the bottom rungs of Taiwan's socioeconomic ladder.
 Specially designated seats in both central and provincial
 legislative bodies are reserved for aborigine representatives,
 and the authorities have instituted a number of social programs
 to ease the aborigines' transition into the dominant Chinese
 society. Aboriginal people nevertheless complain that they
 are prevented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas
 under the control of the authorities. Furthermore, aboriginal
 people are not allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on
 legal documents. Some complain of economic exploitation by
 commercial or tourist concerns. The sale of aboriginal
 children into prostitution is a serious social problem.
 The contribution of Taiwan's women to the economy and to the
 island's economic transformation has been significant.
 However, the majority of women still have poorly paying jobs
 at the low end of the economic scale, generally earning 40 to
 50 percent less than men.
 Although the law prohibits sex discrimination, the press
 occasionally carries complaints of cases of discrimination.
 For example, women have complained of being forced to quit
 jobs because of age or childbearing restrictions. Restrictive
 quotas exist within certain ministries to control the number
 of women who may be accepted even after passing rigorous civil
 service examination. The laws that discriminate against women
 relate mostly to divorce issues and inheritance. A revised
 Civil Code passed by the Legislative Yuan in March 1985
 provides for more equal treatment of women in the areas of
 marriage and divorce.
 In recent years, women have become increasingly active in
 local politics and have been successful votegetters. Election
 regulations ensure that women hold a minimum of 20 percent of
 elected offices at both the central and local levels.
 Enrollment of women over 18 years of age in institutions of
 
 
 693
 TAIWAN
 higher learning has increased during the past 30 years from
 1,750 students in 1953 (0.3 percent of the total number of
 students enrolled) to 131,297 students in 1983 (9.7 percent of
 the total number of students enrolled). A fledgling women's
 rights movement is growing slowly.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law, promulgated in 1984, was
 "enacted to provide a minimum standard for labor conditions,
 protect workers' rights and interests, improve worker-employer
 relationships and promote social and economic development."
 About 4 million of Taiwan's 5.26 million paid workers, mostly
 in blue-collar jobs, public utilities, construction,
 agriculture, transportation, and communications fall under its
 purview. The law has enjoyed relative success in several
 areas. The authorities plan to extend the coverage of this
 and other labor laws to protect the rights and interests of
 other workers. The minimum age for employment is 15, and a
 combination of this law and a strict compulsory education law
 assure that few children are employed on Taiwan.
 By law the workweek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6
 days per week) with certain provisions for overtime. Taiwan
 has no minimum wage legislation, but the average manufacturing
 wage is over $450 per month. Most larger firms provide their
 employees with allowances for transportation, meals, housing,
 etc., which can amount to 60 to 80 percent of base salary.
 There are minimum standards for working conditions and health
 and safety precautions.
 Many areas covered by the law have not been enforced because
 the number of inspectors is far too small to ensure regular
 checks on compliance. Routine inspections of any given
 business may be held as seldom as once in 11 years, and action
 is rarely taken unless a worker complains formally to the
 authorities. Further, with most companies being small,
 family-owned operations employing relatives who will not
 report violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage, and
 safety sections of the law is hard to document and thought to
 be minimal.
 Labor discontent resulted in the unexpected 1986 election loss
 by the KMT of two labor constituency seats. The authorities,
 as a result, have placed greater emphasis on labor matters. A
 cabinet-level Labor Council was created in 1987 to implement
 and oversee labor laws and policies. Thus far, it has
 concentrated its resources on monitoring working conditions
 and provisions for legally mandated retirement funds in state
 enterprises and larger private concerns. The authorities have
 also promised to introduce legislation clarifying union
 organization and workers' right to strike by the end of 1987
 or early 1988. Unemployment insurance is being studied and
 may be offered to a small segment of workers in a pilot
 program. Finally, efforts on the part of the authorities to
 increase workers' awareness of their rights through union
 edudation programs and the establishment of complaint channels
 appear to be bearing fruit, as manifested by an increasing
 number of lawsuits filed against employers by workers.
 
 
 694
