TAIWAN
This year's report on Taiwan presents a basically accurate picture of a society in rapid evolution. It is strongest in the areas of government control of the media, worker rights and ethnic and gender discrimination. On the negative side, the report understates politically motivated persecution and harassment by the government of opposition groups and independence activists. And its mention of the December national elections omits discussion of government actions that undercut the opposition.
While the report acknowledges that a number of overseas dissidents still considered undesirable by the authorities have been denied entry into Taiwan, it fails to mention the significant number of overseas pro-independence advocates who were admitted to the country and subsequently arrested and deported. Many of the activists were associated with the World United Formosans for Independence (WUFI), a U.S.-based organization outlawed for its alleged advocacy of violence. For example, in November the authorities deported Lin Ming-che, a naturalized U.S. citizen and a WUFI activist, after he appeared in an opposition-sponsored march supporting Taiwan's entry into the United Nations. Others deported during the year include WUFI activists Dr. Kuo Cheng-kuang and Dr. Wong Kang-lung.
The discussion of the prosecution of pro-independence activists could be strengthened by the inclusion of individual cases. For example, two WUFI leaders. Dr. Kuo Pei-hung and Professor Li Ying-yuan, were arrested in August and September respectively and charged with sedition, forgery and illegal entry into the country. The government has presented no evidence that either used or advocated violence.
This year's report corrects an omission in the 1990 report by providing opposition, as well as government, assessments of the length of the blacklist of persons denied access to the country. However, the report goes on to state that the "Taiwan authorities have indicated that they will reduce" the blacklist. The report should focus on what the
367
Taiwan
government has done, rather than accepting at face value self-serving government statements of intentions.
The report also does not include cases of arrests of local pro-independence activists. In October, the authorities arrested 10 local WUFI activists on charges of sedition. The report does not discuss the Civic Organization Law which bans organizations advocating independence. In November three local WUFI members were charged under the criminal code for recruiting new members of an illegal organization.
The report seriously slants its coverage of the arrest of five and subsequent conviction of four alleged members of the banned Tokyo-based Association for an Independent Taiwan, Dutaihui. Instead of merely noting the convictions, the report should have pointed out that the basis for the charges was a computer data base of documents on the culture and history of Taiwan being constructed by one of the accused. The data base included a banned book by Shih Ming that is now readily available in Taiwan. One of those arrested was a member of the Abi aboriginal tribe who worked at the Presbyterian Church's Fisherman's Service Center in Kaosiung, which helps aboriginal fishermen secure better working conditions.
The report understates the opposition to Article 100 of the Criminal Code, which is used to prosecute dissidents for sedition. The opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) was joined in its call for repeal of Article 100 by a committee of leading intellectuals from the academic, cultural, religious and legal communities, who enlisted the support of hundreds of professors, physicians and students. Largely due to this pressure, the authorities agreed to revise the provision.
The report states that "critics" say the sedition law was used to harass and intimidate the opposition. The State Department should have reached its own conclusion on this issue. In its discussion of the Parade and Assembly Law, the report should have indicated the extent to which the authorities use the law to harass the opposition. For instance,
368
Taiwan
demonstration leaders have been arrested for such petty infractions as leading marchers away from the approved route.
In its discussion of torture and other mistreatment, the report accurately acknowledges the credible complaints of beatings of suspects by police and cites an important example of mistreatment of a political detainee. However, the report does not indicate what concrete steps the authorities have taken in prosecuting those officials responsible for Chen Ching-chi's death.
Concerning government monitoring and interference with activities of dissidents abroad, the report fails to note allegations made before a committee of the U.S. House of Representatives in September that the Kuomintang maintains a vast network of informers and special agents in the United States to report on U.S.-based Taiwanese. Wang Kang-lu, a member of WUFI who testified before the House committee, was arrested upon his return to Taiwan.
The report glosses over the continuing surveillance of academics and intellectuals by the authorities. In its discussion of academic freedom, the report states that there is generally greater freedom to dissent on campus than in past years. However, buried in another section of the report is mention of an attempt by the Ministry of Investigation Bureau to infiltrate academia and investigate student activities. Moreover, the report omits that in October DPP legislator Hsieh Ch'ang-t'ing made public two secret government documents dated March 26 and May 20, 1991. The documents showed that the National Security Bureau, an intelligence organization operating under the National Security Council, had recruited the chairman of Taiwan National University's political science department to set up an academic research institute as a front for the Bureau. The primary purpose of the institute was to secretly gather intelligence on activities of students and professors who might be active in the opposition movement.
The report terms the December elections as being "open and democratic" and ignores charges by the opposition and human rights advocates of government corruption and gerrymandering, and of
369
Taiwan
intervention by the military. Moreover, it fails to mention the Executive Yuan's December decree that county and city election committees remove pro-Taiwan independence platforms from election bulletins and recall those already printed. The basis for the demand was that the bulletins violated the law against the advocacy of independence. Opposition magistrates and mayors led six major counties and cities, including Taipei and Kaosiung, in ignoring this ban.
Like last year's report, the 1991 report devotes insufficient attention to the fluctuations in permitted contact between persons in Taiwan and mainland China. For example, the report should have mentioned that the authorities now allow brothers and sisters from mainland China to visit sick relatives or attend funerals of their relatives in Taiwan. Formerly only grandparents, parents, and children or spouses were allowed such visits. Moreover, regulations were further relaxed to allow military employees whose jobs do not involve military secrets to visit sick relatives or attend relative's iunerals on the mainland. Ranking government officials and regular servicemen are still banned from visiting the mainland. As to restrictions on travel of mainland Chinese to Taiwan, the requirement that mainland reporters find a Taiwanese guarantor in order to apply to visit Taiwan has been dropped and revised government regulations now allow mainland film, radio and television personnel to apply to come to Taiwan.
However, there are inconsistencies in the liberalization of travel restrictions. Since the authorities ended the Period of Communist Rebellion and repealed the statute for the punishment of sedition, Communist Party members need no longer declare their party membership when entering Taiwan. In spite of this purported policy change, several prominent mainland visitors were either denied entry or expelled because they were Communist Party members. In September, a prominent mainland scientist who had been invited by a prestigious research body to join a research project in Taiwan was denied an entry permit for this reason. Also in September, five mainland Chinese physicians visiting Taiwan as experts on traditional Chinese medicine were expelled for not revealing their Communist Party membership.
370
