 TAIWAN
 With the popular election of President Lee Teng-hui in 1996, Taiwan completed
 its transition to an open, democratic system. Lee, who is also the Chairman of the
 Nationalist Party (KMT), appoints the Premier, who heads the Executive Yuan
 (EY), or cabinet. Constitutional amendments adopted in 1997 provided the Legisla-
 tive Yuan (LY) with the authority to bring down the Cabinet with a no confidence
 vote and removed the previous power of the LY to confirm the appointment of the
 Premier. The current LY members were elected in a free and fair election in Decem-
 ber. The ruling KMT remains the single most powerful political force with a working
 majority in the LY, where two opposition parties play significant roles. The Judicial
 Yuan (JY) is constitutionally independent of the other branches of the political sys-
 tem, but corruption and political influence remain serious problems.
 
 
 The National Police Administration (NPA) of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the
 NPA's Criminal Investigation Bureau, and the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Investiga-
 tion Bureau are responsible for law enforcement relating to internal security. The
 police and security agencies are under effective civilian control. Some members of
 the police occasionally committed human rights abuses.
 Taiwan has a dynamic, export-oriented, free-market economy. Liberalization of
 the economy has undercut the dominant role that state-owned and party-run enter-
 rises had played in such major sectors as finance, transportation, utilities, ship-
 uilding, steel, telecommunications, and petrochemicals. As the economy has
 evolved, services and capital- and technology-intensive industries have become the
 most important sectors. Major exports include computers, electronic equipment, ma-
 chinery, and textiles. Citizens generally enjoy a high standard of living and an equi-
 table income distribution.
 The authorities generally respect human rights; however, occasional problems re-
 main in some areas. Principal problems include police abuse of detainees; physical
 abuse of military inductees, which appears to be declining;, prison overcrowding; po-
 litical and personal pressures on the judiciary;, some restrictions on freedom of asso-
 ciation; discrimination and violence against women; child prostitution and abuse; re-
 strictions on workers' freedom of association and on their ability to strike. The au-
 thorities also have resorted occasionally to the use of libel laws, apparently to deter
 criticism of senior leaders.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Illling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution does not directly address the issues of torture and punishment.
 The Code of Criminal Procedure, however, stipulates that no violence, threat, in-
 ducement, fraud, or other improper means shall be used against accused persons.
 However, there were credible reports that police occasionally physically abused per-
 sons in their custody. The law allows suspects to have attorneys present during in-
 terrogations, primarily to ensure that abuse does not take place (see Section 1.d.).
 The MOJ says that each interrogation is recorded and that any allegation of mis-
 treatment is investigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often
 occur in local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and when attor-
 neys are often not present. Informed observers note that police forces emphasize the
 confession of suspects as the principal investigative tool. Law enforcement agencies
 remain weak in scientific investigative skills so that, when political leaders demand
 that cases be solved, there is pressure on the police to coerce confessions. Inter-
 national observers also have noted that the judicial system sometimes accepts such
 confessions even when they contradict available physical evidence or logic. However,
 in a positive development, in one case police rejected a confession when forensic evi-
 dence contradicted the suspect's confession. The NPA denies that abuse of suspects
 by police takes place. It asserts that regulations forbid such abuse and that any
 member of the police force who abused suspects would be punished for doing so.
 Nevertheless, there are credible reports that the physical abuse or the threat of
 abuse of prisoners is a recurring investigative technique. Detainees who are phys-
 ically abused have the right to sue the police for torture, and confessions shown to
 have been obtained through torture are inadmissible in court proceedings. There
 were no such suits reported during the year.
 The authorities state that they have made efforts to investigate, prosecute, and
 punish officials responsible for torture and other mistreatment. Although the basic
 responsibility for investigating mistreatment lies with prosecutors, the Control Yuan
 (CY), a coequal branch of the political system that investigates official misconduct,
 also investigates such cases. The Control Yuan President complained that his
 branch lacked the means to do its job properly. While the authorities state that re-
 spect for human rights is a part of basic police training, human rights groups assert
 that the measures the authorities have taken to protect human rights have been
 inadequate to create an ethos of respect for human rights among police officers and
 security personnel. Women's and children's rights groups are active in monitoring
 police and judicial performance and periodically mount campaigns to correct abuses.
 Although corporal punishment is forbidden under military law, there continued to
 be reports of serious physical abuse of military personnel. The Ministry of National
 Defense has addressed these complaints by promulgating regulations specifying the
 appropriate treatment of lower ranking personnel and by conducting regular polls
 
 
 888
 of servicemen and their families to discover any abuse. The authorities have also
 established a telephone hot line to report alleged abuses within the military. The
 Ministry of National Defense has attributed some of the blame for abuse of recruits
 to a supposed softening of youth by modern life, which is said to make them less
 capable of accepting the rigors of combat training. However, the Ministry also has
 recognized that some trainers have used inappropriate methods to address these al-
 leged deficiencies. In order to standardize, rationalize, and make transparent the
 military basic training program, the Ministry appointed professional researchers to
 design practical training and curriculums for all military personnel who have con-
 tact with new recruits Prssure from parents of recruits and a program to retain
 recruits have also contributed to an apparent reduction in the incidence of abuses.
 Prison conditions generally meet minmum international standards. However,
 overcrowding at the 49 prisons and detention centers remained a problem. Despite
 an increase in facilities since 1997, the number of inmates detained as of the end
 of June exceeded capacity by 11,077. The primary reason forovercrowding has
 changed. The number of incarcerated drug users, which had been the fastest grow-
 ing category of inmates, has leveled off. In addition, the Ministry of Justice has set
 up drug treatment facilities to reduce the number of addicts in the prison popu-
 lation. However, the number of parolees has dropped after a 1997 amendment to
 the Code of Criminal Procedure reversed a 1994 amendment that had allowed pris-
 oners to be paroled after serving one-third, rather than one-half, of their sentences.
 Conditions in illegal immigrant detention centers are poor (see Section 2.d.).
 The authorities permit visits by human rights group monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and
 detention, and the authorities generally observe this prohibition. Police legally may
 arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the
 punishment would be imprisonment of 5 years or more and may question persons
 without a formal summons when circumstances are too urgent to report to a public
 prosecutor. However, the authorities must, within 24 hours after detention, apply
 to a prosecutor for a warrant and give written notice to the detainee or a designated
 relative or friend, stating the reason for the arrest or questioning. Indicted persons
 may be released on bail at judicial discretion.
 An important amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure was enacted at the
 end of 1997, shifting the power of investigative detention from the prosecutors to
 the courts. Under the new law, prosecutors must apply to the courts within 24 hours
 after arrest for permission to continue detaining an arrestee. The duration of this
 pretrial detention is limited to 2 months, and the courts may approve a single exten-
 sion of 2 months. Limits also were set for detention during trial. If a crime is pun-
 ishable by less than 10 year's imprisonment, then no more than 3 extensions of 2
 months each may be granted during the trial and appellate proceedings. Duringthe
 second appeal, only one extension may be granted. The authorities generally have
 followed these procedures, and trials usually take place within 3 months of indict-
 ment.
 The revised Code of Criminal Procedure requires the police to inform a suspect
 during an interrogation of the crimes charged, the right to remain silent, the right
 to counsel, and the right to ask the police to investigate evidence that would be fa-
 vorable to the suspect. If the charges are amended subsequently, the police also are
 bound to inform the suspect. The authorities generally respect a detainee's request
 to have a lawyer present during the investigation phase, but defense lawyers and
 human rights groups continue to complain that the rules do not provide adequate
 protection as suspects often do not have legal representation during police interroga-
 tion. A contributing factor is that there is no legal requirement that indigent per-
 sons be provided counsel during police interrogation, although such counsel is pro-
 vided dur frin tals. Informed observers report that the qublic defense counsels do
 not provide effective defense assistance. They typically do not appear until the final
 debate hearing of the trial, and they seldom spend a significant amount of time dis-
 cussing the case with their clients.
 The authorities do not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and for equality before the law. In the past, some observers have characterized
 the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to political and personal
 pressure and influence.
 The Judicial Yuan is one of the five coequal branches of the political system. The
 JY is headed by a president and a vice president and -also contains the 16-member
 Council of Grand Justices (CGJ), which interprets the Constitution as well as laws
 and ordinances. Subordinate JY organs include the Supreme Court, high courts, dis-
 trict courts, the Administrativ    the ot  n t ittee on the Discipline of Pub-
 lic Functionaries.
 
 
 Dissatisfaction exists among judges and others about the slowness of strengthen-
 ing the rule of law. Corruption within the judiciary remains a problem. During the
 year, there were a number of indictments of judges for accepting bribes in exchange
 for favorable judgments. In 1996 the JY President invited legal scholars to study
 and to recommend measures for judicial reform. In 1997 the JY, as a first step in
 the reform process, revoked the previous procedure whereby the decisions of junior
 judges were automatically reviewed by senior judges. A number of additional steps
 to improve judicial performance also were undertaken, including establishing
 anticorruption units within each department of the JY, drafting a "judges code," and
 setting up evaluation teams of independent scholars to examine judicial perform-
 ance. However, investigative efforts apparently have concentrated on people outside
 the judicial system who falsely claim that they are able to influence judges in order
 to defraud defendants. A number of judges have called for even more significant
 changes, and a nongovernmental judicial reform foundation, consisting of lawyers,
 legal scholars, and legislators, was established to promote and monitor the reform
 process. In May a new organization of prosecutors was formed to push for rational-
 ization of the system and better conditions of work, including more professional
 standards and training for prosecutors. Such reforms are aimed at providing a more
 equitable trial system.
 The law provides for the right of fair public trial, and this is generally respected
 in practice. Judges, rather than juries, decide trials, and all judges are appointed
 by, and responsible to, the JY. In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor.
 The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to
 submit if the judge considers it irrelevant; refusal to hear evidence may be a factor
 in an appeal. Trials are public, but attendance at trials involving juveniles or poten-
 tially sensitive issues that might attract crowds may require court permission.
 A defendant has the right to an attorney. If the defendant is suspected of commit-
 ting a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment or if the defend-
 ant is disabled, the judge may assign an attorney. A law passed in 1997 states that
 a suspect may not be compelled to testify. The Code of Criminal Procedure states
 that a confession shall not be the sole evidence used to find a defendant guilty.
 However, informed observers note that many convictions frequently result from a
 combination of a confession and circumstantial evidence of varying quality. Any con-
 victed person has the right to appeal to the next higher court level. Persons sen-
 tenced to terms of imprisonment of 3 years or more may appeal beyond that level.
 The Supreme Court automatically reviews life imprisonment and death sentences.
 Under the law, prosecutors have the right to appeal verdicts of not guilty to the next
 higher court level.
 The "Antihoodlum" Law of 1985 was a departure from international standards of
 due process in that it included a secret witness system that allowed police to con-
 duct "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums" and to use the testimony of unidentified in-
 formants in detaining the suspects. Lawyers for the alleged hoodlums were not per-
 mitted to cross-examine these informants. While defense lawyers were given the
 right to examine documentary evidence, critics charged that evidence in these cases
 was often weak or fabricated. In 1995, however, the Council of Grand Justices (CGJ)
 declared unconstitutional the administrative procedures that had been used to sen-
 tence hoodlums to reformatory education. The LY passed new legislation in 1997 re-
 quiring all witnesses to testify openiy, but providing procedures for their subsequent
 protection, "in exceptional cases.'
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and sections of the Criminal and Civil Codes contain provisions pro-
 tecting privacy. A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained be-
 fore a search, except when "incidental to arrest." Critics, however, claim that the
 incidental to arrest provision is not only unconstitutional but also often interpreted
 broadly by police to justify searches of locations other than actual arrest sites. Ac-
 cording to the National Police Administration, warrantless searches are allowed
 only in special circumstances, such as to arrest an escapee or if facts indicate a per-
 son is in the process of committing a crime. In any such case, the police must file
 a report with the prosecutor or court within 24 hours. A policeman who carries out
 an illegal search may be sued for illegal entry and sentenced to up to 1 year's im-
 prisonment. Few prosecutors or judges did in fact file charges against policemen
 found to have obtained evidence illegally. Furthermore, such evidence is not auto-
 matically excluded from consideration by the court; instead, its admission is left to
 the discretion of the judge. More often than not, such evidence is admitted and fre-
 quently provides the basis for conviction.
 
 
 890
 In addition to criminal suspects, persons are subject to searches and identity
 checks by police in public places. Roadblocks to randomly check vehicles are con-
 ducted routinely. Pedestrians are also subject to identity checks. Such checks are
 based only on a section of the Police Administration Law, and police officers are
 given wide discretion.
 Wiretapping of telephones also is a serious problem. The Telecommunication Law
 and the Code of Criminal Procedure provide that judicial and security authorities
 may fie a written request to a prosecutor's office to monitor telephone calls to col-
 lect evidence against a suspect involved in a major crime. According to media re-
 ports this practice is commonplace, with more than 106,000 successful applications
 (or wiretapping in 1997. Moreover, the intelligence services have their own wire-
 tapping capabilities, which are not subject to supervision by the judicial branch.
 Ministry of Justice authorities have stated that such steps are required in view of
 the threat Taiwan faces from mainland China.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the authorities generally respect these rights in practice. Al-
 though a statute prohibiting advocacy of communism or division of national territory
 formally circumscribes these rights, these provisions are not enforced in practice.
 Print media represent the full spectrum of views within society. Residual political
 influence, however, still exists over the electronic media, particularly television sta-
 tions. The KMT, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the military continue to
 be the largest shareholders in three of the four island-wide broadcast television sta-
 tions, and some critics still claim that coverage on these three stations has been bi-
 ased in favor of the KMT. A fourth island-wide broadcast television station is based
 in Kaohsiung and associated with the largest opposition party, the Democratic Pro-
 gressive Party (DPP). In any event, the existence of approximately 60 cable tele-
 vision stations, some of which carry programming openly hostile to the ruling party,
 has diminished greatly the importance of KMT control over three of the four broad-
 cast television stations. Over 70 percent of households receive cable television,
 which includes local, privately financed channels, as well as many major inter-
 national networks. Several mainland Chinese and Japanese channels also are car-
 ried widely on cable.
 Controls over radio stations were more limited than those over television stations
 and are being further liberalized. From 1993 to September, the Government Infor-
 mation Office (GIO) received 529 applications for radio broadcast frequencies. A
 total of 164 frequencies were made available and 118 of these were apportioned;
 many of the 46 still available are in remote areas. Many of the newly authorized
 radio stations, however, have limited broadcast ranges, leading critics to charge that
 the stations do not constitute a genuine counterweight to the authorities' monopoly
 on island-wide radio broadcasting.
 Observers have noted that licensing requirements oblige prospective radio station
 owners to have more capital than is required to actually operate a station. This in
 itself inhibits individuals or groups from applying for radio station licenses. There
 are reportedly over one hundred unlicensed "underground" radio stations, many as-
 sociated with opposition parties, operating illegally.
 In 1992 the authorities revised sedition statutes to limit the purview of the Sedi-
 tion Law and the National Security Law (NSL) and to remove prohibitions on "ac-
 tions against the Constitution." However, the NSL still retains prohibitions against
 advocating communism or espousing the division of national territory, although
 these provisions are no longer enforced in practice.
 While there were three cases in which senior leaders charged local publications
 with libel in 1997, no such cases were reported during the year.
 There is a vigorous and active free press despite the Publications Law, which em-
 powers the police to seize or ban printed material that is seditious, treasonous, sac-
 rilegious, interferes with the lawful exercise of public functions, or violates public
 order or morals. There were no reports of censorship of the print media during the
 year, nor were there any seizures of materials on political grounds. The police do
 sometimes conduct raids to seize pornographic materials.
 The Government Information Office (GIO) has demanded that any publications
 imported from mainland China be sent to the GIO Publications Department for
 screening before sale or publication in Taiwan. The GIO still seeks to ban the impor-
 tation of publications that advocate communism or the establishment of united front
 organizations, endanger public order or good morals, or violate regulations or laws.
 However, few local publishing companies observe this regulation, and substantial
 People's Republic of China-origin material is imported every year. Moreover, cable
 television systems broadcast uncensored television channels from mainland China.
 
 
 Among other restrictions regulating the media are those precluding people pre-
 viously convicted of sedition from owning, managing, or working in television and
 radio stations. Major opposition leaders, many of whom were convicted of sedition
 after the December 1979 Kaohsiung incident, are nevertheless not affected because
 their rights were restored through presidential amnesties.
 There are few restrictions on academic freedom. The expression of dissenting po-
 litical views is common.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly; although the authorities restricted this right somewhat in
 practice in the past, they did not do so following the Council of Grand Justices deci-
 sion in January that provisions of the Parade and Assembly Law prohibiting dem-
 onstrations promoting communism or advocating Talwan's separation from main-
 land China were unconstitutional.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but the authorities restrict
 this right somewhat in practice. The Civic Organization Law requires all civic orga-
 nizations to register; however, the central authorities have refused to approve reg-
 istration of some groups-such as the Taiwan Association for Human Rights
 (TAHR), the Taiwan Association of University Professors, and the Taiwan Environ-
 mental Protection Alliance-which use the word "Taiwan" in their titles (a usage
 that some authorities still frown on as promoting Taiwan independence). The au-
 thorities note that the Civic Organization Law requires that the name of a civic or-
 ganization must correspond to the administrative district it covers; i.e., the "Repub-
 lic of China" for island-wide organizations. The lack of registration entails some in-
 convenience to the operations of these groups. For example, they may not solicit do-
 nations from the public, contributors may not take income tax deductions for their
 contributions, and their employees may not receive employment-linked benefits such
 as national health insurance coverage. Nonetheless, they operate actively, freely,
 and effectively. Several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's), including the Tai-
 wan Association for Human Rights, registered with local governments, such as the
 Taipei city government, which do not impose such restrictions on the use of the
 word "Taiwan." The registration removes most of the legal impediments but raises
 as yet unanswered questions about the legality of these groups' operations, such as
 fundraising, outside the city of their registration.
 A 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the Executive Yuan
 the power to dissolve political parties. This power now resides in the Constitutional
 Court. Grounds for dissolution include objectives or actions that are deemed to jeop-
 ardize the existence of the "Republic of China." The Constitutional Court heard no
 cases under this law during the year.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The authorities do not restrict freedom of internal travel. Foreign travel
 by Taiwan passport holders is common.
 Nonresident Taiwan passport holders are usually issued "overseas Chinese" pass-
 ports and must seek entry permits for travel to Taiwan. According to 1992 revisions
 to the National Security Law, entry permits may be refused only if there are facts
 sufficient to create a strong suspicion that a person is engaged in terrorism or vio-
 lence. Reasons for entry and exit refusals must be given, and appeals may be made
 to a special board. No exit or entry permit refusals were reported during the year.
 In 1993 new measures provided that holders of Taiwan passports who normally re-
 side abroad may return and regain their household registration, a document re-
 quired to vote or participate as a candidate in an election.
 Since 1988 Taiwan has substantially relaxed strictures against travel by Taiwan
 residents to the Chinese mainland, and such travel is common. Relatively tight re-
 strictions on the entry of Chinese from the mainland remain in force for national
 security reasons, but they have been relaxed in recent years to expand cross-strait
 exchanges.
 There is no law under which noncitizens may ask for asylum, and there were no
 applications for refugee status during the year. While the authorities have been re-
 luctant to return to the mainland those who might suffer political persecution there,
 they regularly deport to the mainland, under provisions of the Mainland Relations
 Act, mainlanders who illegally enter the island for economic reasons. There were no
 reports of forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal immigrants (most from mainland China)
 continued to be criticized by local media. The Bureau of Entry and Exit claims that
 the overcrowding at the three detention camps has been reduced by expansion
 projects and blames the problem on mainland Chinese authorities, who insist on ex-
 
 
 tensive background checks, which result in delays in accepting the timely repatri-
 ation of illegal immigrants.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right. In 1996 Taiwan for the first time carried out the direct,
 popular election of its president, thus completing its transition to a democratic,
 multiparty political system. The transition began with the lifting of martial law in
 1987. After generally free and fair popular elections for the LY in 1992 and 1995,
 the third direct election of all LY members took place in December. Previously, the
 President and Vice President had been indirectly elected by the National Assembly
 (NA), which now stands for popular election every 4 years and is charged mainly
 with amending the Constitution.
 The KT remains the largest political party, with 2 million members. It secured
 a working majority in the December elections-for an expanded LY, winning 124 of
 225 seats. The KIT also won the December election for Taipei mayor. The Demo-
 cratic Progressive Party, which traditionally had advocated independence for Tai-
 wan and has an estimated 140,000 members, controls 54 LY seats. It won 12 of 23
 mayoral and county magistrate posts in 1997, including that of Taipei County, plac-
 ing a majority of Taiwan's popuiation in DPP-Ied localities. The DPP also won the
 Kaohsiung mayor's office in the December election. Younger KNIT members who op-
 posed the Party's domination by "mainstream" ethnic Taiwanese supporters of
 Pr    en and Party Chairman Lee Teng-hul established the New Party in 1993.
 The New Party has 11 seats in the LY and claims a membership of 86,000.
 The KT benefits from its ownership of the major television channels and of en-
 terprises and business holdings estimated to be worth in excess of $6 billion, and
 from the fact that its members still hold most key positions in the political system,
 sometimes concurrently with important party positions. However, in recent years,
 opposition parties have grown rapidly-and freely contest elections, criticize the au-
 thorities, and influence national policy through the legislative process.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but their role in politics,
 while increasing, remains limited. Neveteless, a number of women hold senior ad-
 ministrative and KNT positions, including the EY Council for Cultural Development
 Chaeon and KMT Central Standing Committee (CSC) member Lin Cheng-chih,
 KMT  Deputy Secretary General Yeh Chin-feng, and Fair Trade Commission Chair-
 person Chao Yang-ching. In addition, 43 of 225 newly elected LY members, 60 of
 333 National Assembly members, 15 of 71 Provincial Assembly members, 2 of 29
 Control Yuan members, and 318 of 1,221 judges are women.
 Aborigine representatives participate in most levels of the political system, par-
 tially through 6 reserved seats in t  N  and LY and 2 seats in the Provincial As-
 sembly-hamf of each elected by the plains Aborigines and half by mountain Aborig-
 ines. An Aborigine serves as Chairman of the Aboriginal Affairs Commission. The
 magistrate of Taitung County is an Aborigine first elected in 1993 and reelected in
 1997.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Humfan Rights
 The principal human rights organizations are the Chinese Association of Human
 Rights (CAHR) and the Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination
 between the two bodies is limited. Despite the authorities' refusal to register it (see
 Section 2.b.), the TAHR operates freely. Both organizations investigate human
 rights complaints, many of which come to public attention through the media and
 statements by lawmakers from all political parties. The authorities permit rep-
 resentatives of international human rights organizations to visit and meet with citi-
 zens freely. Women's and children's human rights groups monitor police and judicial
 performance and campaign to correct abuses (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based onRace, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality of citizens before the law "irrespective of
 sex, religion, race, class, or party affiliation." Constitutional amendments enacted in
 1997 also provide for the rights of disabled persons. While the authorities are com-
 mittd to protecting these rights, some areas of discrimination continue to exist.
 Women.-fViolence against women, including domestic violence and rape, remains
 a serious problem. Wife beating is especially widespread. The DPP Women's Devel-
 opment Committee claimed that 35 percent of married women were victims of
 spousal abuse. The authorities have fnded domestic violence hot lines, which have
 handled some 17,000 cases over the past decade. According to the law, a prosecutor
 may not investigate domestic violence cases until a spouse files a formal lawsuit.
 
 
 Although some cases are prosecuted, strong social pressure discourages abused
 women from reporting incidents to the police in order to avoid disgracing their fami-
 lies. Rape also remains a serious problem, and its victims are socially stigmatized.
 One expert estimates that 7,000 rapes occur annually-10 times the number re-
 ported to the police. Because rape trials are public, women have been reluctant to
 prosecute their attackers. Support from feminist and social welfare organizations,
 however, has made victims more willing to come forward- and press charges. Under
 the law, the authorities may not prosecute for rape without the victim's formal com-
 plaint. The Code of Criminal Procedure establishes the punishment for rape as not
 less than 5 years' imprisonment, and those convicted are usually sentenced to from
 5 to 10 years in prison.
 During the year, 1,140 persons were arrested for the crime of rape, 664 were in-
 dicted, and 228 were convicted. In the other cases, the charges were either dropped
 for lack of evidence, or because the victim withdrew her complaint or the cases were
 still before the courts.
 The LY passed new legislation in June that requires all city and county govern-
 ments to set up domestic violence prevention and control centers. The centers pro-
 vide victims with protection, legal counseling, and other services on a 24-hour basis.
 The Ministry of Interior also provides assistance to victims of rape or domestic vio-
 lence, such as financial assistance and shelter.
 Prostitution, including coerced prostitution and child prostitution, is also a prob-
 lem, although there is little public concern about adult prostitution. When the police
 discover illegal prostitution, the cases are prosecuted according to the Criminal Pro-
 cedure Code. However, under the "Prostitute Management Regulations," prostitu-
 tion is legal in 34 registered houses of prostitution in one section of Kaohsiung. In
 1997 the Taipei municipal government ended legal prostitution in registered houses
 of prostitution in specified areas of that city.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, and the LY has in recent years begun a sys-
 tematic review and revision of those portions of the legal code relating to divorce,
 property, and child custody. As a result of legislation passed in June, many discrimi-
 natory sections of the code were eliminated. For example, women now are no longer
 required to adopt their husband's last name after getting married. In 1994 the CGJ
 declared unconstitutional a Civil Code provision dating back to the 1930's that gave
 fathers priority in child custody disputes. In 1996 the LY passed legislation that
 clarified a woman's right to her own property. In 1997 the LY repealed legislation
 requiring that a child take the father's name; the parents may now choose to give
 the child either the father's or mother's family name.
 There is no equal employment rights law, and enforcement of existing sex dis-
 crimination laws remains a problem. Labor laws provide for maternity leave, but
 employers do not always grant it. Women also have complained of being forced to
 quit jobs upon marriage or because of age or pregnancy. Women often complain of
 less frequent promotions and lower salaries than their male counterparts, although
 the Labor Standards Law prohibits gender-based differences in wages. According to
 the Council on Labor Affairs, salaries for women average 85 percent of those for
 men performing roughly equal jobs.
 In the past, many women married to foreigners said that their husbands had a
 more difficult time obtaining residency than the foreign wives of male citizens. They
 also complained that their children were not allowed to enter public schools. In 1995
 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced a relaxation of the regulations governing
 foreign husbands' visas that allows the foreign husbands of citizens to remain in
 Taiwan (at a minimum) for 6 months at a time rather than the shorter periods
 granted previously. The Ministry of Education also clarified regulations permitting
 the children of foreign fathers to attend public schools. However, the Citizenship
 Law continues to stipulate that the transmission of citizenship may occur exclu-
 sively through the father. A citizen mother with a foreign husband thus cannot
 apply for a Taiwan passport for her child.
 Children.-The Constitution has provisions to protect children's rights, and the
 authorities are committed to supporting them. Education for children between 6 and
 15 years of age is compulsory, and this rule is enforced. Children also are provided
 health care under the national health insurance scheme.
 Child abuse is a significant problem. The 1993 revision of the Child Welfare Act
 mandates that any persons discovering cases of child abuse or neglect must notify
 the police, social welfare, or child welfare authorities, and that child welfare special-
 ists must make such notification within 24 hours, and that the authorities involved
 must issue an investigation report within 24 hours. Both the Ministry of Interior's
 Social Affairs Department and private organization specialists assert that these re-
 quirements are followed.
 
 
 894
 Although no reliable statistics are available, child prostitution is a serious prob-
 lem, particularly among Aborigine children. Most child prostitutes range from 12
 through 17 years of age. The juvenile welfare law enables juvenile welfare bodies,
 prosecutors, and victims to apply to courts for termination of guardianship of par-
 ents and the appointment of qualified guardians if parents have forced their chil-
 dren into prostitution. If children are engaged in prostitution of their own free will,
 and the parents -are incapable of providing safe custody, the courts muy order com-
 petent authorities to provide counseling for not less than 6 months and not more
 than 2 years. However, legal loopholes and cultural barriers remain obstacles to en-
 forcement.  For example, if both parents have sold a child into prostitution, a prob-
 lem associated mostly with Aborigine families, the law requires the child to lodge
 a complaint before prosecution is undertaken. In many cases, the child is xeluctant
 or afraid to do so.   -  -
 I According to some reports, brothel owners, to prevent child prostitutes from escap-
 ing, use violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion. In 1995 the LY passed
 legislation providing for as- much as 2 years' incarceration for customers of pros-
 titutes under the age of 18. The legislation also requires the publication of the
 names of violators in newspapers. Over 900 persons have been arrested under this
 law, of whom 260 have been indicted and 147 convicted.
 People With Disabilities.-The Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strength-
 ened in 1990. It prohibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum
 fines at approximately $2,400 for violators. Under these revisions, new public build-
 ings, facilities, and transportation equipment must be accessible to the disabled,
 while existing public buildings were to, be brought into conformity by 1995. Although
 new buildings appear to meet many accessibility requirements, there does not as yet
 appear to be substantial effort aimed at refitting older buildings to accommodate
 disabled people.
 A leading expert in the field estimates that the number of disabled is between
 400,000 and 500,000-possibly as high as 700,000. One-third of the total are se-
 verely disabled and receive shelter or nursing care from the authorities. The Dis-
 abled Welfare Law requires large public and private organizations to hire disabled
 persons equal to 2 and 1 percent of their work forces respectively. Organizations
 failing to do so must pay, for each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly sal-
 ary (approximately $570) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institu-
 tions involved -in welfare for the disabled. Many organizations complain that it is
 difficult to find qualified disabled workers, and they appear to prefer to pay the
 fines involved. The authorities have noted the impact of a traditional belief that the
 disabled lack the ability to do real work..
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's-only non-Chinese minority group consists of the Ab-
 original descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan when the
 first Chinese settlers arrived. According to MOI statistics, there are 357,000 Aborig-
 ines. More than 70 percent are Christian, while the dominant Han Chinese are
 largely Buddhistor Taoist. The civil and political rights of Aborigines are fully pro-
 tected under law. The National Assembly amended the Constitution in 1992 and
 again in 1997 to upgrade the status of Aboriginal people, protect their right of politi-
 cal participation, and ensure cultural, educational, and business development. In ad-
 dition, the authorities have instituted social programs to help Aborigines assimilate
 into the dominant Chinese society. A new cabinet-level agency, the Aboriginal Af-
 fairs Commission, was created, although critics noted that its budget was quite
 small. As part of its efforts to-preserve ethnic identities, the Ministry of Education
 now includes some Aboriginal-language classes in primary schools. Under legislation
 passed by the LY in May, the Ministry of Education is to subsidize university edu-
 cation for Aborigines and make efforts to preserve Aboriginal culture, history, and
 language through the establishment of Aboriginal studies centers.
 Although they face no official discrimination, Aborigines have had little impact,
 over the years, on major decisions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and the
 allocation of their natural resources. In addition, they complain that they are pre-
 vented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities' con-
 trol, some of which have been designated as national parks or conservation areas.
 Land rights remain a crucial issue for Aborigines, along with social discrimination,
 educational underachievement, low economic status, and high rates of alcoholism.
 Some Aboriginal leaders have come to believe that only some form of autonomy can
 preserve their land rights, which are constantly threatened by Han developers who
 use connections and corruption to gain title to Aboriginal land. According to MOI
 statistics, only about 50 percent of Aborigine children complete elementary school.
 In the past, Aborigines were not allowed to use a non-Chinese personal name on
 legal documents, but this was changed by legislation in 1996.
 
 
 The sale of Aboriginal girls into prostitution by their parents is a serious social
 problem. However, recent reports have indicated that in the period from June 1994
 to July 1995, the percentage of all arrested child prostitutes who were of Aboriginal
 origin dropped from 15 percent to 5 percent. This reduction may have come about
 due to intensive efforts on the part of social workers and nongovernmental organiza-
 tions to combat the practice of selling female children into prostitution.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In 1995 the Judicial Yuan ruled that the right to
 organize trade unions is protected by the Constitution. But, until new legislation im-
 plementing this decision is passed, teachers, civil servants, and defense industry
 workers are still not permitted to form labor unions. Even with this ruling, there
 are a number of laws and regulations limiting the right of association. Labor unions
 may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but they must submit these to the
 authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved if they do not meet certification re-
 quirements or if their activities disturb public order. However, there were no in-
 stances of the authorities dissolving local labor groups or denying new unions cer-
 tification.
 The Labor Union Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by secret
 ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes rejected KMT or management-
 endorsed union slates.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including a city,
 county, or province, can have competing labor confederations. There is only one Tai-
 wan-wide labor federation, the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL) which is closely
 associated with the ruling KMT. In 1997 Lee Cheng-hung, Board Chairman of the
 CFL, was elected to the KMT's Central Standing Committee.
 On March 12, large unions representing some 300,000 workers announced their
 decision to break with the CFL and organize the National Federation of Industrial
 Labor Unions. A similar challenge to the restriction on island-wide unions was
 mounted in -1994 when 12 unions from state-run enterprises announced their with-
 drawal from the CFL to establish a new national federation of labor unions of state-
 run enterprises. The Council of Labor Affairs (CLA) turned down their application,
 as well as the appeal of that rejection. In the meantime, the trade unions have re-
 tained their seats in the CFL. Twenty trade unions with a combined membership
 of 4,000 are affiliated as the National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists.
 Although the affiliates are legal, the Federation is considered illegal. In general, the
 drive for independent labor unions has lost momentum in recent years due to the
 extremely low unemployment rate, higher wages, the shift from manufacturing to
 service industries, the small scale andpoor organization of rihost unions, and pros-
 ecution of labor activists by the authorities in the past.
 The law governing labor disputes recognizes the right of unions to strike but im-
 poses restrictions that make legal strikes difficult and seriously weaken collective
 bargaining. For example, the authorities require mediation of labor/management
 disputes when they deem the disputes to be sufficiently serious or to involve "unfair
 practices." The law forbids both labor and management from disrupting the "work-
 ing order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. The law mandates
 stiff penalties for violations of no-strike/no-retaliation clauses. Employers in the past
 sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers without any legal
 action being taken against them, although there were no such cases reported during
 the year. The CLA reported that from 1990 through 1998, there were 34 strikes,
 of which 23 involved workers at bus companies asking for increased pay and re-
 duced hours. In January workers at a bus transportation company went on strike
 seeking a year-end bonus payment. In August workers at a container terminal com-
 pany went on strike for a wage increase and job protection. Both strikes were re-
 solved by mutual agireement. Also in August more than three-quarters of the pilots
 of a domestic airline tendered their resignations to protest an involuntary wage re-
 duction. The strike ended after 1 week when most of the pilots returned to work.
 There was one strike in 1997 and no strikes in 1996.
 Taiwan was expelled from the International Labor Organization in 1971 when the
 People's Republic of China replaced Taiwan in the United Nations. The CFL is affili-
 ated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for the categories of
 workers noted in Section 6.a., the Labor Union Law and the Settlement of Labor
 Disputes Law give workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. As of
 March, some 3 million workers, approximately 31 percent of the 9.5-million person
 labor force, belonged to 3,710 registered labor unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss,
 or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union members. In practice,
 
 
 896
 however, employers have sometimes dismissed union leaders without reasonable
 cause, and observers point out that the law sets no specific penalties for violations.
 According to the illegal National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists, over
 400 trade unionists and supporters have been fired since Taiwan's labor movement
 began to expand after the 1987 lifting of martial law. Employers discharged fewer
 than 12 trade union officers during the year.
 The Collective Agreements Law provides for collective bargaining but does not
 make it mandatory. Since such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises,
 and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this category, the propor-
 tion of workers covered remains small. Employers set wages genery in accordance
 with market conditions.
 Firms in export processing zones are subject to the same laws regarding treat-
 ment of labor unions as other firms and follow normal practices including collective
 bargaining agreements with their unions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Standards Law pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of these practices, apart
 from coerced prostitution (see Section 5). The law prohibits forced and bonded labor
 by children, and the authorities generally enforce this prohibition effectively. How-
 ever, some parents of Aboriginal children sell them into prostitution, and the re-
 quirements of the law make prosecution difficult at times (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The au-
 thorities prohibit forced and bonded child labor and generally enforce this prohibi-
 tion effectively, although the sale of Aboriginal children into prostitution remains
 a problem (see Section 6.c.). The Labor Standards Law (LSL) stipulates age 15, after
 compulsory education required by law ends, as the minimum age for employment.
 County and city labor bureaus enforce minimum age laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The LSL mandates labor standards. According
 to the CIA, the law covers 3.6 million of Taiwan's 6.6 million salaried workers. The
 law is not well enforced in areas such as overtime work and pay or retirement pay-
 ments. A 1996 amendment required the LSL to cover all salaried employees by the
 end of 1998. By mid-year the LSL covered 5.5 million employees.
 In 1997 the CLA raised the minimum monthly wage by 3.13 percent to $485 (NT$
 15,840). While sufficient in cheaper areas, this is less than what is needed to assure
 a decent standard of living for a worker and family in metropolitan areas such as
 Taipei. However, the average manufacturing wage is more than double the legal
 minimum wage, and the average for service industry employees is even higher. The
 law limits the workweek to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days- per week) and re-
 quires 1 day off in every 7 days. In January the public sector adopted a new system
 providing for a 5-day workweek every other week.
 Because of an acute labor shortage, there has been a legal influx of foreign work-
 ers in the last several years. The law stipulates that foreign workers who are em-
 ployed legally receive the same protection as local workers. For example, following
 an explosion in 1997, the media reported that Thai workers would receive medical
 treatment and compensation for injuries suffered in the accident equivalent to that
 received by citizens. However, authorities say that in many cases illegal foreign
 workers, many from Thailand and the Philippines, receive board and lodging from
 their employers, but no medical coverage, accident insurance, or other benefits en-
 joyed by citizens. Illegal foreign workers also are vulnerable to employer exploitation
 in the form of confiscation of passports, imposition of involuntary deductions from
 wages, and extension of working hours without overtime pay. In addition, observers
 say that conditions in many small- and medium-sized factories that employ illegal
 foreign labor are dangerous, due to old and poorly maintained equipment. There are
 also occasional reports of mistreatment of legal foreign workers. According to avail-
 able statistics, there are almost 252,000 legal foreign workers, including approxi-
 mately 129,000 workers from Thailand and 106,000 workers 'from the Philippines.
 There was a slight rise in the unemployment rate among citizens from 2.6 percent
 in 1996 to 2.72 percent in 1997, which is attributed primarily to the continuing
 structural adjustent of the manufacturing sector. The CIA set the quota for for-
 eign workers at 300,000.
 The 1991 Revised Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to in-
 dude workers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and appeared to
 strengthen penalties for safety violations. It nevertheless still provides only minimal
 standards or working conditions and health and safety precautions. The Occupa-
 tional Safety and Health Law gives workers the right to remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment. Some critics,
 however, see the law as a step backward; for example, they note that, under the
 revised law, general contractors are not responsible for the safety of those working
 for subcontractors.
 
 
 The 1993 Labor Inspection Law was designed to strengthen the enforcement of
 labor standards and health and safety regulations. It increased the number of enter-
 prises and types of safety issues to be inspected; gave inspectors quasi-judicial pow-
 ers; required pre-examination of dangerous working places such as naphtha-crack-
 ing plants, pesticide factories, and firecracker factories; and raised penalties for vio-
 lations. Critics allege that the CIA does not effectively enforce workplace laws and
 regulations because it employs too few inspectors. There are 212 inspectors for the
 approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational Safety and Health
 Law. The inspection rate increased to 7.6 percent in 1997, up from 5.9 percent in
 1996. Since many enterprises are small, family-owned operations employing rel-
 atives unlikely to report violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage, and safety
 sections of various labor laws is hard to document but is believed to be minimal in
 these smaller enterprises.
