 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity is dominated by the Nationalist Party
 (Kuomintang or KMT) in what is essentially a one-party
 authoritarian system, although there is a vocal opposition
 with a wide range of popular support. The Taiwan authorities,
 who claim to be the government of all of China, maintain the
 full array of central political bodies originally established
 on the Chinese mainland under the 1948 Constitution. In some
 ways these are vestigial, but supplemental elections have
 increased their vitality by bringing the addition of younger
 members in recent years. In particular, the Legislative Yuan
 is evolving into a forum for questioning policy, though still
 lacking power to change it. In addition to these central
 bodies, a range of functioning democratic institutions from
 the village to the province level has been created in Taiwan.
 Nevertheless, effective power remains in the hands of the
 small leadership group from mainland China whose members came
 to Taiwan after World War II. This aging elite runs the KMT,
 the military, the security apparatus, and the executive
 bureaucracy, under a limited Constitution whose major
 democratic provisions have been circumscribed by the martial
 law provisions enacted in 1949. The authorities justify
 martial law as necessary to counter the threat of military
 action or subversion from mainland China.
 Throughout the past 34 years, Taiwan's authorities, while
 firmly controlling the political system to ensure stability,
 have promoted economic development. Taiwan's vibrant, largely
 free enterprise economy has been one of the fastest growing in
 the world in recent decades. Its per capita gross national
 product of over $2,673 ranks fourth highest in East Asia and
 is accompanied by high standards of education, health, and
 nutrition.
 Political evolution has occurred on Taiwan, but it has not
 kept pace with economic development. Human rights are
 publicly endorsed, but ircampletely realized. Although
 tolerated, opposition activity is restricted. The expression
 and publication of opposition political views is controlled
 and opposition activities are monitored, both at home and,
 apparently, abroad. Native Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese
 who migrated from the mainland in the seventeenth and
 eighteenth centuries, dominate the private economy but,
 although they now constitute 85 percent of the population, are
 still underrepresented at the upper levels of the ruling
 elite. Dissatisfaction of many on Taiwan with mainlander
 domination has resulted in demands for more representative
 government. The increasing prevalence of higher education,
 foreign travel, and access to news from abroad has accentuated
 the felt need for political development, particularly among
 the youth.
 In 1984, the dramatic human rights violations that have marred
 Taiwan's record in the past were absent. The slow trend
 toward human rights improvements continued. The authorities
 continue gradually to recruit increasing numbers of qualified
 Taiwanese to fill important economic, political, military, and
 security posts. The expanding, prosperous, and educated
 middle class displays a growing willingness to pressure the
 authorities about human rights issues.
 The remaining 13 long-term prisoners at the Green Island
 Military Prison who had been convicted of sedition 30 years
 ago were released during 1984. The last of the Kaohsiung
 
 
 751
 TAIWAN
 Incident prisoners sentenced by civilian courts were released,
 while four who had been sentenced by military tribunal were
 given improved conditions after a brief hunger strike. In
 November, one of the latter, Lin Hung-hsuan, was transferred
 to the Green Island Military Prison.
 In the first half of the year confrontation developed over the
 issue of press freedom when proliferating opposition
 publications printed a rash of articles on a number of
 traditionally sensitive topics. The authorities responded
 with increased bannings and confiscations. However, although
 there are strict limits to what is acceptable, critics of the
 political system and its policies have some freedom to express
 their views.
 The unresolved conflict with the People's Republic of China
 (PRC) over Taiwan's future fuels local authorities' concerns
 which, in turn, influence human rights practices. However,
 the outlook for continued improvement in human rights appears
 favorable.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There are no reports of any killings for political reasons
 taking place on Taiwan in 1984. The questionable
 circumstances surrounding the July 1981 death of
 Carnegie-Mellon Professor Chen Wen-cheng and the February 1980
 murder of the family members of opposition politician Lin
 Yi-hsiung  emain unresolved.
 b. Disappearance
 In recent years, there have been no substantiated reports of
 persons being abducted or secretly arrested by the security
 services.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture. The
 Code of Criminal Procedure and the Military Trial Law state
 that an accused shall be 'frankly* examined but that no
 violence, threat, inducement, fraud, or other improper means
 shall be used. Many observers point out that, in practice,
 individual members of the police or security forces at times
 resort to physical violence in interrogating suspects.
 The May 1982 death in police custody of a Taipei taxi driver,
 Wang Ying-hsien, focused public attention on the use of
 physical violence by police in interrogating criminal
 suspects. Although Wang's death was officially declared a
 suicide, five policemen were eventually tried and sentenced
 for illegally arresting Wang and causing him bodily harm.
 However, no one convicted of wrongdoing in this case has yet
 spent any time in prison and the convictions are presently
 being appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Taiwan's civilian prisons are severely overcrowded. According
 to an October 15, 1984, Ministry of Justice report, civilian
 prisons built to accommodate 15,983 prisoners were holding
 
 
 752
 TAIWAN
 22,908. Because of this overcrowding, prisoners are forced to
 share cramped living quarters and have few opportunities for
 work, exercise, and family visits. Even the opening of
 additional facilities has not provided adequate space.
 In 1983, local officials and observers estimated that up to 40
 percent of the inmates were serving sentences for writing bad
 checks. The improved economic conditions of 1984 have
 reportedly reduced this figure. The expected approval by the
 Legislative Yuan of a bill that will delete criminal penalties
 for writing or passing bad checks should further alleviate
 some of the prison overcrowding.
 The security police-administered military prisons, where
 political prisoners are confined, are reportedly less
 crowded. Prisoners are said to receive the same food as
 soldiers and to have work and recreation opportunities.
 Conditions for the Kaohsiung Incident prisoners have
 reportedly improved for those imprisoned for their involvement
 in events related to the December 1979 Kaohsiung Human Rights
 Day rally, which degenerated into a violent confrontation
 between police and participants. Eight participants were
 convicted of sedition in a military court and an additional 33
 were convicted in a civilian court of lesser charges. A
 separate group of ten persons was sentenced by a military
 tribunal for harboring a Kaohsiung Incident fugitive.
 By the end of 1984, all of the Kaohsiung Incident prisoners
 sentenced by civilian courts had been paroled or had completed
 their sentences. In May, 1984, four of the Kaohsiung Incident
 prisoners, who had been sentenced by military tribunals,
 launched a brief hunger strike to protest, among other things,
 their continued confinement and the conditions of their
 confinement. After abandoning the strike, the four were
 transferred to another military prison facility in June.
 According to relatives, they now occupy more spacious cells
 with better ventilation and have access to newspapers,
 television, and a writing desk. Relatives complain, however,
 that the remaining prisoners continue to be denied access to
 regular work programs and recreational activities. They also
 charge that health care is inadequate. The authorities deny
 these charges, claiming that curtailed activities and contact
 are aimed at protecting the prisoners from possible harm from
 other inmates and that medical care is the same for all
 prisoners.
 On November 7, 1984 one of the four prisoners, Lin Hung-hsuan,
 was transferred to the Green Island Military Prison for what
 the authorities described as violations of prison regulations
 and activities which had a bad affect on the morale of other
 prisoners. According to the authorities, Lin refused to
 submit regular reading reports, ridiculed other prisoners'
 reading reports, spread untrue rumors, and violated the 300
 word limit on the length of a prisoner's letters to his or her
 family.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Taiwan's "habeas corpus' law requires that within 24 hours
 after the time of arrest, the arresting authorities notify in
 writing the individual and his designated relative or friend
 of the reason for his arrest or detention. The Code of
 Criminal Procedure, which does not apply to martial law
 offenses, specifies that the authorities may detain an accused
 
 
 753
 TAIWAN
 person for up to two months during the investigation phase
 prior to the filing of a formal indictment, and for up to
 three months during the trial. During the investigation
 phase, however, the prosecuting officer may apply to the court
 for one extension of two months. The period of detention may
 also be extended during the trial. In recent cases, including
 the Kaohsiung Incident, the authorities generally have
 followed these procedures and extended the periods of
 detention. Exceptions occur more frequently in the military
 courts. Individuals indicted for relatively minor criminal
 offenses can, at the discretion of the judge, be released on
 bail.
 Since the July 1982 revisions in the Code of Criminal
 Procedure, suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer
 present during interrogation and to legal counsel during the
 investigation phase. In some cases, windows and even closed
 circuit cameras have been installed in police station
 interrogation rooms to permit lawyers and family members to
 view the interrogation without hearing the questioning.
 Lawyers are not permitted to provide legal counsel during
 police interrogation nor do the individuals arrested by
 security services have the right to have a lawyer present
 during interrogation. Furthermore, they do not have the right
 to legal counsel until after they have been formally indicted.
 Other revisions enacted in July 1982 augment police powers,
 permitting the police legally to arrest without a warrant
 anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the
 punishment would be five years or more in prison. Police
 power was further increased to allow them to call in suspects
 or witnesses for questioning without a formal summons. The
 authorities justify these new measures by insisting that the
 revisions only legalize long-standing police practices.
 Critics in the legal establishment, the press, and among
 elected officials have denounced these powers and called for
 their repeal.
 Many minor crimes in Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute
 and punish offenders. This law sometimes has been used
 against political activists. The provisions of the statute
 empower the police to impose and carry out sentences of up to
 two weeks imprisonment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 which do not incorporate trial by jury. Under a 1980 judicial
 reorganization, district and high courts were shifted from the
 control of the executive branch to the judicial branch,
 thereby formally separating the courts from the prosecution
 function. Taiwan legal circles generally hold that the change
 has given the judiciary somewhat greater independence. Over
 one-half of all eligible cases are appealed and reviewed.
 Informed observers characterize the judiciary as basically
 independent, although susceptible to pressure from the
 authorities on whom they depend for career advancement. Under
 martial law, which has been in effect in Taiwan since 1949,
 civilians who commit certain offenses, including sedition, may
 be tried in military courts. The authorities occasionally
 transfer *important' civilian cases (involving such crimes as
 homicide, kidnapping, and armed robbery) to the military
 courts. The authorities state that the military courts'
 
 
 754
 TAIWAN
 swifter and generally more severe justice acts as a deterrent
 to potential criminals. Sentences meted out in the military
 courts are reviewed only within the Ministry of National
 Defense. Neither civil nor martial law specifically provides
 the defendant with protection from self-incrimination.
 Following the traditional Chinese pattern, in a typical
 criminal court case parties and witnesses are interrogated by
 a single judge (in high court sessions by the chief judge) but
 not by a lawyer or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear
 witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit.
 Court cases are generally heard through several brief court
 sessions. In high court appellate proceedings new evidence
 may be introduced and the judges's review of district court
 judgments covers both fact and law. Individuals convicted in
 cases where the sentence exceeds three years have the
 inalienable right to judicial review by the Supreme Court.
 Those tried in military courts do not have this right. The
 Supreme Court limits its review to the law of the case, and to
 specific procedural aspects.
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. Although
 exact figures on the number of political prisoners are not
 obtainable, in a written statement issued on June 18, 1984,
 the Executive Yuan (Cabinet) stated that 117 civilians tried
 by military court are currently serving their sentences in
 military penal facilities for sedition, revealing military
 secrets, corruption, and robbery. Prisoners such as the
 Kaohsiung Incident prisoners are classed among those in the
 *sedition' category. The authorities define sedition as
 opposition to basic policy. This includes expressing
 Communist sympathies, espousing views contrary to the
 authorities' claim to represent all of China, and supporting
 an independent legal status for Taiwan.
 In January, the authorities released 11 long-term Green Island
 prisoners. with one exception, these prisoners had been
 imprisoned on Green Island since their 1950 conviction for
 sedition. Lin Shu-yang and Li Chin-mu, the two remaining
 prisoners convicted of sedition in the early 1950's, were
 released in December.
 In 1984, the authorities granted early parole to four
 prominent Kaohsiung Incident prisoners who had been sentenced
 by military tribunals. On August 15, Reverend Kao Chun-ming,
 Lin Yi-hsiung, and Hsu Ching-fu were paroled. In addition,
 Ms. Lin Wen-chen, who had been on medical parole since
 September 1983, was granted regular parole status. Seven of
 the Kaohsiung Incident prisoners, all of whom were tried in
 military courts, remain in prison. One, as previously noted,
 was transferred to Green Island on November 7, 1984.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The daily life of an individual not actively engaged in
 politics is subject to only minor interference by the
 authorities. The authorities impose limits on the use of the
 Taiwanese dialect (the mother tongue of most inhabitants on
 Taiwan) on television and radio. Romanized Taiwanese versions
 of the Bible are not permitted. The authorities do not
 interfere with basic family matters such as the right to marry
 or have children as one chooses. Membership in the KMT, the
 dominant political organization, is a matter of free choice.
 
 
 755
 TAIWAN
 Access to institutions of higher education is based entirely
 on academic achievement.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant is not common
 practice in Taiwan but does occur on occasion. As noted in
 Section l.d., the Code of Criminal Procedure generally
 requires that searches be authorized by warrants, signed by a
 prosecutor or, during a trial, by a judge. However,
 exceptions to this rule have substantially increased following
 the July 1982 revision of the Code to provide for warrantless
 arrests under certain circumstances. When making such
 arrests, police may also search persons or property without
 prior authority.
 Other types of violations of privacy, such as the monitoring
 of telephone calls, are widely believed to exist. The
 authorities deny that they monitor telephone conversations.
 In June 1982, the authorities declared *selective postal
 checks" necessary to intercept parcel bombs and illegal
 correspondence from the PRC.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech. Current
 martial law restrictions, however, significantly limit this
 right.
 Individuals are not free to question publicly the regime's
 basic political policy of anti-Communism or its claim to
 sovereignty over all of China. Critics maintain that the
 security authorities monitor political expression, both in
 Taiwan and overseas.
 Anyone who speaks favorably of Communism or the PRC, or
 questions the legitimacy of Taiwan's mainlander authorities by
 suggesting support for "Taiwan independence," can expect to be
 warned. If they do not desist, they are likely to be charged
 with sedition and tried in a military court. Nevertheless,
 since the 1983 Legislative Yuan elections, the concept of
 self-determination, which calls for substantially greater
 power to the electorate, and a variety of other sensitive
 issues which question the legitimacy or competence of the
 authorities, have been debated publicly.
 There have been recent reports that Taiwan agents keep tabs on
 Taiwanese in the United States suspected of being pro-PRC or
 pro-Taiwan independence. The latter is the label often
 applied by the Taiwan authorities variously to those who favor
 a Taiwan independent of China, those who are pro-PRC, or those
 who oppose Mainlander/KMT domination of.political life on
 Taiwan.
 On October 15, 1984 Henry Liu, a U.S. citizen journalist of
 Chinese descent whose writing had often been critical of
 Taiwan's leadership and KMT governance of Taiwan, was murdered
 in the driveway of his Daly City, California home. According
 to Taiwan press reports, information which came to the
 attention of the Taiwan authorities as a result of an
 anti-gang sweep in November 1984 led to their announcement on
 January 15, 1985, that staff of the Intelligence Bureau of the
 Ministry of National Defense (IBMND) were implicated in the
 
 
 756
 TAIWAN
 Liu case. The authorities suspended the head of the IBMND,
 ordered an immediate investigation of alleged IBMND
 involvement, and reaffirmed their commitment to cooperate with
 U.S. law enforcement authorities investigating the Liu case.
 Those investigations continue.
 Debate over the limits of parliamentary immunity erupted in
 March 1984, when it became known that the Executive Yuan in
 November 1983 had advised the Ministries of Defense, Justice,
 and Interior that parlimentarians could be held liable for
 those opinions they expressed in the Legislative Yuan which
 are later used by them or others in books or speeches.
 Members of the opposition objected that the Executive Yuan had
 no legal right to interpret a constitutional issue such as
 parliamentary immunity and was actually trying to clamp down
 on the opposition's practice of citing hard-hitting statements
 made in parliamentary bodies to bolster political speeches and
 articles. Furthermore, they argued that to be held liable for
 a third party's improper use of their remarks made in the
 Legislative Yuan makes parliamentarians hostage to the actions
 of others. The issue is now before the Supreme Court for
 adjudication.
 All major newspapers are owned by the authorities, the KMT, or
 high KMT officials. There are, however, a variety of smaller,
 privately-owned, and independent newspapers. Control over the
 daily newspapers is often exercised indirectly, through
 guidance from the local authorities' information office, the
 KMT and, as in the past several years, by freezing the number
 of newspaper licenses. In addition, reporters and editors
 exercise a considerable degree of self-censorship.
 Nevertheless, newspapers have expanded their coverage of
 sensitive subjects, such as news from mainland China and
 controversial views of U.S. citizens of Chinese origin.
 Censorship of publications is carried out through provisions
 of the Publications Law, which empowers the security police to
 seize or ban printed material that "confuses public opinion
 and affects the morale of the public and the armed forces."
 As interpreted by the authorities, this covers a wide range of
 topics, including articles that discuss possible leadership
 changes, question the legitimacy of KMT rule, criticize
 Taiwan's foreign policy, or merely reveal behind-the-scenes
 news that is potentially embarrassing to the leadership.
 Although the limits of acceptable criticism are not clear-cut,
 opposition publishers generally know when an issue of their
 magazine is courting a ban. They select their material
 cautiously but are willing to court banning in order to test
 the limits. There are political, and even sometimes
 financial, rewards for being banned. A ban of a single issue
 guarantees a sellout if the ban occurs after the magazine has
 been distributed. Or, if the magazine is seized at the
 printer, publishers have been known to arrange a "pirate'
 version of the banned magazine. Most publishers have several
 titles registered with the authorities so that, in practice,
 publications hit by lengthy bans, such as one year, are
 quickly resurrected under another title.
 Since 1982, the authorities have allowed an increase in the
 number of domestic political opinion magazines, many of which
 support non-KMT politicians and criticize the ruling party.
 The magazines arq an important forum for getting opposition
 
 
 757
 TAIWAN
 views across to the public since there is a limit to the
 number of newspaper licenses available (31), and all are
 presently taken. The number of issues of non-KMT magazines
 mushroomed in 1984, as five of the seven established
 periodicals changed from a monthly/fortnightly format to a
 weekly one. In addition, at any one time a half dozen new
 periodicals (often short-lived) were making their debut on the
 newsstands. This dramatic rise in the quantity of
 publications was accompanied by a similar jump in the tempo of
 bannings. According to unofficial statistics, from August 1,
 1983, to August 1, 1984, the authorities banned a total of 13
 magazines for one year, plus 40 individual magazine issues, a
 significant increase over the same period in 1983. According
 to opposition publishers, banned magazines are more subject to
 partial or full confiscation than in past years. Opposition
 publishers report that full confiscation of one issue can
 result in a $7,500 loss--a- considerable sum for many of these
 publishers.
 The authorities argue that most banned issues--particularly
 those banned from March to July 1984--carried poorly
 researched articles which distorted facts and sullied the
 reputation of many leading KMT figures. By August, the
 confrontation had abated. Opposition publishers toned down
 this 'sensationalism" and the authorities eased the pace of
 their bannings. Critics of the regime denounce censorship as
 simple political harassment. The heavy pace of bannings
 sparked a renewed cry in publishing and political circles
 (both KMT and opposition) for a detailed set of publishing
 guidelines. These guidelines have not been, and are unlikely
 to be, established.
 The authorities occasionally ban books. Although the writing
 of pre-World War II Chinese pro-Communist authors are formally
 banned, a few of their famous works are obtainable.
 Foreign publications are available but are also subject to
 censorship. Sometimes pages carrying articles offensive to
 the authorities are removed or blacked out before they are
 distributed. Some foreign publications are available through
 subscription only and are not allowed to be sold on
 newsstands. From time to time an entire issue will be
 withheld from distribution.
 The authorities partially or wholly own all three of the
 island's television stations. Nonetheless, competition among
 them, as well as competition with the print media, has led to
 a general gradual expansion of the coverage of sensitive
 topics, both domestic and international. Public opinion has
 also played a role in expanding media coverage. During the
 Los Angeles Olympics, public pressure pushed the television
 stations to report more fully, as did the newspapers, the
 performance of PRC athletes.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the Constitution. In
 practice, permits are generally issued for non-political
 assembly. Public assembly for political purposes, except
 during elections, is often prevented under martial law
 provisions. During the first half of the authorized 15-day
 campaign period preceding the 1983 elections, all candidates
 
 
 758
 TAIWAN
 were allowed to hold rallies, although these were closely
 monitored by the authorities. During the second half of the
 15-day period, campaigning was limited to highly structured,
 officially sponsored rallies in which both KMT and opposition
 candidates participated.
 The revised election and recall law, which the Legislative
 Yuan passed on June 28, 1983, prohibits holding campaign
 rallies in any form prior to the authorized 15-day period.
 The law also outlaws joint rallies of two or more candidates
 during the campaign period, except for officially sponsored
 rallies. Opposition politicians have been sharply and openly
 critical of these measures, claiming they hinder their ability
 to reach the electorate.
 A 1983 survey conducted by National Taiwan University reports
 that 22.5 percent of the labor force holds union membership.
 By and large, labor unions generally do not exercise
 significant influence either in the economic or political
 spheres. /However, according to the reports of informed
 observers, union officials serving in the Legislative Yuan did
 play an important role in negotiating the difficult July 19,
 1984, passage of the more liberal benefits provided for under
 the 1984 Labor Standards Law. The law improved standards for
 working hours, salary benefits, worker welfare, and retirement
 for over 3 million workers.
 Walkouts and strikes are prohibited under martial law.
 Collective bargaining, although provided for by legislation,
 does not in fact take place. Individual factory unions do,
 however, facilitate the resolution of disputes. It is
 generally believed that labor unions--especially general
 federations--have close ties with the ruling KMT. Taiwan's
 largest federation, the Chinese Federation of Labor, maintains
 contact with the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees freedom to practice religion.
 This guarantee is observed in practice. All denominations
 have full freedom to pursue their purely religious
 activities. Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere to Confucianism,
 Taoism, Buddhism, Animism, or a combination of these beliefs.
 Other religions include Christianity and Islam. There is no
 state or favored religion. Some marginal Buddhist sects and
 Sun Myong Moon's Unification Church have been banned in
 response to parents' complaints that these groups were
 exercising a corrupting influence on Taiwan youth.
 Kaohsiung County authorities have been involved since 1980 in
 a dispute with a denomination called the New Testament Church
 over the right of church members to settle on a tract of land
 in southern Taiwan near Kaohsiung. After the authorities
 evicted church officials and followers fiom a tract of leased
 public land, the church accused them of engaging in religious
 persecution. Kaohsiung County authorities contend that the
 church violated the terms of a 10-year lease, thereby making
 it necessary to evict them. District and high courts have
 upheld this position. Seven church members were sentenced to
 six months imprisonment for refusing to vacate the disputed
 area. In August 1984, the Supreme Court upheld these
 convictions.
 
 
 759
 TAIWAN
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, (PCT),
 which has approximately 190,000 members and is predominantly
 Taiwanese, has been a prime target. In 1977, the church
 called on the authorities to "face reality and to take
 effective measures whereby Taiwan may become a new and
 independent country.' Although the church did not reiterate
 this appeal in 1984, it did call on the authorities to
 'thoroughly implement democracy, respect human rights and
 safeguard the future of the people of Taiwan.' These calls
 have put the church on a collision course with Taiwan's
 mainlander-controlled political establishment. The early
 parole of PCT General Secretary Reverend Kao Chun-ming,
 imprisoned since 1980 for harboring Kaohsiung Incident
 fugitive Shih Ming-te, has been taken by many as indication
 that the confrontation between the church and the authorities
 has moderated. However, relations, although improved, remain
 strained.
 On June 26, 1984, the Tainan city government, acting on
 instructions of the Ministry of Education, ordered the Tainan
 Theological College of the Presbyterian Church of Taiwan to
 cease operations. The directive was ostensibly issued because
 the college failed to meet certain regulations regarding
 enrollment, curriculum, and diplomas. However, observers
 close to the issue have concluded that the order to cease
 operations stemmed in large part from the authorities'
 displeasure with the college for identifying with opposition
 activities. The order was rescinded in August following
 negotiations.
 The authorities announced plans in 1984 to resubmit a revised
 draft of the 'Law for the Protection of Religions.' This will
 mark the fourth submission since 1979. Each time, strong
 opposition from all church groups on Taiwan induced the
 authorities to withdraw the draft. Critics note that past
 drafts gave the authorities the right to review the
 appointments of church officials, to ensure religious
 doctrines conform to "basic national policy' and to require
 foreign religious missions to pledge not to engage in
 non-religious activities. The authorities argue that the
 law's regulatory powers are necessary to ensure that religious
 activities do not jeopardize Taiwan's *national security.'
 They have, however, declared that they will consult with
 representatives of Taiwan's various religious denominations
 before submitting a new draft law for legislative approval.
 There were indications in 1984 that the authorities may have
 begun to adopt more stringent policies regarding the
 activities of foreign missionaries. Several missionary
 organizations have reported difficulties obtaining entry visas
 for new missionaries wishing to come to Taiwan. A visa for a
 new arrival reportedly is not issued until a resident
 missionary leaves Taiwan. The authorities maintain that there
 has been no attempt to restrict the number of foreign
 missionaries on Taiwan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change
 residence. Except for military and other restricted areas,
 there is general freedom of internal travel in Taiwan.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 49
 
 
 760
 TAIWAN
 Emigration and private travel abroad have become freer since
 1979. In 1983, 674,578 Taiwan residents went abroad for
 tourism--a 5.3 percent increase over 1982. Since 1980,
 businessmen have been permitted to travel to, and do business
 directly with, certain Eastern European countries. Although
 travel to the PRC is officially prohibited, the authorities
 overlook some discreet travel to the mainland by people with
 clear anti-Communist credentials. After the last calendar day
 of the year in which they turn 15, males may not leave Taiwan
 until completion of compulsory military service.
 Permission to leave Taiwan may be delayed or withheld,
 according to an April 11, 1984, statement by the Director
 General of the National Police Administration. In February
 1984, the Entry and Exit Permits Control Bureau currently had
 instructions to block exit permits for more than 6,000
 persons. According to statistics released by the National
 Police Administration, those prohibited from leaving Taiwan
 include: 1,482 persons involved in tax cases, 1,761 involved
 in civil or criminal cases, 452 involved in economic crimes,
 and over 2,200 involved in cases related to military service.
 The statistics also include 91 persons prohibited from leaving
 Taiwan by military prosecutors either for having had contact
 with seditious organizations or because they are cooperating
 in an investigation with security implications. Although
 outspoken critics in the past have been denied exit visas, in
 recent years a number of persons openly critical of the KMT
 have been permitted to travel overseas.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right of those
 Chinese who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in
 Taiwan, to return from abroad. Those issued 'overseas
 Chinese* passports do not automatically have the right to
 travel to Taiwan for permanent residence. In principle,
 Taiwan will not authorize the entry of Chinese between the
 ages of 16 and 75, even those who have long held Taiwan
 passports, if they have lived in Communist-controlled areas
 within the preceding five years.
 on January 19, 1984, the Executive Yuan authorized the
 appropriate authorities to detain or revoke Taiwan passports
 of persons whose behavior violates the interests of Taiwan,
 endangers security, public order, tradition, or Taiwan's
 economic interests. Critics of the measure protest that it
 gives the authorities the power to revoke the passport of any
 person who makes remarks overseas that are deemed inimical to
 Taiwan's interests. This, they argue, places undue
 restriction on the opposition's right to travel and to make
 their views known outside Taiwan. The authorities defend the
 measure as designed to curb the activities of economic
 criminals--tax evaders, persons engaged in illicit activities,
 and individuals who have left large debts behind in Taiwan.
 Although Taiwan authorities deny charges that political
 activities of Taiwanese residing abroad are systematically
 monitored, there are credible reports that prominent Taiwanese
 critics of the regime returning to Taiwan to live or visit
 have been intercepted at the airport by security agents and
 warned that they face expulsion if they participate in
 anti-regime activity while in Taiwan.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program,w since 1977 an estimated 5,183 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled in Taiwan, and 1,977 small boat
 refugees from Indochina have been granted 'temporary" refuge.
 
 
 761
 TAIWAN
 All small boat refugees have resettled in third countries,
 with the exception of 57 who found sponsors and resettled on
 Taiwan. Another 94 small boat refugees live in a refugee camp
 awaiting resettlement. The authorities report that there have
 been no refugee cases from non-Communist areas. They advise
 that any such instances would be dealt with on a case-by-case
 basis. Refugees are not forced to return to their country of
 origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Effective political power resides with the aging KMT
 leadership which fled the mainland in 1949. Reflecting their
 claim to be the government of all of China, the authorities
 maintain not only a provincial and local government system,
 but also an array of political bodies identical to those found
 on the mainland prior to 1949. The locus of power on Taiwan
 is the Presidency, the Executive Yuan, and the KMT Central
 Standing Committee. This power is exercised by a small number
 of top figures in these organizations, particularly by the
 President. Although the number of Taiwanese in the Cabinet
 and the Central Standing Committee has been gradually
 increasing, they are not yet the power wielders within these
 bodies. Hence, although Taiwanese hold a number of
 prestigious positions--the Vice President, Vice Premier, a
 number of ministers, the Governor of Taiwan, and the Mayors of
 Taipei and Kaohsiung are all Taiwanese--their power
 individually, and even their collective influence, is
 limited. However, as representatives of the majority
 population, their views form an important consideration as the
 leadership decides on policies affecting the population. The
 Taiwanese have greater effective power at the local level,
 where they hold most of the executive and KMT party positions.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the National Assembly, which convenes every six years to elect
 the President and Vice President, and the Legislative Yuan,
 which is the Parliament. There have been no general elections
 to these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats
 and to form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Beginning
 in 1969, periodic *supplementary elections" have been held to
 choose additional representatives from Taiwan province and the
 off-shore islands (which are considered part of Fukien
 province). Nevertheless, only 1,036 out of 2,691 seats of the
 National Assembly are currently filled, including 75
 supplemental members. Of the Legislative Yuan's current
 membership of 360 (compared to an original membership of 760),
 the supplemental legislators number 71 and constitute the most
 active group in the Legislative Yuan, due in most part to the
 advanced age and incapacity of those elected 35 years ago on
 the mainland.
 The nature of the elective bodies continued to spark calls in
 1984 by both opposition and KMT politicians, academicians,
 journalists, and legal experts for the National Assembly, the
 Legislative Yuan, and Control Yuan (similar to the U.S.
 General Accounting Office) to be made more representative of
 Taiwan's polity. The authorities are extremely reluctant to
 adopt any measures that might undercut the mandates of those
 parliamentarians who were elected on the mainland in the late
 1940's as to do so could call into question the authorities'
 claim that these bodies represent all of China.
 
 
 762
 TAIWAN
 At various times over the past decade, prominent political and
 academic figures have called on the authorities to fill
 vacancies in these bodies by appointing or electing
 mainlanders living on Taiwan. In 1984, the National Assembly,
 acting in accordance with an earlier decision taken by a blue
 ribbon ad hoc committee, did not endorse any proposals to fill
 the vacancies. By delaying consideration of the issue until
 its next meeting--which is not scheduled until 1990--the
 National Assembly has implicitly paved the way for
 representatives elected on Taiwan to play an increasingly
 important role in parliamentary bodies. Political and
 academic circles hailed the decision as an important step
 toward making the political system more representative, since
 leaving vacancies open increases the proportion and influence
 of the supplemental members.
 The authorities appoint the Taiwan provincial governor and the
 mayors of Taipei (since 1967) and Kaohsiung (since 1979).
 Nevertheless, elections pitting KMT, independent, and
 opposition candidates have been held regularly for the
 Provincial Assembly and all county and municipal level offices
 since 1950. Universal suffrage exists for citizens 20 years
 of age and over. Voter turnout--voting is voluntary--runs
 over 70 percent.
 One party, the KHT or Nationalist Party, dominates Taiwan, as
 it has since 1945. There are also two nominally independent
 parties which came from the mainland. Although KMT structure
 and control mechanisms are based on early Soviet models, the
 party's operations are considerably more flexible. Party
 organs exist at all levels of the ruling structure, as well as
 in the military, schools, and other public institutions.
 People who arrived from the mainland after 1945 dominate the
 highest echelons of the KMT. Native-born Taiwanese
 predominate at local levels and are playing an increasingly
 important role in the middle and higher levels. Native
 Taiwanese comprise more than 60 percent of the KMT's total
 membership of approximately two million, and 66 of the 71
 elected supplemental members in the Legislative Yuan are
 native-born Taiwanese.
 In the 1983 Legislative Yuan elections, the KMT won slightly
 over two-thirds of the vote and 61 seats. The opposition and
 independents won six and four seats respectively. The
 opposition's influence exceeds its small presence. Its
 members are quite vocal in these elective bodies, which, in
 turn, provide important forums for the expression of
 opposition views.
 New political parties are forbidden under martial law.
 Candidates who oppose the KMT in elections run as "non-party'
 (dangwai) candidates. Although not permitted to form a party,
 the dangwai politicians organized 'Campaign Assistance Groups'
 at the central and regional levels to contest the 1983
 Legislative Yuan elections. In 1984, the opposition
 established a "Dangwai Public Policy Research Association*
 (DPPRA) and the "Dangwai Writers and Editors Association.'
 Officials of the former have stated that the authorities are
 opposed to the DPPRA and have not permitted it to register
 because the "Law Governing the Organization of Civic Bodies
 During the Extraordinary Period" permits only one organization
 per function to register; the authorities claim that because a
 Public Policy Research Association had been registered earlier
 
 
 763
 TAIWAN
 in 1984, the DPPRA can not now be registered. On November 21,
 1984, Interior Minister Wu Po-hsiung, in a statement to the
 Legislative Yuan, called for the DPPRA to disband. The press
 has reported that DPPRA officials are contemplating court
 action to challenge the constitutionality of the civic bodies
 law.
 The opposition faces several disadvantages in the election
 process. The election law enacted in 1980 forbids the
 participation of students, formerly a prime source of campaign
 workers, and limits the campaign period to 15 days before an
 election. It allowed only officially sponsored joint rallies
 in the last few days before an election. The revised election
 and recall law enacted on June 26, 1983, abolished joint
 rallies and pre-campaign "get-togethers," campaign tactics
 favored by the opposition. The law also placed ceilings on
 campaign expenditures, political contributions, and the
 quantity of campaign paraphernalia. The opposition argues
 that these provisions further reduce its ability to compete
 with well-financed, well-organized KMT candidates, and hinder
 contact with the electorate. Oppositionists label as
 ineffective the newly adopted provisions penalizing candidates
 for vote buying and bribery.
 Press self-censorship leads the media to give less publicity
 to the views of the opposition and thereby further handicaps
 dangwai candidates. Periodicals which have emerged as an
 alternative method for publicizing the views of opposition
 candidates are frequently censored and occasionally banned by
 the authorities.
 The 1983 revisions to the election law also changed the method
 of indirect election of members of the Control Yuan (which
 exercises powers of impeachment, censure, and audit), two of
 whose 74 members are dangwai representatives. Under new
 election procedures, electors (members of the Provincial
 Assembly and various county and city councils) must cast their
 two mandatory votes for two separate candidates, thereby
 making it impossible for opposition members to pool their
 limited votes behind one candidate. Supporters of the
 revision maintain that it will eliminate vote buying in
 Control Yuan elections since election bribery would be too
 costly and complicated.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In past years, Taiwan authorities have occasionally permitted
 representatives of international human rights organizations
 and private individuals interested in human rights issues to
 meet with appropriate officials. The authorities permitted
 several ethnic Taiwanese observers from two U.S.-based
 organizations, the Formosan Association for Human Rights
 (FAHR) and the North American Taiwanese Professors
 Association, to monitor the December 1983 Legislative Yuan
 elections. The FAHR observer was later expelled from Taiwan
 for activities which the authorities believed went beyond his
 role as election observer (he allegedly sought to expand the
 activities of his organization, which monitors the human
 rights situation of the ethnic Taiwanese majority from its
 U.S. base but which reportedly has no significant presence in
 Taiwan); the other election observers were reportedly not only
 permitted to monitor the election without interference but
 were assisted by the authorities in arranging meetings with
 key officials.
 
 
 764
 TAIWAN
 The nominally non-governmental Chinese Human Rights
 Association, a strongly anti-Communist organization that
 originally focused its attention on human rights questions in
 the People's Republic of China, recently began devoting more
 of its efforts to human rights in Taiwan. In the past, the
 Association has sponsored tours for lawmakers and legal
 experts to examine Taiwan's crowded prisons and has
 established a free legal aid service for Taipei residents. In
 1984, the Association strongly urged the authorities to
 release all remaining prisoners at the Green Island Military
 Prison who have served 30-year sentences. Its efforts in this
 regard helped obtain the release of eleven of these long-term
 prisoners. The Association also acted as one of the mediators
 in efforts to resolve the May hunger strike by four Kaohsiung
 Incident prisoners. In September, the Association arranged
 for an impartial delegation to travel to Green Island to
 report on the condition of Kaohsiung Incident prisoner Shih
 Ming-te.
 On December 9, 1984 a group of opposition lawyers,
 parliamentarians, scholars, and doctors established the
 'Taiwan Human Rights Association (THRA)." The authorities
 have stated that the Association cannot be recognized because
 it has not been registered in accordance with the "Law
 Governing the Organization of Civic Bodies During the
 Extraordinary Period," which permits the registration of only
 one association per organizational function. In their
 statements to the press, the authorities have noted that the
 Chinese Human Rights Association has already been registered
 and therefore a second such organization may not legally be
 established. THRA sponsors argue that the civic bodies law is
 unconstitutional because it was promulgated before the
 constitution was adopted. In addition, they argue that the
 THRA will not focus on human rights concerns in the People's
 Republic of China (as they claim the Chinese Human Rights
 Association does), and therefore will fulfill a function
 different from that of the Chinese Human Rights Association.
 This dispute over establishment of the THRA had not been
 resolved by the end of 1984.
 In its 1984 Report, Amnesty International stated that it had
 continued to appeal during 1984 for the release of 40
 prisoners of conscience, was investigating the cases of some
 70 other political prisoners detained for several years, and
 had investigated 9 reported arrests on political grounds and
 one report of torture. Freedom House lists Taiwan as "partly
 free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Taiwan has one of the strongest economies in Asia. Riding the
 upswing in the worldwide economic recovery, Taiwan's GNP
 ($2,673 per capita in 1983) was projected to grow 12 percent
 in 1984. The opportunity to participate in economic benefits
 is available to the population as a whole without
 discrimination.
 The prospects for continuing economic well-being are favorable
 as the authorities work to shift the focus of Taiwan's
 export-based economy from labor-intensive to high-technology
 industries. Unemployment in 1984 averaged 2.2 percent.
 
 
 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's fiscal 1984 budget allocated more than 30 percent of
 expenditures to education, science, culture, and social
 programs. Taiwan has developed an effective public health
 program. It can boast of a health clinic system throughout
 the island that comprises more than 11,000 medical care
 facilities. In 1983, for every 10,000 persons, Taiwan had 7.9
 practicing physicians, 9.0 practicing nurses, and 30.9
 hospital beds. Health promotion programs include maternal and
 child disease control and environmental sanitation. The
 infant mortality rate for 1984 was 20.3 per 1000. Major
 epidemic disease has been reduced, although limited outbreaks
 still occur. Safe water is accessible to 77.6 percent of the
 population. Because of these public health programs and a
 generally good diet (1983 per capita average daily caloric
 intake was 2740--the highest in Asia), life expectancy at
 birth has increased to 70 years for men and nearly 75 years
 for women.
 Taiwan's population in 1984 was 19,063,000. Successful birth
 control efforts have brought the 1984 birth rate down to 1.5
 percent. However, with a population density of 522 per square
 kilometer--the second highest in the world--the Taiwan
 authorities believe the birth rate must be lowered even more.
 Education is one of the main concerns of the authorities and
 the population in general. Of the population over age six
 90.4 percent is literate. Of school-age children, 99.8
 percent are currently in school. Free compulsory education is
 available through junior high school. About 60 percent of
 junior high school graduates pass examinations and enter
 three-year senior high and vocational school programs. Entry
 into Taiwan's extensive system of higher education is also
 based on competitive exams, and departures from a strict merit
 system are almost nonexistent. In 1983, more than 17 percent
 of college-age youth (18-24 years) were enrolled as
 undergraduate or graduate students.
 The few laws which discriminate against women relate mostly to
 divorce issues and inheritance. In recent years women have
 taken an increasingly active role in local politics and have
 been increasingly successful vote-getters. Election
 regulations ensure that women hold a minimum of 20 percent of
 elected offices at both the central and local levels.
 Enrollment of women over 18 years of age in institutions of
 higher learning has increased 75 fold over the past 30 years,
 from 1750 students in 1953 (.3 percent of the total number of
 students enrolled) to 131,297 students in 1983 (9.7 percent of
 the total number of students enrolled). A fledgling women's
 rights movement is slowly growing.
 Taiwan's only non-ethnic Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established
 in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These
 aboriginal "mountain people" comprise slightly more than one
 percent of Taiwan's total population. There is no official
 policy of discrimination against them, but the barriers
 created by de facto cultural and economic discrimination are
 frequently difficult to surmount. Aboriginal 'mountain
 people" occupy the bottom rungs of Taiwan's socio-economic
 ladder. Special designated seats in both central and
 provincial legislative bodies are reserved for aborigine
 representatives, and the authorities have instituted a number
 of social programs to ease the aborigines' transition into the
 dominant society.
 
 
 766
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TAIWAN
 1982     1983     1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ....   ............. ..... 0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ............   224.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......      224.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............  ....  0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........    . " 0.0   0.0     50.0    528.7
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0    309.8
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      9.8
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     13.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0     92.4
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.0      0.0      18.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     50.0     85.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 767
