 TAIWAN
 Taiwan has a constitutional system headed by President Lee Teng-hui, who was
 elected by the National Assembly (NA) in 1990. Lee, who is also the chairman of
 the Nationalist Party (KMT), appoints the Executive Yuan (EY), or Cabinet, which
 has been headed since February 1993 by Premier Lien Chan. The Legislative Yuan
 (LY) approves the selection of the Premier. LY members were elected in a free and
 fair election in December. While the KMT remains the country's dominant political
 force, two opposition parties play important roles in the LY, which vigorously exer-
 cises its constitutional prerogatives. The Judicial Yuan (JY) is constitutionally inde-
 pendent of the other branches of the political system, but corruption and political
 influence remain serious problems.
 Taiwan is close to completing its transition to a democratic, multiparty political
 system. This process began with the lifting of martial law in 1987 and has included
 the holding of generally free and fair popular elections for the NA and LY in 1991,
 1992, and 1995, and the passage of constitutional amendments that provide for the
 direct election of both the President and Vice President. The first direct presidential
 and vice presidential election is scheduled for March 1996.
 The National Police Administration (NPA) of the Ministry of Interior (MOD, the
 NPA's Criminal Investigation Bureau, and the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Investiga-
 tion Bureau are responsible for law enforcement relating to internal security. The
 National Security Bureau and Ministry of National Defense military police units
 also play limited law enforcement roles. These police and security agencies are
 under effective civilian control. There were occasional reports that members of the
 security forces committed human rights abuses.
 Taiwan has a dynamic, export-oriented, free market economy, but state-owned
 and party-run enterprises still dominate some major sectors, including finance,
 transportation, utilities, shipbuilding, steel, telecommunications, and petrochemi-
 
 
 597
 cals. As the economy has evolved, services and capital and technology-intensive in-
 dustries have become the most important sectors, and major exports include com-
 puters, electronic equipment, machinery, and textiles. Citizens generally enjoy a
 high standard of living.
 The Taiwan authorities generally respect the human rights of citizens; however,
 occasional problems remain in some areas. Principal abuses include police abuse of
 detainees; physical abuse of military personnel; some restrictions on freedom of
 press, assembly and association; discrimination and violence against women; child
 prostitution and abuse; restrictions on workers' freedom of association; and limita-
 tions on workers' freedom to strike.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. The 1994 case of a prisoner in the city of Tainan was
 still unresolved at the end of 1995. Five policemen found guilty of the crime by a
 district court have appealed the verdict, and the High Court had not made a deci-
 sion on the appeal by the end of the year. In September the authorities announced
 the indictment of nine jailers charged with the beating death of a prisoner in Chia-
 i County.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Taiwan's Constitution does not directly address the issues of torture and punish-
 ment. The Code of Criminal Conduct, however, stipulates that no violence, threat,
 inducement, fraud, or other improper means shall be used against accused persons.
 There were credible reports that police occasionally physically abused persons in
 their custody. The law allows suspects to have attorneys present during interroga-
 tions, primarily to ensure that abuse does not take place (see also Section 1.d.). The
 MOJ says that each interrogation is recorded and that all allegations of mistreat-
 ment are investigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur
 in local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and when attorneys
 are generally not present. Detainees who are physically abused have the right to
 sue the police for torture, and onfessions obtaned through torture are inadmissible
 in court proceedings. There were no such suits reported during the year.
 The authorities made efforts to investigate, prosecute, and punish officials respon-
 sible for torture and other mistreatment. Although the basic responsibility for inves-
 tigating mistreatment lies with prosecutors, the Control Yuan (CY), a coequal
 branch of the political system which investigates official misconduct, also inves-
 tigates such cases. Women's and children's rights groups monitor police and judicial
 performance and periodically mount campaigns to correct abuses.
 Although corporal punishment is forbidden under military law, there continued to
 be reports of physical abuse of military personnel. Following the beating death of
 a marine recruit in September, the CY began no-notice inspections of military facili-
 ties to question young servicemen regarding conditions of service in the military and
 allegations of abuse.  he authorities also established a national telephone hot line
 for the reporting of alleged abuses within the military. Plans to set up centers with-
 in the military to hear complaints were not implemented in 1995. Some 100 families
 have petitioned the the authorities for compensation for the alleged wrongful deaths
 of their sons during military duty.
 Prison overcrowding at Taiwan's 43 detention centers remained a problem despite
 some expansion of existing facilities and amendment of the Criminal Code in 1994
 to allow prisoners to be paroled after serving one-third, rather than one-half, of
 their sentences. The more than 50,000 inmates in detention substantially exceed the
 facilities' planned capacity by 15,000. According to the MOJ, the number of pris-
 oners has grown rapidly in recent years because of increased arrests of narcotics law
 violators. These violators now make up more than 70 percent of the overall inmate
 population. It is not clear whether the jump from 30 percent in 1994 to 70 percent
 in 1995 was due to a surge in drug-related arrests or whether it partly stemmed
 from a wider definition of "drug-related offenses." The MOJ has set up drug treat-
 ment facilities to reduce the number of addicts in the prison population. Poor condi-
 tions exist in illegal immigrant detention centers (see Section 2.d.). The authorities
 permit visits to prisons by human rights monitors, and the China Human Rights
 Association has made prison visits. According to the authorities, there were no re-
 quests from international human rights organizations to make prison visits in 1995.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the authorities generally observe this prohibition. Police may le-
 gally arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which
 
 
 598
 the punishment would be imprisonment of 5 years or more and may question per-
 sons without a formal summons. However, the authorities must, within 24 hours
 after detention, give written notice to the detainee or a designated relative or friend,
 statig the reason for the arrest or questioning. Indicted persons may be released
 on bail at judicial discretion.
 The Criminal Procedure Code specifies that the authorities may detain a suspect
 for up to 2 months during the investigative phase before filing a formal indictment.
 The prosecutor's office may extend the investigative detention for an additional 2-
 month period. A suspect may be held for up to 3 months during trial proceedings,
 and the court may extend the trial detention for two additional 3-month periods.
 The authorities generally have followed these procedures, and trials usually take
 place within 3 months of indictment.
 The authorities generally respect a detainee's request to have a lawyer present
 during the investigation phase, but defense lawyers continue to complain that peo-
 ple often are not advised of their right to have legal representation during police
 interrogation. While there is no legal requirement that the police advise suspects
 of their right to counsel, arresting officers' checklists do provide for such notifica-
 tion. However, there is no legal requirement that indigent people be provided with
 counsel during police interrogation, although such counsel is provided during trials.
 The "Antihoodlum" Law of 1985 was a       arture from international standards of
 due process in that it included a secret witness system which allowed police to con-
 duct "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums" and to use the testimony of unidentified in-
 formants in detaining the suspects. Lawyers for the alleged hoodlums have not been
 permitted to cross-examine these informants. While defense lawyers have been
 given the right to examine documentary evidence, critics charge that evidence in
 these cases is often weak or fabricated. Although the testimony of the secret wit-
 nesses is included under the criminal statutes for perjury, critics claim that the de-
 tainees often lack the means to prove pejury. in July, however, the Council of
 Grand Justices declared unconstitutional the administrative procedures which had
 been used to sentence "hoodlums" to reformatory education. If the authorities fail
 to draft administrative procedures in conformity with the Constitution by mid-1996,
 the entire law will automatically become invalid.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.- he Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and for equality before the law. Some in the past characterized the judiciary
 as not fully independent and as susceptible to political and personal pressure, espe-
 cially from the ruling KMT. There is still public dissatisfaction with the consider-
 able influence exertel by political and business figures over the court system, but
 this influence is reflected more in terms of personnel appointments and general op-
 erations than the fairness of the judgments, which many observers believe are usu-
 ally arrived at in a fair, independent and impartial manner. Dissatisfaction exists
 among judges and others about the slowness of the judiciary to work towards
 strengthening the rule of law. Corruption within the judiciary remains a problem.
 A number of Taiwan judges have called for significant reforms, the most impor-
 tant of which would be the election of a chief judge in each district court by the
 other judges rather than appointment by the Judicial Yuan. These judges have also
 called for an end to the process of automatic review by senior judges of decisions
 by junior judges. In addition, as the result of a Council of Grand Justices ruling,
 judges will have the sole authority, once implementing legislation has been passed
 by the Legislative Yuan, to order pretrial detention of suspects, a power once shared
 by prosecutors.
 he Judicial Yuan (JY) is one of the five coequal branches of Taiwan's political
 system. It consists of a President a Vice President, and a 16-member Council of
 Grand Justices. It interprets the Constitution as well as laws and ordinances. Sub-
 ordinate JY organs include the Supreme Court, High Courts, district courts, the Ad-
 ministrative Court, and the Committee on the Discipline of Public Functionaries.
 The law provides for the right of fair public trial, and this is generally respected
 in practice. Judges, rather than juries, decide trials, and all judges are appointed
 by, and responsible to, the JY. In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 inte   gae by a single judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor.
 The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to
 submit if the judge considers it irrelevant; refusal to hear evidence may be a factor
 in an appeal. Trials are public, but attendance at trials involving juveniles or poten-
 tially sensitive issues which might attract crowds may require court permission.
 Organized crime figures have attempted to use violence to influence the judicial
 process. In Kaohsiung, members of a criminal gang shot a public prosecutor in the
 legs in an attempt to intimidate local legal authorities.
 A defendant has the right to an attorney. If the defendant is suspected of commit-
 ting a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment, or if the de-
 
 
 599
 fendant is disabled or elderly, theudge may assign an attorney. Criminal law spe-
 cifically provides the defendant with protection from self-incrimination. Persons con-
 victed in cases in which the sentence exceeds 3 years have the right to appeal to
 a high court and to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court automatically reviews
 life imprisonment and death sentences.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and sections of the Criminal and Civil Codes contain provisions pro-
 tecting privacy. A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained be-
 fore a search, except when "incidental to arrest." Critics, however, claim that the
 incidental to arrest provision is not only unconstitutional but often interpreted
 broadly by police to justify seaivhes of locations other than actual arrest sites. More-
 over, police continue to search cars routinely at roadblocks. According to the Na-
 tional Police Administration, warrantless searches are allowed only in specialized
 circumstances, such as to arrest an esapee or if facts indicate a person is in the
 process of committing a crime. In any such case, the police must fie a report with
 the prosecutor or court within 24 hours. Evidence collected without a warrant is not
 excluded from introduction during a trial; however, a policeman who carries out an
 illegal search may be sued for illegal entiy and sentenced to up to 1 year~s imprison-
 ment. According to Executive Yuan regulations, judicial and security ath~orities
 may ifie a written request to a prosecutor's office to monitor telephone calls to col-
 lect evidence against a suspect involved in a major crime.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Inrufding:
 a. Freedom of Speeh and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the authorities generally respect these rights in practice. How-
 ever, political influence does exist over the electronic media, particularly televisions
 stations, as the KMT, the Taiwan provincial government, and the militay continue
 to operate three island-wide broadcast televis ion stations and to be their largest
 shareholders. The Government Information Office (GIO) claims these stations are
 really civilian businesses with their programming guided by the marketplace, but
 critics have claimed that coverihge has been biased in favor of the KMT and against
 opposition parties.
 In 1995 considerable progress was made toward loosening control of the broadcast
 media. In July a screening committee awarded a license or the fourth island-wid
 broadcast television station to a Kahsinng-based company associated with the larg-
 est opposition p arty (DPP). This step, which will eliminate the KMT's monopoly on
 Taiwan's broadcast television, represents a significant move toward more complete
 media independence. Experts have estimated, however, that it will take 1 to 2 years
 for this new network to bei operation. If this estimate is accurate, broadcasting
 will not begin until well alter the March 1996 p residential election. However, the
 proifratonof cable television stations, some of which cary  ro gamming openly
 hosil t te ulng prt, has diminished the importance of M    control over the
 three established island-wide broadcast stations. Sixty-five percent of households re-
 ceive cable television.
 Although controls over radio stations have been more limited than those over tele-
 vision stations, until recently more than three-fourths of Taiwan's 33 radio fre-
 quencies were held by the authorities, the KMT, and other noncommercial entities.
 Past refusals to approve new television and radio stations led  t ahe establishment
 in recent years of a number of "underground" cable television and radio operations.
 In 1995 authorities continued a multiyear process, started in 1993, to loosen con-
 trols using a five-stage licensing process. The GIO received 136 applications for the
 53 available community radio stations; it expects to complete its screening process
 in the spring of 1996. Critics have charged that the limited broadcast ranges of the
 new television and radio sts              titute a counterweight to the authori-
 ties' monopoly on island-wide broadcasting.
 Two highly visible underground stations remain unlicensed. One is the "Voice of
 Taiwan" station run by Hsu Jung-Chi. Hsu was convicted on two charges of incite-
 ment to riot and violation of the Pade and Assemby Law for organizing an August
 1994 demonstration in support of underground radio stations. One charge of incite-
 ment to riot had not been heard by the competent district court by the end of the
 year. Hsu, who had left Taiwan in 1994 to escape prosecution, returned to the is-
 in        ptember, and has appealed his two convictions. At the end of 1995, he
 had not been detained by the authorities. The other station is the "   Voice of
 Formosa," which broadcasts in the Hakka dialect. Although some station personnel
 claim that the decision not to grant a license to the station reflects continuing anti-
 Hakka discrimination by the authorities, the available evidence does not support
 this claim.
 
 
 600
 In 1992 the authorities revised sedition statutes to limit the purview of the Sedi-
 tion Law and the National Security Law (NSL) to remove prohibitions on "actions
 against the Constitution." However, the NSL-and related statutes such as the
 Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and Assembly Law-still retains prohibi-
 tions against advocating communism or espousing the division of national territory.
 Taiwan has a vigorous and active free press despite the Publications Law which
 empowers the police to seize or ban printed material that is seditious, treasonous,
 sacrilegious, interferes with the lawful exercise of public functions, or violates public
 order or morals. There were no reports of censorship of the print media during the
 year nor were there any seizures of materials on political grounds, although the po-
 lice sometimes conduct raids to seize pornographic materials. Organized crime ele-
 ments have sought to use violence to intimidate the press. In particular, criminals
 assaulted two print journalists in Taichungin October.
 In 1994 the GIO reiterated that any publications imported from mainland China
 should be sent to the GIO publications department for screening before sale or pub-
 lication in Taiwan. The GIO still seeks to ban the importation of publications which
 advocate communism or the establishment of United Front organizations, endanger
 public order or good morals, or violate regulations or laws. However, few local pub-
 lishing companies observe this regulation. According to GIO figures, 1,344,237 vol-
 umes of mainland origin had been legally imported into Taiwan as of November.
 Moreover, cable television systems broadcast uncensored television channels from
 mainland China.
 Among other restrictions regulating the media are those precluding people pre-
 viously convicted of sedition from owning, managing, or working in television and
 radio stations. However, major opposition leaders, many of whom were convicted of
 sedition after the December 1979 Kaohsiung incident, are not affected because their
 rights were restored through presidential amnesties. The authorities lifted controls
 on the percentage of time television and radio stations could broadcast in dialects
 in 1993. Although Taiwanese is the mother tongue of most of the island's inhab-
 itants, the authorities had previously required that 80 percent of broadcasting be
 in Mandarin. Broadcasting is now done in Mandarin, Taiwanese, Hakka (television
 and radio), and in several aboriginal languages (radio only).
 There are few restrictions on academic freedom. The expression of dissenting po-
 litical views is common. However, school authorities still sometimes pressure school-
 teachers to discourage students from joining demonstrations.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, but the authorities restrict these rights some-
 what in practice. The Civic Organization Law requires all civic organizations to reg-
 ister;, however, the authorities have refused to approve registration of some groups-
 such as the Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR), the Taiwan Association
 of University Professors, and the Taiwan Environmental Protection Alliance-which
 use the word 'qaiwan" in their titles (a usage which is regarded by the authorities
 as promoting Taiwan independence). These groups continue to be active, though the
 lack of registration entails some inconvenience to their operations. For example,
 these organizations may not solicit donations from the public and contributors may
 not take income tax deductions for their contributions. Nonetheless, these organiza-
 tions operate freely and effectively.
 A 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the Executive Yuan
 the power to disolve political parties. This power now resides in the Constitutional
 Court. Grounds for dissolution include objectives or actions which are deemed to
 jeopardize the existence of the "Republic of China." The Constitutional Court heard
 no cases under this Law in 1995.
 The Parade and Assembly (P&A) Law permits peaceful demonstrations as long as
 they do not promote communism or advocate Taiwan's separation from mainland
 China and are approved in advance by the authorities. In practice, however, the au-
 thorities disperse such gatherings rather than prosecute peaceful P&A violators.
 Two Aborigine demonstrators were prosecuted under the P&A Law in 1995, and
 prosecution continues of four senior leaders of the opposition Democratic Progressive
 Party for incidents in 1992.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice. There is no established or favored religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The authorities do not restrict freedom of internal travel except for a
 few military and other restricted areas. Foreign travel by Taiwan passport holders
 resident on the island requires an exit permit.-Nonresident Taiwan passport holders
 are usually issued 'overseas Chinese" passports and require entry permits to travel
 to Taiwan. According to 1992 revisions to the Nationa Security Law (NSL), entry
 permits may be refused only if there are facts sufficient to create a strong suspicion
 
 
 601
 that a person is engagd in terrorism or violence. Reasons for entry and exit refus-
 als must be given, and appeals may be made to a special board. No exit or entry
 permit refusals were reported during 1995.
 Since 1988 Taiwan has substantially relaxed strictures against travel by Taiwan
 residents to the Chinese mainland. From January to November Taiwan citizens
 made 1,150,000 trips to the mainland according to the Ministry of the Interior.
 In 1993 new measures guaranteed that holders of Taiwan passports who normally
 reside abroad may return and regain their household registration, a document re-
 quired for participation as a candidate in an election. Relatively tight restrictions
 on the entry of Chinese from the mainland remain in force.
 Taiwan has no law under which noncitizens may ask for asylum. However, the
 authorities have been reluctant to return to the mainland those who might suffer
 political persecution there. In 1994 the authorities resettled abroad five detainees,
 includin student activist Xu Lifang, who had entered Taiwan in 1991 on a counter-
 feit Salvadoran passport, as well as four others who had claimed in 1993 that they
 had left the mainland for political reasons. In general, however, Taiwan does deport
 to the mainland, under provisions of the Mainland Relations Act, those mainlanders
 who illegally enter the island.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal immigrants (most from mainland China)
 continued to be poor. The Entry and Exit Bureau admitted that the three detention
 camps are overcrowded but blamed mainland Chinese authorities, who insist on ex-
 tensive background checks, for delays in accepting the timely repatriation of illegal
 immigrants.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 During the year, Taiwan came closer to completing its transition to a democratic,
 multiparty political system. The second direct election of all Legislative Yuan (LY)
 members took place in December and the first-ever direct, popular Presidential elec-
 tion is scheduled for March 1996. Previously, the President and Vice President have
 been indirectly elected by the National Assembly (NA), which stands for popular
 election every 4 years.
 The KMT remains the largest political party, with 2 million members, although
 voters gave it only a slim majority in the December elections for the LY. As of the
 end of 1995theMT had 85 seats in the 164-member LY. The Democratic Progres-
 sive Party (DPP), which advocates independence for Taiwan, held 54 seats. The DPP
 also held seven of 25 mayor and county magistrate posts, including mayor of Taipei,
 and had an estimated 70,000 members. The Chinese New Party, established in 1993
 by younger KMT members who opposed the party's domination by "mainstream"
 ethnic Taiwanese supporters of Chairman Lee Teng-hui, held 21 seats in the LY and
 claimed a membership of 86,000.
 The KMT benefits from its ownership of the major television channels, from own-
 ership of enterprises and business holdings estimated to be worth in excess of 6 bil-
 lion dollars, and from the fact that its members still hold most key positions in the
 political system, sometimes concurrently with important party positions. In recent
 years, opposition parties have grown rapidly, however, and freely contest elections,
 criticize the authorities, and influence national policy through the legislative proc-
 ess. The largest city, Taipei, elected an opposition party member as mayor in 1994.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but their role in politics,
 while increasing, remains limited. Nevertheless, a number of women hold senior ad-
 ministrative and KMT positions, including Minister without Portfolio and KMT
 Central Standing Committee (CSC) member Shirley Kuo (a former finance min-
 ister), KMT Deputy Secretary General and former CSC member Jeanne Tchong-
 Kwei Li, National Health Administration Director General Dr. Chang Po-Yu, and
 one major general in the armed forces. In addition, 23 of 164 LY members, 42 of
 325 NA members, 13 of 77 provincial assembly members, 2 of 24 Control Yuan
 members, and 255 of 1,300 judges are women.
 Aborigine representatives participate in most levels of the political system, par-
 tially through six reserved seats in the national and legislative assemblies and two
 seats in the provincial assembly-half of each elected by the plains Aborigines and
 half by mountain Aborigines. An Aborigine was appointed Chief of the  mistry of
 Interior's Aborigine Affairs Section.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The principal human rights organizations are the establishment-oriented Chinese
 Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the opposition-aligned Taiwan Associa-
 tion for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination between the two bodies is limited. De-
 
 
 602
 spite the authorities' refusal to register it (see Section 2.b.), TAHR continues to op-
 erate. Bath organizations investigate human rights complaints, many of which come
 to public attention through the media and statements by lawmakers from all politi-
 cal parties. The authorities permit representatives of international human rights or-
 gamzations to visit Taiwan and meet with citizens freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality of citizens before the law "irrespective of
 sex, religion, race, class, or party affiliation." Other laws provide for the rights of
 disabled persons. While the authorities are committed to protecting these rights,
 some areas of discrimination continue to exist.
 Women.-Domestic violence, especially wife beating, is a serious problem. Accord-
 ing to a survey by the Taiwan Provincial Social Affairs Department in 1994, 17.8
 percent of married women had been beaten by their husbands. The DPP Women's
 Development Committee said other statistics showed 35 percent of married women
 were victims of spouse abuse. According to the law, a prosecutor may not investigate
 domestic violence cases until a spouse files a formal lawsuit. Although some cases
 are prosecuted, strong social pressure discourages abused women from reporting in-
 cidents to the police in order to avoid disgracing their families.
 Rape also remains a serious problem, and its victims are socially stigmatized. One
 expert believes that only 10 percent of the estimated 7,000 rapes occurring annually
 are reported to the police. Under the law, the authorities may not prosecute for rape
 without the victim's complaint. The Criminal Code establishes the punishment or
 rape as not less than 5 years' imprisonment, and those convicted are usually sen-
 tenced to from 5 to 10 years in prison. Because rape trials are public, women have
 been reluctant to prosecute their attackers-although support from feminist and so-
 cial welfare organizations has made victims more willing to come forward and press
 charges.
 Prostitution, including coerced prostitution and child prostitution is also a prob-
 lem in Taiwan although there is little public concern about the adult prostitution
 issue. When the police discover illegal prostitution, the cases are prosecuted accord-
 ing to the Criminal Code. However, under the "prostitute management regulations,"
 prostitution is legal in registered houses of prostitution in specified urban areas,
 mainly in Taipei and Kaohsiung.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, and the Legislative Yuan has in recent
 years begun a systematic review and revision of those portions of the Legal Code
 relating to divorce, property, and child custody. As a result, recent legislation has
 eliminated many discriminatory sections of the Code. In 1994 the Council of Grand
 Justices (CGJ) declared unconstitutional a Civil Code provision dating back to the
 1930's which gave fathers priority in child custody disputes. The CGJ ruling invali-
 dating this provision will take effect in 1996.
 Taiwan does not have an equal employment rights law, and enforcement of exist-
 ing sex discrimination laws remains a problem. Labor laws provide for maternity
 leave, but employers do not always grant it. Women have also complained of being
 forced to quit jobs upon marriage or because of age or pregnancy. Women often com-
 plain of less frequent promotions and lower salaries than their male counterparts.
 According to the Council on Labor Affairs, salaries for women average 85 percent
 of those of men.
 In the past, many Taiwan women married to foreigners claimed that their hus-
 bands had a more difficult time obtaining residency in Taiwan than the foreign
 wives of Taiwan citizens. They also complained that their children were not allowed
 to enter public schools. During the year, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced
 a relaxation of the regulations governing foreign husbands' residence permits that
 allows the foreign husbands of citizens to remain in Taiwan for 6 months at a time
 rather than the shorter periods granted previously. The LY also passed new legisla-
 tion permitting the children of foreign fathers to attend public schools. However, the
 Citizenship Law continues to stipulate that the transmission of Taiwan citizenship
 occurs exclusively through the father. A Taiwan mother with a foreign husband thus
 cannot apply for a Taiwan passport for her child.
 Children.-The Constitution has provisions to protect children's rights, and the
 authorities are committed to supporting them. Education for children between 6 and
 15 years of age is compulsory an enforced. The Constitution provides that spending
 on education shall be no less than 15 percent of the central budget, 25 percent of
 the provincial and special municipality budgets, and 35 percent of the county and
 city budgets.
 Child abuse is a significant problem. The 1993 revision of the Child Welfare Act
 mandates that any persons discovering cases of child abuse or neglect must notify
 
 
 603
 the police, social welfare, or child welfare authorities, that child welfare specialists
 must do so within 24 hours, and that the authorities involved must issue an inves-
 tigation reort within 24 hours. Both the Ministry of Interior (MOI) Social Affairs
 Department and private organization specialists assert that these requirements are
 being followed. The Child Welfare Foundation, which operates 21 telephone hot line
 centers around Taiwan, reported 1,005 cases where telephone counseling was suffi-
 cient to resolve the problem and 951 cases that required direct intervention by a
 case worker.
 Child prostitution is a serious problem involving between 40,000 and 60,000 chil-
 dren, an estimated 20 percent of them Aboriginal children. Most child prostitutes
 rge from 12 through 16 years of age. The Juvenile Welfare Law enables juvenile
 welfare bodies, prosecutors, and victims to apply to courts for termination of guard-
 ianship of parents and the appointment of qualified guardians if parents have forced
 their children into prostitution. If children are engaged in prostitution of their own
 free will, and the parents are incapable of providing safe custody, the courts may
 order competent authorities to provide counseling education for not less than 6
 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal loopholes and cultural barriers
 remain obstacles to prosecution. For example, if bath parents have sold a child into
 prostitution, a problem associated mostly with Aborigine families, the current law
 requires the child to lodge a complaint before prosecution is undertaken. In many
 cases, the child is reluctant or afraid to do so.
 According to some reports, violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion
 are used by brothel owners to prevent child prostitutes from escaping. During the
 year, the LY passed new legislation providing for as much as 2-years' incarceration
 for customers of any prostitute who is under the age of 18. The legislation also re-
 quires the publishing of the names of violators in newspapers.
 People With Disailities.-The Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strength-
 ened in 1990. It prohibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum
 fines at approximately $2,400 for violators. Under the new revisions, new public
 buildings, facilities, and transportation equipment must be accessible to the dis-
 abled, while existing public buildings were to be brought into conformity by 1995.
 Although new buildings appear to meet many accessibility requirements, there does
 not as yet a ppear to be much effort aimed at refitting older buildings to accommo-
 date disabled people.
 A leading expert in the field estimates that the number of disabled is between
 400,000 and 500,000-possibly as high as 700,000. One-third of the total are se-
 verely disabled and receive shelter or nursing care from the authorities. The Dis-
 abled Welfare Law requires large public and private organizations to hire disabled
 persons, 2 and 1 percent of their work forces respectively. Organizations failing to
 do so must pay or each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly salr a-
 proximately $540) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institutions in-
 volved in welfare for the disabled. However, many organizations complain that it
 is difficult to find qualified disabled workers and appear to prefer to pay the fines
 involved. The authorities have noted the impact of a traditional belief that the dis-
 abled lack the ability to do real work.
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of the Ab-
 original deseendants of Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan when the
 first Chinese settlers arrived. According to MOI statistics, there were 357,000 Abo-
 rigines in Taiwan. More than 70 percent are Christian.
 The civil and political rights of Aborigines are fully protected under law. The Na-
 tional Assembly amended the Constitution in 1992 to upgrade the status of Aborigi-
 nal people, protect their right of political participation, and ensure cultural, edu-
 cational, an business development. In addition, the authorities have instituted so-
 cial program to help them assimilate into the dominant Chinese society. As part
 of its efforts to preserve ethnic identities, the Ministry of Education now includes
 some Aboriginal-language classes in primary schools.
 Although they face no official discrimination, Aborigines have had little impact
 over the years on major decisions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and the
 allocation of their natural resources. In addition, they complain that they are pre-
 vented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities' con-
 trol, some of which have been designated as national parks. According to MOI sta-
 tistics, only 52 percent receive elementary educations. Researchers have found alco-
 holism to be a significant problem among the Aborigines, with alcohol addiction
 rates exceeding 40 percent among members of three of the nine major tribes. In the
 past, Aborigines were not allowedto use non-Chinese personal names on legal docu-
 ments, but this was changed by recently passed legislation.
 The sale of Aboriginal girls by their parents into prostitution is a serious social
 problem (see Children above). However, recent reports have indicated that in the
 
 
 604
 period from June 1994 to July 1995, the percentage of arrested child prostitutes of
 aboriginal origin dropped from 15 percent to 5 percent.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In February the Judicial Yuan decided that organiz-
 ing trade unions is a right protected by Taiwan's Constitution. But, until new legis-
 lation implementing this decision is passed, teachers, civil servants, and defense in-
 dustry workers are still not permitted to form labor unions.
 Even with this ruling, there are a number of laws and regulations limiting the
 right of association. abor unions may draw up their own rules and constitutions
 but they must submit these to the authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved
 if they do not meet certification requirements or if their activities disturb public
 order. In 1995 there were no instances of the authorities disolving local labor groups
 or denying new unions certification.
 The Labor Union Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by secret
 ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes rejected KMT or management-
 endorsed union slates. Some workers have established independent unions and fed-
 erations under other names, such as "friendship organizations" and "brotherhood al-
 liances." These groups may register with the MOI as legal civic organizations but
 not as labor unions; thus they are not protected by the Labor Union Law and do
 not have the right to bargain with their members' employers. According to Taiwan's
 Labor Front, an independent labor organization, the number of independent trade
 unions or quasi-labor unions is declining.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including a city,
 county, orprovince, can have competing labor confederations. There is only one 2ai-
 wan-wide labor federation, the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL) which is closely
 associated with the ruling KMT. A standing member of the CFL's board of directors
 is a member of the KMTs Central Standing Committee. The restriction on island-
 wide unions was challenged in 1994 when 12 unions from state-run enterprises an-
 nounced that they would withdraw from the CFL and establish a new national fed-
 eration of labor unions of state-run enterprises. The Council of Labor Affairs (CIA)
 turned down their application. The case is now bein appealed within the CLA. (The
 CLA carries out the functions of a labor ministry but lacks cabinet rank.) In the
 meantime, the trade unions have retained their seats in the CFL. In general, the
 drive for independent labor unions has lost momentum in recent years due to higher
 wages, the shift from manufacturing to service industries, the small scale and poor
 organization of most unions, and prosecution of labor activists by the authorities in
 the past. No labor activists were charged during 1995.
 The law governing labor disputes recognizes the right of unions to strike but im-
 poses restrictions that make legal strikes difficult and seriously weaken collective
 bargaining. For example, the authorities require involuntary mediation of labor/
 management disputes when they deem the disputes to be sufficiently serious or to
 involve "unfair practices." The law forbids both labor and management from disrupt-
 ing the "working order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. The law
 mandates stiff penalties for violations of no-strike/no-retaliation clauses, but em-
 ployers have sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers with-
 out any legal action being taken against them. According to a press report, the CIA
 said that from 1990 to August 1995, there were 31 strikes, of which 22 involved
 workers at bus companies asking for increased pay and reduced hours. There were
 only two strikes recorded in 1995, one in March and another in May.
 Taiwan is not a member of the International Labor Organization. The CFL is af-
 filiated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for the categories of
 workers noted in Section 6.a., the Labor Union Law and the Settlement of Labor
 Disputes Law give workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. As of
 March, some 3.3 million workers, approximately 36 percent of Taiwan's 9-million
 person labor force, belonged to 3,740 registered labor unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss,
 or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union members. In practice,
 however, union leaders have sometimes been dismissed without reasonable cause by
 employers, and observers point out that the law sets no specific penalties for viola-
 tions. According to the National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists, about
 400 trade unionists and supporters have been fired since Taiwan's labor movement
 began to expand after the 1987 lifting of martial law. There were no reports in 1995
 of employers intentionally firing trade unionists, but some trade unionists were laid
 off as a result of factory closures.
 The Collective Agreements Law provides for collective bargaining but does not
 make it mandatory. Since such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises,
 
 
 and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this category, the propor-
 tion of workers covered remains small. Employers set wages generally in accordance
 with market conditions.
 Firms in export processing zones are subject to the same laws regarding treat-
 ment of labor unions as other firms and follow normal practices including collective
 bargaining agreements with their unions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Standards Law pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of these practices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Standards Law stipu-
 lates age 15, after compulsory education required by law ends, as the minimum age
 for employment. County and city labor bureaus enforce minimum age laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Standards Law (ISL) mandates
 labor standards. According to the CLA, the law covers 3.6 million of Taiwan's 6.3
 million salaried workers. The law is not well enforced in areas such as overtime
 work and pay or retirement payments.
 In August the minimum wage was raised by 6.2 percent to about $540
 ($NT14,800) per month. This is less than what is needed to assure a decent stand-
 ard of living for a worker and family. However, the average manufacturing wage
 is more than double the legal minimum wage, and the average for service industry
 employees is even higher. The law limits the workweek to 48 hours (8 hours per
 day, 6 days per week) and requires 1 day off in every 7 days.
 The 1991 revised Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to in-
 clude workers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and appeared to
 strengthen penalties for safety violations; however, it still provides only minimal
 standards for working conditions and health and safety precautions. The Occupa-
 tional Safety and Health Law gives workers the right to remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment. Some critics,
 however, see the law as a step backward; they note, for example, that general con-
 tractors are not responsible for the safety of those working for subcontractors under
 the revised law.
 The 1993 Labor Inspection Law was designed to strengthen the enforcement of
 labor standards and health and safety regulations. It increased the number of enter-
 prises and types of safety issues to be inspected; gave inspectors quasi-judicial
 rights; required preexamination of dangerous working places such as naphtha-crack-
 ing plants, pesticide factories, and firecracker factories; and raised penalties for vio-
 lations. Critics allege that the CIA does not effectively enforce workplace laws and
 regulations because it employs too few inspectors. There are slightly over 200 in-
 spectors for the approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational
 Safety and Health Law. Because the new Law expanded coverage to include more
 enterprises, the inspection rate actually declined. Since many enterprises are small,
 family owned operations employing relatives unlikely to report violations, actual ad-
 herence to the hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to doc-
 ument but is thought to be minimal in the smaller enterprises. Reports have alleged
 that Taiwan has one of the world's highest workplace accident rates.
 Because of Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there has been a legal influx of foreign
 workers in the last several years. The law stipulates that foreign workers who are
 employed legally receive the same protection as local workers. However, authorities
 say that in many cases illegal foreign workers, many from Thailand and the Phil-
 ippines, receive board and lodging from their employers, but no medical coverage,
 accident insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by citizens. In addition, observers say
 that conditions in many small and medium-sized factories which employ illegal for-
 eign labor are dangerous, due to old and poorly maintained equipment. Illegal for-
 eign workers remain vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation of passports,
 imposition of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working hours
 without overtime pay. There are also occasional reports of mistreatment of legal for-
 eign workers. According to available statistics, there are 130,000 workers from Thai-
 land and 55,000 workers from the Philippines in Taiwan.
 The authorities, in response to criticism that their inflexibility led to the death
 by drowning of mainland workers when their "floating hotel" (a ship used as a dor-
 mitory for mainland Chinese who may not land on Taiwan legally) was caught in
 a typhoon in 1994, have agreed that such "floating hotels" may temporarily be
 brought into harbors in emergencies.
 
 
 606
