 TAIWA'
 Taiwan's transition from a legacy of authoritarian rule by the
 Nationalist Party (KMT) toward democracy advanced significantly
 in 1991, as the authorities completed the first stage of a two-
 stage constitutional reform plan. In April the old National
 Assembly (NA)--Taiwan's electoral college and constitution-
 amending body--composed largely of KMT elders ostensibly
 representing Chinese mainland districts, enacted the legal basis
 for President Lee's May 1 end to the "Period of Mobilization"
 and abolition of the "temporary provisions" to the Constitution
 in effect since 1948. Presidential emergency powers were
 continued, however, with a sunset provision. The election of
 new members from Taiwan constituencies in December created a
 new NA basically representative of the island's population.
 As with the NA, senior mainland members of the Legislative Yuan
 (LY)--Taiwan's lawmaking body--were retired at the end of 1991.
 With LY elections scheduled for late 1992, the NA and LY will
 no longer be constituted under a representational formula
 ensuring KMT dominance. The LY's role in politics became more
 pronounced through opposition and KMT legislators'
 interpellations.
 The transition to majority rule inevitably has eroded the
 disproportionate role of Chinese mainlanders who have dominated
 politics and government on the island since 1949, and who still
 hold a majority of important government and military positions.
 The military's role in politics and civil administration has
 diminished considerably since the lifting of martial law on
 Taiwan in 1987. However, the Taiwan Garrison General
 Headquarters (TGGH)--the principal enforcement mechanism for
 martial law rule until 1981--continued to play a role in law
 enforcement. Its handling of reformatory education centers for
 "hoodlums" came under scrutiny in 1991 following reports of a
 fatal beating and hunger strikes.
 Taiwan has basically a free market economy, but major sectors--
 including finance, transportation, utilities, shipbuilding,
 steel, petrochemicals, and telecommunications--remain dominated
 by state-run enterprises. Taiwan's economy continued to shift
 toward the service sector and capital/technology-intensive
 industries. Shortages of unskilled labor resulted in the exodus
 abroad of many labor-intensive manufacturers, as well as new
 pressures to admit foreign workers.
 In addition to advances in political reform, progress on human
 rights in 1991 included: a new Law for the Maintenance of
 Social Order, which replaced the Police Offense Punishment Law
 declared unconstitutional over a decade ago; abolition of the
 Sedition Punishment Law (although other sedition statutes
 remain); abolition of the Statute for Eradication of Communist
 Bandit Spies; and the end of review of junior judges' decisions.
 Although human rights continued to expand in Taiwan's more open
 political environment, significant restrictions remain--
 including restrictions on freedom of speech, the electronic
 press, movement and association, as well as on worker and
 women's rights. Other problems included politically motivated
 prosecutions, selective enforcement of the laws, and unfair
 political practices, including restrictions on access to the
 electronic media.
 While the authorities' responses to increasingly visible Taiwan
 independence activities have been more moderate than in the
 past, they are still restrictive. Several independence
 
 
 835.
 TAIWN
 activists were prosecuted for allegedly seditious actions,
 although mere individual advocacy of independence was no longer
 deemed sufficient basis for prosecution. Sedition statutes, a
 border-entry "blacklist," and other methods continue to be used
 against independence activists, particularly those who organize
 outside Taiwan and those who advocate or use violence.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political killings but an inmate of a
 reformatory died after being beaten (see Section l.c.).
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although Taiwan law expressly prohibits the use of torture,
 there continued to be credible reports of physical abuse of
 persons in police custody. Ministry of Justice officials claim
 that all interrogations are recorded and that an attorney may
 be present. They add that all allegations of mistreatment are
 investigated. However, one of the attorneys for alleged
 seditionist Lin Ying-fu, arrested in connection with the
 "Independent Taiwan Association" case, claimed the authorities
 interrogated Lin for 20 hours in a 24 hour period; an attorney
 was not present much of this time (See Section 2.a.). Criminal
 lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur in
 local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and
 that most persons do. not have attorneys present at the
 interrogation stage.
 The handling of alleged "hoodlums" in a reformatory education
 camp under the jurisdiction of the Eastern Taiwan Garrison .
 Command came under scrutiny after the death in June of an inmate
 at the reformatory education institute at Yenwan, Taitung
 County. According to press reports, an autopsy disclosed that
 the inmate, Chen Ching-chi, had been beaten severely before he
 died. The Ministries of National Defense and Interior have
 announced plans to transfer most of the TGGH's law enforcement
 function to the civilian police.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Police may legally arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect
 of committing a crime for which the punishment would be 5 years
 or more in prison and may call in persons for questioning
 without a formal summons. The authorities'must, within 24
 hours after detention, give notice in writing to the detained
 person, or a designated relative or friend, stating the reason
 for the arrest or questioning. The Code of Criminal Procedure
 specifies that the authorities may detain an accused person for
 up to 2 months during the investigation phase prior to filing a
 formal indictment, and for up to 3 months during the trial.
 The prosecuting officer may apply once to the court to extend
 the investigative detention for 2 months, and twice while in
 detention during trial. The authorities generally have followed
 
 
 826
 TAIWAN
 these procedures in extending periods of detention, although
 trials usually take place within 3 months of indictment.
 Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal offenses can be
 released on bail at the judge's discretion. The right to have
 a lawyer present during the investigation phase is generally
 respected, but defense lawyers complain that persons often are
 not advised of their right to have legal representation during
 police interrogation, and there is no legal requirement that
 indigent persons be provided with counsel during police
 interrogation.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan passed the "antihoodlum"
 law, which accords law enforcement authorities broad powers,
 including the power to determine whether a person should be
 designated as a "hoodlum." The courts approve or deny requests
 for reformatory education of designated hoodlums. Human rights
 organizations and defense attorneys criticize the law as an
 extreme departure from appropriate standards of due process.
 Attorneys for persons charged under the law have no right to
 examine documents or to cross-examine witnesses. While a
 decision to commit a designated hoodlum to reformatory
 education can, in principle, be appealed to, the High Court,
 critics say that courts simply rubberstamp police decisions.
 Reformatory education for "hoodlums" remains under the
 jurisdiction of the TGGH. The law does not authorize the
 courts to determine the length of reformatory education; police
 and prison authorities decide. The usual term is 3 to 6 months
 for a first offense. Repeat offenders are detained for longer
 periods, and detention may be extended up to 3 years, depending
 on behavior in custody.
 Until the June 1991 passage of the Law for the Maintenance of
 Social Order, many minor crimes on Taiwan were handled under the
 Police Offenses Law, which had empowered the police not only to
 arrest but also to prpsecute, convict, and punish offenders with
 incarceration for up to 2 weeks. The Council of Grand Justices
 in 1980 declared this statute unconstitutional, and in 1990
 upheld this ruling and imposed a 1-year deadline for abolishing
 this law. To assure that suspects would not be detained without
 charge for over 24 hours, the new law establishes a series of
 "simple courts" which operate 24 hours a day. These courts--
 not the police--now determine penalties (up to 3 days'
 imprisonment) for suspects arrested for minor offenses. The new
 law also gives civilian police jurisdiction in cases involving
 military personnel.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right of fair public trial is provided by law and generally
 respected in practice. Taiwan's legal system does not provide
 for trial by jury. In a typical court case, parties and
 witnesses are interrogated by a single judge but not directly by
 a defense attorney or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear
 witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit. All
 judges are appointed by, and responsible to, the Judicial Yuan.
 Informed observers have characterized the judiciary as not
 fully independent and as susceptible to political and personal
 pressure. Since the lifting of martial law on July 15,
 1987, civilians may no longer be tried in military courts.
 Although trials are public, attendance at trials involving
 juveniles or politically sensitive issues may require
 permission from the court. Defendants have a right to an
 
 
 837
 TAIWAN
 attorney; if the defendant is suspected of committing a crime
 for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment, or if
 the defendant is handicapped or elderly, the judge may assign an
 attorney. Criminal law specifically provides the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination. Court cases generally are
 heard in several brief court sessions, often separated by weeks
 or months. Persons convicted in cases in which the sentence
 exceeds 3 years have a right to appeal to a High Court and the
 Supreme Court. The Supreme Court limits its review to the
 legal aspects of the case and to specific procedural aspects.
 The authorities on April 1, 1991, abolished the practice of
 review of decisions of junior judges by senior judges. While
 intended to correct errors of law and terminology, some ,critics
 said the practice had increased the possibility of outside
 interference with the judicial process.
 The Legislative Yuan in May abolished the 42-year old Sedition
 Punishment Law and the 41-year old Statute for the Elimination
 of Communist Bandit Spies, after unrest over the arrest of 4
 alleged members of the Tokyo-based Dutaihui (Independent Taiwan
 Organization) on May 9 (also see Section 2.b.).
 Antisedition provisions still exist in both the National
 Security Law and the Criminal Code. The opposition has called
 for abolition of Article 100 of the Criminal Code, which allows
 for punishment of individuals who prepare for or conspire to
 commit sedition. The KMT has agreed to revise this section to
 eliminate penalties for "preparation for sedition" but has
 refused to accede to opposition demands to abolish this law
 altogether. Critics say the law is vague and inconsistent with
 Taiwan's constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech. It
 was involved in a number of sedition trials in 1991 of persons
 advocating Taiwan's independence.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or'
 Correspondence
 Warrantless searches, common before the lifting of martial law,
 are unusual now. A warrant must be obtained before a search,
 except when the search is incidental to arrest. The exception
 is car searches, which are routinely conducted at roadblocks.
 Although the right to privacy is generally respected, members
 of opposition political parties and other political dissidents
 allege that their correspondence and telephone calls are
 routinely intercepted and that they are subject to surveillance.
 The Ministry of Justice is drafting a telecommunications
 monitoring law to provide a new legal basis for the Ministry of
 Justice, Ministry of National Defense, and the intelligence
 authorities to monitor telephone calls and correspondence.
 In June an agent of the Ministry of Justice Investigation
 Bureau (MJIB) was observed collecting information on campus
 activists while posing as a Chiaotung University student.
 After students protested to the MJIB, the Bureau announced that
 the agent's actions were in violation of regulations and that
 the evidence would not be used. Also in June, opposition
 legislators caught an undercover MJIB agent--posing as a
 volunteer legislative assistant--attempting to obtain from the
 Legislative Yuan a list of members of an organization
 investigating human rights abuses in the military.
 
 
 838
 TAIWAN
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and
 press, these rights continue to be circumscribed by sedition
 laws. Security agencies continue to monitor political
 expression, both in Taiwan and overseas, and the authorities
 continued selectively to prosecute opposition activists on
 charges ranging from "sedition" to "harming public order."
 "Sedition" is defined to include expressing sympathy with
 Communists, espousing views contrary to the authorities' claim
 to represent all of China, and supporting an independent legal
 status for Taiwan. 'Nevertheless, the authorities have
 demonstrated increasing tolerance for open debate, even on
 sensitive issues.
 None of the sedition cases.initiated in 1991 was based on mere
 individual advocacy of Taiwan independence, although the
 authorities continued to draw the line at actions that went
 beyond mere speech, such as joining or establishing
 organizations deemed subversive because of such advocacy. The
 authorities in some cases have investigated alleged seditious
 actions but later declined to prosecute. Critics say such
 investigations were intended to harass and intimidate the
 opposition. The Taiwan High Court prosecutor's office in
 August and October began investigations to determine whether an
 opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) "Draft
 Constitution of the Republic of Taiwan"'and its call for a
 plebiscite on "Taiwan independence" justified criminal
 prosecution for sedition. In addition, the authorities
 referred the plebiscite plank case to the Executive Yuan's
 .Political Party Screening Committee for possible sanctions,
 which range from issuance of a warning to ordering the DPP to
 disband. Decisions were held in abeyance until after the
 December 21 National Assembly election, and no decisions had
 been made by year's end.
 Various sedition prosecutions were initiated by the authorities
 in 1991. In one case, 5 members of the Dutaihui (Independent
 Taiwan Association) were'tried; 4 were found guilty and 1 was
 acquitted. Several persons were arrested from August through
 December on various sedition charges as members of the World
 United Formosans for Independence (WUFI)--an organization
 banned by the Taiwan authorities. Some of them were also
 charged with violation of the National Security Law (passport
 fraud) in evading the "blacklist" to enter Taiwan. They were
 denied bail on grounds that they might flee prosecution and
 their cases remain in the courts. Several other cases
 initiated in 1990 and earlier also remain in the courts.
 The authorities can censor publications through provisions of
 the Publications Law which empower the police to seize or ban
 printed material that commits or instigates others to commit
 sedition, treason, sacrilege, offenses of interference with the
 lawful exercise of public functions, or offenses against public
 order or morals. Cases of censorship, however, are rare today,
 although critics say the existence of this statute continues to
 be a source of indirect control over the press. Reporter Chang
 Yu-hua and publisher Hsu Ting-hsin of the Economics political
 magazine were indicted in March 1991 by the Taipei district
 prosecutor's office for "jeopardizing military secrets" in
 connection with an article in an October 1990 issue on military
 deployments in-Quemoy (Kinmen). Chang was sentenced to 19
 months' imprisonment, but the sentence was later suspended.
 
 
 839
 TAIWAN
 Hsu was acquitted. Chang has appealed his sentence to the High
 Court.
 In contrast with the relatively unrestrained and highly
 competitive environment in which the print media now operate,
 television and radio remain tightly controlled. The authorities
 are major stockholders in all three television stations.
 Television coverage of sensitive political subjects, such as
 opposition demonstrations, is restricted and slanted. Moreover,
 while authorities claim only 12 of 33 radio stations are owned
 by military or civil authorities, they count among ostensibly
 "private" radio stations the KMT-controlled Broadcasting
 Corporation of China, which operates a number of stations
 throughout Taiwan. Moreover, no requests to open new radio and
 television stations have been approved since 1969, although
 illegal cable television networks are pervasive.
 In August the opposition DPP issued a statement protesting the
 authorities' crackdown on unlicensed cable television stations,
 charging that the ban was intended to disconnect its "democratic
 cable-television network" during the National Assembly campaign.
 Authorities said the crackdown was motivated by intellectual
 property and safety concerns. Owners of competing movie
 theaters and video rental stores, however, protested that the
 crackdown was not thorough enough.
 The authorities for the first time agreed to allow television
 campaigning during the December National Assembly elections.
 Any political party fielding more than 10 candidates in a
 national election was entitled to access to television
 campaigning. The party had to pay a deposit, which would not be
 returned if less than one-tenth of its candidates were elected.
 Legislators from both the KMT and the opposition DPP have
 criticized a requirement that all campaign materials be approved
 by a censor prior to broadcast.- Other critics say the
 regulations discriminate against smaller political parties.
 Restrictions on academic freedom have diminished in recent
 years, and the trend has been-to allow greater expression of
 dissenting political views. Student demonstrations occur and
 are tolerated, at least within university campuses. Colleges
 and universities have "education officers," who are military
 officers seconded to the Ministry of Education for the purpose
 of teaching the "Thought of Sun Yat-sen," but who also monitor
 student attitudes and behavior. Teachers are sometimes
 pressured to discourage students from taking part in
 demonstrations and risk being disciplined and harming their
 careers if they express unorthodox views themselves. There is
 no system of tenure to protect teachers who express such views.
 However, the overall trend has been to remove political loyalty
 from professional consideration. The effect has been to enhance
 the independence of the faculty from KMT political control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is provided for in the Constitution but is
 restricted in practice. In 1987 the LY passed the Parade and
 Assembly Law, which allows peaceful demonstrations if they are
 approved by the authorities and do not violate the Constitution,
 advocate Communism or advocate Taiwan's separation from China.
 The DPP and other opposition groups have organized and carried
 out numerous demonstrations under the Law. The Parade and
 Assembly Law provides, however, that demonstration organizers
 may be held responsible for the behavior of participants.
 Oppositionists have been prosecuted for alleged harm to public
 
 
 840
 TAIWAN
 order and interference with public functions (usually the
 police) resulting from demonstrations they organized, as well as
 for holding "illegal demonstrations" without a permit.
 Prosecutors deny that politics plays a part in decisions to
 bring charges under the Parade and Assembly Law, but the
 authorities did not assert that those being prosecuted
 personally either advocated or engaged in violence.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The constitutional provision for freedom to practice religion is
 generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere
 to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism, or a combination of
 these beliefs. Other religions include Christianity and Islam.
 There is no established or favored religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for military and other restricted areas, there is general
 freedom of internal travel. An exit permit is required for
 travel abroad and may be refused for a number of reasons,
 including failure to complete compulsory military service. Such
 refusals are now rare. There are now no countries to which
 civilian residents of Taiwan may not travel. Entry permits for
 overseas-resident Taiwan passport holders, as well as visas for
 foreigners, also may be refused for a variety of reasons,
 including political activities outside Taiwan. Under the
 National Security Law, however, reasons for entry and exit
 permit refusals must be given, and appeals may be made to
 special board. The authorities claim to recognize the right of
 Chinese who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in
 Taiwan. to return from abroad. Nonresident Taiwan citizens,
 however, are usually issued "overseas Chinese" passports and
 require entry permits to travel to Taiwan. The authorities will
 not authorize the entry of Chinese residents outside Taiwan
 between the ages of 16 and 70, even those who have long held
 Taiwan passports, if they have lived in Communist-controlled
 areas within the preceding 5 years. Exceptions are made,
 including for persons deemed to be of outstanding merit and for
 mainland residents coming because of the serious illness or
 death of close relatives. There is no longer a requirement for
 these persons to renounce prior membership in the Chinese
 Communist Party. In September the Bureau of Entry and Exit
 announced plans to liberalize entry rules to allow
 mainland-Chinese spouses of-Taiwan citizens to enjoy permanent
 resident status, provided that they have been legally married
 for 2 years.
 Increasing numbers of Taiwan-citizen dissidents previously
 denied entry permits are now being permitted to return to
 Taiwan; however, a number of overseas dissidents still
 considered "undesirable" by the authorities have been denied
 entry into Taiwan under the 1984 Law. The authorities' refusal
 to allow the return of overseas-based Taiwan-citizen dissidents
 has become the subject of political debate and interpellations
 in the Legislative Yuan. The Premier stated April 2 in the LY
 that, in order to protect the security of Taiwan residents, the
 authorities will not permit the return to Taiwan of citizens
 advocating "Taiwan independence."
 The Taiwan authorities have indicated that they will reduce the
 number of persons on this so-called blacklist of persons denied
 admission because of their activities abroad. Entry and Exit
 
 
 841
 TAIWAN
 Services Bureau statistics indicate that 296 persons of one
 proscribed organization alone, the World United Formosans for
 Independence (WUFI), were restricted from entering Taiwan in
 1991. Opposition estimates put the total number of blacklisted
 people at around 500. Entry and Exit Services Bureau
 statistics indicate that the National Security Law was used as
 the basis for the denial of 179 applications for entry and 490
 applications for exit between January and October (including
 criminal suspects and persons who visited the Chinese mainland
 without approval).
 The Taiwan authorities also continue to monitor and, in some
 cases, interfere with the activities of political dissidents
 abroad. In March five Taiwan independence activists were
 initially denied entry into the Philippines for a meeting of
 Taiwan independence activists there. The Taiwan authorities.
 provided a list of names to Philippine immigration officials,
 and oppositionists charge that a security agent from Taiwan
 assisted Philippine immigration officials in screening inbound
 Taiwan tourists.
 A 1984 law allows the authorities to detain persons or revoke
 their passports, for behavior that harms the interests of
 Taiwan, or endangers security, public order, tradition, or
 Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law claim that it
 gives the authorities the power to revoke the passport of any
 Taiwan citizen who makes remarks overseas that are deemed
 inimical to the political interests of the authorities, and
 that this violates the right of all citizens to return to their
 homeland. This law is not used frequently.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Taiwan has taken significant steps away from its authoritarian
 political system to a more pluralistic one. The KMT, which
 established itself in Taiwan after the surrender of the Japanese
 in 1945 and has exercised political power since then, achieved'
 a decisive victory in open and democratic elections in
 December. Reflecting their constitutional claim to be the
 government of all of China, the authorities maintain not only a
 provincial and local government system but also an array of
 central-level political bodies identical to those found on the
 mainland prior to 1949. In the past, centers of power on Taiwan
 have been the Presidency, the Executive Yuan, the military and
 security apparatus, and the KMT Central Standing Committee.
 Both the President and Vice-President are elected by the
 National Assembly, although changes in the mode of election are
 under consideration.. The Premier is appointed by the President
 with the approval of the Legislative Yuan (LY). A lively
 debate is taking place in ruling party and opposition circles
 over the merits of direct versus indirect presidential
 elections. Power also is increasingly being shared with the
 LY, which itself is increasingly representative. The Control
 Yuan, the highest government supervisory organ, continues to be
 elected indirectly under a voting system that guarantees KMT
 domination.
 Major changes are occurring in the two most important elective
 bodies at the central level--the LY and the National Assembly
 (NA). Senior representatives elected on the mainland over four
 decades ago retired at the end of 1991. New elections for the
 NA--which under the present Constitution has jurisdiction over
 constitutional revisions and meets every 6 years to elect the
 
 
 842
 TAIWAN
 President and Vice-President--took place in December 1991. The
 new NA has 403 members, 225 elected in 1991 from Taiwan
 constituencies, 100 elected from party slates in proportion to
 the 1991 Taiwan constituency election results (80 "national"
 seats and 20 overseas Chinese seats), and 78 incumbents elected
 in Taiwan in supplemental elections in 1986.
 The KMT won 71 percent of the popular vote and 78 percent of
 the seats in the new NA, giving the KMT the three-fourths
 majority needed to control constitutional changes. The KMT
 holds 318 seats in the new NA, while the DPP holds 75, the other
 10 seats being held by third parties. LY elections will take
 place in late 1992. There had been no general elections to
 these two bodies since 1948. Universal suffrage exists for
 citizens 20 years of age and over. Voting is voluntary and by
 secret ballot.
 The KMT continues to be the dominant political party in Taiwan,
 as has been the case since 1945. Originally composed
 overwhelmingly of mainlanders, its membership of over 2 million
 is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. (Native Taiwanese of
 southern Fujian and Hakka origin comprise an estimated 85
 percent of Taiwan's population, with Chinese mainlanders
 arriving since 1949 and their offspring comprising most of the
 remainder.) The KMT's structure and control mechanisms are
 based on Leninist models; however, the party's operations are
 considerably more flexible. In 1988 the KMT began to remove
 formal party organs from the military and the school systems
 and to democratize its party structure.
 The passage of the Civic Organizations Law in January 1989
 legalized the organization of additional political parties. At
 present, there are 68 registered parties. The major opposition
 party, the DPP. was formed in 1986 in defiance of martial law;
 it registered as a political party in April 1989. The DPP
 claims a membership of 25,00G. The other opposition parties are
 much smaller. The role of the opposition, however, is greater
 than its small numbers might indicate. Opposition members are
 very vocal, sometimes even violent, in elective bodies and
 frequently use interpellation sessions to raise controversial
 or sensitive issues. Their activities have spurred some KMT
 legislators to criticize the authorities' policies as too
 lenient toward critics. The opposition parties still face
 several disadvantages, principally the authorities' virtual
 monopoly of television and, to a lesser extent, radio. (For a
 discussion of opposition access to mass media, see Section 2.a.)
 Oppositionists also charge that the election code passed by the
 Legislative Yuan in July 1991 increases the KMT's overwhelming
 organizational advantages over smaller parties. The statute
 bars defeated candidates from being appointed to at-large
 proportional representation seats in the bodies, and adopts a
 one-vote system under which voters cast a single vote for both
 candidate and party. With the exception of those whose rights
 were restored by presidential amnesty, persons convicted of
 sedition under martial law were often given additional,
 time-limited sentences depriving them of civil rights such as
 voting and holding public office. (Further, restrictions on
 practicing certain professions such as the law, medicine,
 pharmacy, accountancy, and company management are not limited
 by time but may be curtailed by an amnesty.) The benefits that
 the KMT enjoys in terms of access to public and private funds
 and assistance from administrative and security agencies also
 give it a significant advantage.
 
 
 843
 TAIWAN
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Taiwan has two principal human rights organizations: the
 Chinese Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the Taiwan
 Association for Human Rights (TAHR). CAHR, staffed mostly by
 retired officials, is regarded as the establishment-oriented
 human rights organ. TAHR is aligned with the opposition.
 Coordination between the two bodies is limited; they generally
 have contact only when representativesof international human
 rights organizations visit Taiwan.
 The Taiwan authorities permit representatives of most
 international human rights organizations, including Amnesty
 International and Asia Watch, to visit Taiwan.and meet citizens
 freely. However, the staff of the publication Taiwan
 Communique, published by the International Committee for Human
 Rights in Taiwan, is denied entry.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group, slightly more than 1
 percent of Taiwan's-total population, consists of the aboriginal
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan
 when the first Chinese settlers arrived. They face no official
 discrimination but encounter significant cultural and economic
 barriers. Specially designated seats in both central and
 provincial legislatures are reserved for representatives of
 these aboriginal people, and the authorities have instituted a
 number of social programs to help-them assimilate into the
 dominant.Chinese society. The aboriginal people complain that
 they are prevented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas
 under the control of-the authorities. Furthermore, they are not
 allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on legal documents.
 The sale of aboriginal children into prostitution is a serious
 social problem. Although aborigines constitute under 2 percent
 of Taiwan's population, nearly 20 percent of the child
 prostitute population consists of aborigines, according to
 reliable statistics.
 In June aborigine rights activists clashed with police and
 occupied the offices of the Tibetan and Mongolian Affairs
 Commission, demanding that a similar agency be established for
 them. They claimed the authorities placed undue emphasis on
 Tibetan and Mongolian affairs, despite the fact that only a
 handful of Tibetans and Mongolians reside on Taiwan, while only
 a small section within the Interior Ministry handles the affairs
 of over 340,000 aborigines on Taiwan.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, but it exists both in fact
 and in law. There are still some laws that discriminate against
 women, relating mostly to divorce and child custody issues, but
 a revised civil code passed by the LY in March 1985 provides for
 more equal treatment of women in the areas of marriage and
 divorce. The law, for example, provides for joint ownership of
 property acquired after marriage. Previously, property obtained
 after marriage would go to the husband upon divorce. A January
 1989 revision of the juvenile welfare law now allows a public
 prosecutor to appeal on behalf of the mother or a third party in
 child custody cases. This revised law, however, applies only to
 children between 12 and 18 years of age, and custody of children
 under 12 generally is given to the.father upon divorce. Women
 have complained of being forced to quit jobs because of age or
 
 
 84
 TAIWAN
 childbearing restrictions, and restrictive quotas exist within
 certain ministries to control the number of female government
 employees. A women's rights movement is active and growing.
 Although official data on violence against women are not
 available, women active in politics, human rights, and women's
 organizations single out intrafamily violence as a serious
 problem, especially wife beating. Strong social pressure is
 sometimes exerted on abused wives to conceal their treatment to
 avoid "disgracing" their families. The critics of this violence
 believe that greater mobility, education, and job opportunities
 are making women less inclined to tolerate such abuse and more
 willing to complain of mistreatment, but it is not known if the
 number of actual complaints filed increased in 1991. A somewhat
 similar situation exists with regard to rape, since the victims
 are still socially stigmatized. Under Taiwan law, the
 authorities may not undertake a prosecution for rape; only the
 victim may make a complaint. Because rape trials are public,
 women are reluctant to prosecute their attackers. However,
 feminist and human rights organizations have assisted rape
 victims, and victims are now more willing to come forward and
 press charges.
 The problem of child prostitutes continues to receive
 considerable public attention in Taiwan. Reliable estimates say
 there are currently around 100,000 women under age 18 employed
 as prostitutes. Preliminary police statistics for 1991 indicate
 police located 1,152 child prostitutes; of these, 204 were under
 14 years old, 880 were between the ages of 14 and 16, and 224
 were aborigines. Police in recent years have established
 antichild prostitution task forces in response to public
 pressure. Women's rights activists have also hailed the January'
 1989 passage of a juvenile welfare law, which enables juvenile
 welfare bodies, prosecutors' and victims to apply to courts for
 termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment of
 qualified guardians in cases where parents have forced their
 children into prostitution. In cases where children are engaged
 in prostitution of their own free will and the parents are
 incapable of taking safe custody, the courts may order competent
 authorities to provide counseling education for not less than 6
 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal loopholes and
 cultural barriers remain as obstacles to prosecution. For
 example, in cases where both parents have sold a child into
 prostitution, the current law requires the victim to lodge a
 complaint before prosecution is undertaken. In many cases, the
 child is reluctant--or afraid-to do so. According to some
 reports, violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion
 are used by brothel owners to prevent girls from escaping.
 Although the Taiwanese dialect is the mother tongue of most
 inhabitants of Taiwan, dialect television and radio programming
 is limited. Taiwan currently has television broadcasts in
 Mandarin, Taiwanese, and Hakka, as well as radio broadcasts in
 Mandarin, Taiwanese, Hakka, and aboriginal dialects. The
 authorities say that the percentage of non-Mandarin dialect
 programming is now determined entirely by the marketplace.
 However, the current broadcasting and television law still
 mandates that "Stations shall mainly use Mandarin in domestic
 broadcasts and shall decrease gradually the use of dialects.
 The proportion between Mandarin and dialect broadcasts shall be
 determined by the Government Information Office according to
 actual requirements." In July, 21 KMT and DPP legislators
 proposed removing dialect use restrictions from regulations
 governing radio and television broadcasts.
 
 
 TAIWAN
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor's right of association is seriously limited by a number
 of laws and regulations. The Civic Organizations Law, revised
 in January 1989, requires all civic organizations, including
 labor unions, to register with the authorities. Labor dnions
 may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but these must
 be submitted to the authorities for review. Unions may be
 dissolved by the authorities if they do not meet legal
 requirements for certification, or if their activities disturb
 public order. According to official sources, no unions have
 been dissolved, although certification has been denied if there
 were competing unions. In the latter cases, the unions were
 asked to reconcile their differences and file as a single union.
 Civil servants, teachers, defense industry workers, and
 administrators acting on behalf of employers are prohibited
 from organizing labor unions. The Labor Union Law requires
 that union leaders be elected regularly by their respective
 membership by secret ballot, and in recent years workers have
 sometimes rejected KMT or management-endorsed union slates.
 Revisions of the law governing labor disputes, effective June
 1988, recognize labor's right to strike but impose serious
 restrictions that make legal strikes very difficult. Both labor
 and management are forbidden from disrupting the "working order"
 when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. Before a
 strike can be called, it must be approved by a majority vote of
 the full membership of the union. The authorities have
 required official approval before such a meeting can be
 called. Applications for arbitration may be made to the local
 government. Stiff penalties may be levied should no-strike/
 no-retaliati6n clauses be violated, but critics say that
 employers have ignored the law and dismissed or locked out
 workers without any legal action being taken against them.
 However, the number of such incidents is believed to be minimal.
 Observers also cite prosecution of labor activists as a factor
 in inhibiting Taiwan's labor movement. In August 1991, nine
 labor activists, including Workers Party Chairman Lo Mei-wen,
 received sentences ranging from 5 months' imprisonment to 20
 days for holding a strike at the Far Eastern Textile Company
 without a proper permit. Their sentences were later reduced.
 Prosecutors sought sentences under an obscure 1938 statute
 governing agricultural, mining, industrial, and commercial
 sectors during the emergency period; the law prohibited
 instigating strikes among workers of enterprises producing
 "designated products," including cotton, fiber, and wool.
 Even well-established unions have adopted a cautious stance
 towards confrontation with employers and authorities. During a
 dispute over bonus payments involving the petroleum workers'
 union in January, the Executive Yuan warned employees of the
 Chinese Petroleum Corporation (CPC) not to carry out a
 threatened stoppage of overtime work during the Chinese Lunar
 New Year (February 13) holiday and ordered the concerned
 authorities to arrest workers if they participated in the
 protest. The union later called off the threatened stoppage
 after the company increased its bonus offer.
 Unions may form confederations but no administrative district,
 including cities, counties, and provinces, can have competing
 labor confederations, which effectively means there can only be
 one Taiwan-wide labor federation. The Chinese Federation of
 
 
 846
 TAIWAN
 Labor is closely associated xith the KMT and also is affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Some
 workers have established independent unions and federations
 under other names, such as "friendship organizations" and
 "brotherhood alliances." These groups remain technically
 illegal under present regulations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 As of September 1991, 2.895 million workers, or approximately
 33.5 percent of Taiwan's work force, belonged to 3,622
 officially registered labor unions. Under the Labor Union Law,
 employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss, or otherwise
 unfairly treat workers because they are union members. Labor
 laws governing union activities apply equally within export
 processing zones. The drive for independent labor unions lost
 momentum in recent years due to toughet tabtics on the part of
 employers and the slowing of Taiwan's economy.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the Collective
 Agreements law but is not mandatory.- Only 295 formal collective
 agreements were in force as of September 1991, down from 329 the
 previous year. Since such agreements are made only in
 large-scale enterprises, and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's
 enterprises fall into this category, the proportion of workers
 covered by them is small. Legal restrictions on the right to
 strike and provisions for involuntary mediation or arbitration
 seriously weaken collective bargaining. Most collective actions
 by workers consist of such technically illegal actions as work
 stoppages and mass leave-taking.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under the Labor Standards Law, forced or compulsory labor is
 prohibited. Violation is punishable by a maximum jail sentence
 of 5 years. Except for allegations concerning prostitution (see
 Section 5), there were no reports of violations of the section
 of the Labor Standards Law prohibiting forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Standards Law stipulates that the minimum age for
 employment is 15 (i.e., after compulsory education ends), and
 interaction between this law and a compulsory education law
 effectively keeps child labor at a very low level.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law was enacted in 1984 to provide
 minimum labor standards. According to Taiwan's labor ministry,
 the Council of Labor Affairs (CLA), it currently covers some
 3.3 million of Taiwan's 5.6 million paid workers. The Law has
 enjoyed only limited success in several areas, and there is a
 growing sentiment that it and other labor laws should be
 strengthened and extended to cover additional workers. By law,
 the work,)eek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days
 per week) with certain provisions for overtime.
 There is general agreement that the legally established minimum
 wage is less than that needed to assure a decent standard of
 living; however, the average manufacturing wage is more than
 double the legal minimum wage. In addition, most large firms
 provide their employees with allowances for transportation,
 meals, housing, and other benefits which can amount to another
 60 to 80 percent of base salary.
 
 
 847
 TAIWAN
 While there is a new Occupational Safety and Health Law which
 enlarges coverage of the old law to include workers in
 agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and strengthens
 penalties for safety violations, it still provides only minimum
 standards for working conditions and health and safety
 precautions. Rising labor consciousness and continuing labor
 shortages have resulted in improvements in working conditions.
 Despite the establishment of the CLA, many workplace laws and
 regulations are not effectively enforced because of a shortage
 of inspectors. As of December 1991, there were 267 inspectors
 for approximately 90,000 enterprises covered by the Labor
 Standards Law. In 1990, 7.8 percent of all enterprises were
 inspected. Since most enterprises are small, family owned
 operations employing relatives who will not report violations,
 actual adherence to the hours, wage, and safety sections of
 various labor laws is hard to document but is thought to be
 minimal. Taiwan's occupational injury rate, however, has
 declined steadily from 1980 to 1990 by over 50 percent.
 Given Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there has been an influx
 of illegal foreign workers into Taiwan in recent years. Earlier
 estimates of the number of illegal workers on Taiwan ranged from
 40,000 to over 200,000. Authorities launched a crackdown on
 illegal workers after a 58-day special amnesty ending on
 February 28, 1991. The amnesty allowed illegal workers to
 depart Taiwan voluntarily without penalty. By June nearly
 30,000 illegal workers had left Taiwan voluntarily or were
 deported. Authorities say illegal workers are entitled to the
 same protection as native workers so far as work conditions are
 concerned. In many cases, however, illegal foreign workers are
 given board and lodging but have no medical coverage, accident
 insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by local workers.
 Conditions in many small- and medium-sized factories which
 employ illegal labor are poor, with old and poorly maintained
 equipment resulting in a high rate of industrial accidents.
 Press reports suggest these illegal workers are vulnerable to
 exploitation, including confiscation of passports, imposition
 of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working
 hours without overtime pay.
 
 
 848
