 TAIWAN
 In 1993 Taiwan continued its rapid progress toward a pluralistic system truly rep-
 resenting the island's population. Open political debate and a freewheeling print
 media contributed to a vigorous democratic environment. The new Legislative Yuan
 (LY) took an increasingly active role. In November local mayor and county mag-
 istrate elections were freely, fairly, and energetically contested, marking a new
 stage in competitive party politics in Taiwan. The disproportionate role of Chinese
 mainlanders who had dominated both politics and government in Taiwan since 1945
 through the Nationalist Party (KMT), already sharply reduced by the National As-
 sembly (NA) (1991) and LY (1992) elections, was further curtailed at the KMT's
 14th Congress in August. Factions led by Taiwan-born Chairman (and regime Presi-
 dent) Lee Teng-Hui won 80 percent of the seats on the Central and Central Stand-
 ing Committees. Senior military officers were discouraged from seeking high KMT
 positions, thereby enhancing the political neutrality of the military. Following the
 lifting of martial law in 1987 and the disbanding of the Taiwan Garrison General
 Headquarters in 1992, most law enforcement functions are handled by civilian police
 agencies.
 Taiwan's basically free market economy has major sectors dominated by state-
 and party-run enterprises--including finance, transportation, utilities, telecommuni-
 cations, shipbuilding, steel, and petrochemicals. Because of opposition and media
 pressure, the KMT has promised to make public information about its enterprises.
 Taiwan's economy continued to shift toward the service sector and capital- and tech-
 nology-intensive industries. Shortages of unskilled labor and high labor costs re-
 sulted in the exodus of many labor-intensive manufacturers as well as the continued
 importation of foreign workers.
 Political rights made further advances with the ending of restrictions on dis-
 sidents returning to Taiwan. A new cable television law and stops to open new radio
 and television frequencies have begun to end the long-term monopoly of broadcast
 media by the authorities and the KMT. New legislation brought significantly im-
 proved protection for the rights of juveniles and children. Administrative changes
 raised the level of offices dealing with aboriginal affairs to give more attention to
 the needs of this group.
 Des pite a much improved human rights environment, human rights abuses con-
 tinued. There continued to be credible reorts of police and military abuse of detain-
 ees. A pattern of restrictions on workers rights of association and to strike contin-
 ues to be a significant problem. Some "antihoodlum" regulations, including a "secret
 witness" system, violate internationally accepted standards of due process. Child
 prostitution, including the sale of aboriginal children, and discrimination and vio-
 lence against women remained significant problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Five police officers in Taichung City
 were indicted for beating to death a rape suspect in August. The death of World
 United Formosans for Independence Secretary-General Wang Kang-Lu in an Octo-
 ber Taipei car crash was branded a "political assassination" by his family and sup-
 porters although though no evidence was found by year's end proving that the death
 was politically motivated.
 There were no other reports or claims of political or other extrajudicial killings
 directed by the authorities in 1993. However, there was the shooting of a county
 council member and his secretary in Yunlin county, reportedly by gangsters, and of
 a Chiayi county opposition leader investigating the collection of illegal fees from
 fishermen by his fishermen's association may have had political motives. Also, long-
 time oppositionist Peng Ming-Min alleged in August that a security official had sug-
 gested murdering him to curb the "rising voice of Taiwan independence." Since Peng
 did not file charges, the authorities did not investigate the allegation.
 Although corporal punishment is forbidden under military law, physical abuse of
 military personnel continues. At a public hearing in July on human rights abuses
 in the military, the deputy military police commander admitted there were problems
 
 
 621
 with the management of the armed forces and apologized to family members of peo-
 ple who died while serving in the military. These included two detainees beaten to
 death at separate military reformatories during the past 2 years.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Credible reports of physical abuse of persons in police custody continued. Five police
 officers in Tainan City were indicted in January for torturing two robbery suspects,
 and three more policemen were indicted in June for torturing another robbery sus-
 pect. Taiwan law allows suspects to have attorneys present during interrogations,
 primarily to ensure that abuse does not take place.
 The Ministry of Justice (MOJ) claims that each interrogation is recorded and that
 all allegations of mistreatment are investigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note
 that abuses most often occur in local police stations where interrogations are not
 recorded and when attorneys are generally not present. Detainees who are phys-
 ically abused have the right to sue the police for torture, and confessions obtained
 through torture are inadmissible in court proceedings.
 Prison overcrowding is an increasing problem. According to reports, MOJ statis-
 tics show more than 50,000 inmates in the 43 detention facilities in Taiwan, at least
 15,000 more than the facilities' maximum capacity. To reduce the overcrowding, the
 MOJ is studying reduction of the amount of time prisoners must serve before apply-
 ingfor parole from one-half to one-third of their sentences.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal immigrants are reportedly poor. More
 than 2,000 illegal immigrants from mainland China are in custody, and some of
 them mounted hunger strikes and other protest actions at detention centers. Among
 those people detained are four who claim to have left the mainland for political rea-
 sons but whose cases have not been reviewed for more than a year. There have also
 been reports of harsh treatment and lengthy detentions of illegal foreign laborers
 and Vietnamese boat people in the San sia holding center. The Chinese Associa-
 tion for Human Rights (CfR) and the U.S.-based Asia Watch are following the
 case of one San Hsia detainee, Xu Li-Fang, a mainland student activist who entered
 Taiwan in 1991 on a counterfeit Salvadoran passport and claimed political persecu-
 tion, but who is facing possible forced repatriation to the Peoples epublic of China
 (PRC).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Police may legally arrest without a war-
 rant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison and may question persons without a formal summons.
 The authorities must, within 24 hours after detention, give written notice to the de-
 tainee, or a designated relative or friend, stating the reason for the arrest or ques-
 tioning. Indicted persons may be released on bailat judicial discretion.
 The Criminal Procedure C ode (CPC) specifies that the authorities may detain a
 suspect for up to 2 months during the investigation phase before filing a formal in-
 dictment. The prosecutor's office may extend the investigative detention for one ad-
 ditional 2-month period. A suspect may be held for up to 3 months during trial pro-
 ceedings, and the court may extend the trial detention for two additional 3-month
 periods. The authorities generally have followed these procedures, and trials usually
 take place within 3 months of indictment.
 March the Judicial Yuan (JY) released its draft of revisions to the CPC, includ-
 ing prvisions which may increase protections for the accused. These include giving
 suspects the right to remain silent when arrested, reducing the time allowed for ini-
 tial interrogationsa and shortening the 4-month period that suspects may be held
 without charges. Ti'he JY has sent the draft revisions to the Ministry of Justice
 (MOJ) of the Executive Yuan (EY) where they were still under review at year's end.
 The re~uest of a sspect to have a lawyer present during the investigation phase
 is generally respeted, but defense lawyers complain that persons often ar not ad-
 vised of their right to have legal representation during police interrogation, and
 there is no legal requirement that indigent persons be provided with counsel during
 police interrogation.
 A continuing departure from international standards of due process is the secret
 witness system under the "Antihoodlum Law." This system allows police to conduct
 "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums-81 were reportedly picked up in the seventh is-
 land-wide sweep in September-and use the testimony of unidentified informants in
 detaining the suspects. Counsel for the alleged hoodlums are not permitted to cross-
 examine the informants. While defense attorneys recently have been given the right
 to examine documentary evidence, critics charge that evidence in these cases is
 often weak or fabricated. In 1992 the Antihoodum Law was revised to bring secret
 witnesses under the criminal statutes for perjury, but critics say this is not suffi-
 cient because the detainees often lack the means to prove perjury.
 
 71F-ARA  n _-- A _----1
 
 
 622
 According to the JY, the secret witness system is not used in normal criminal pro-
 cedures; "antihoodlum" punishments are "administrative proedures." Based on evi-
 dence provided by the police, a specialized court determines whether or not an ac-
 cused hoodlum should receive reformatory education. This decision may be appealed
 by the accused to a higher court. Critics say that courts simply rubberstamp police
 decisions, and, while most detainees appeal their sentences, most remain un-
 changed. Courts do not determine the length of reformatory education; reformatory
 authorities make this decision based on the behavior of the detainee. The usual
 term is 3 to 6 months for a first offense, and detention of repeat offenders may be
 extended for up to 3 years.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The right of fair public trial is provided for by
 law and generally respected in practice. Taiwan's legal system does not provide for
 trial by jury. In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are interrogated by a
 single judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor. The judge may de-
 cline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit. All judges
 are appointed by, and responsible to the JY. Although observers in the past have
 characterized the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to political
 and personal pressure, there was little such criticism in 1993. Nonetheless, press
 reports indicate a group of judges at the Taichung district court asked the Judicial
 Yuan to allow judges themselves to decide on their annual projects and assignments
 rather than have their court presidents decide for them.
 In a landmark decision, the Supreme Court in March overturned, because of lack
 of evidence, Taiwan independence activist George Chang's 1992 conviction for vio-
 lent sedition, including attempted murder, in connection with a 1976 letter-bomb
 plot. Defense attorneys had appealed the prosecution's reliance on evidence obtained
 a risoner during a 1977 military tribunal, which the witness publicly recanted
 during chang's trial.
 Trias are public, but attendance at trials involving juveniles or politically sen-
 sitive issues may require court permission. A defendant has the right to an attor-
 ney; if the defendant is suspected of committing a crime for which the penalty is
 3 or more years' imprisonment, or if the defendant is handicapped or elderly, the
 judge may assign an attorney. Criminal law specifically provides the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination. Persons convicted in cases in which the sentence
 exceeds 3 years have a right to appeal to the High Court and to the Supreme Court.
 Those sentenced to 3 years or less can appeal only to the High Court. Life imprison-
 ment and death sentences are automatically reviewed by the Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-
 Warrantless searches, common before the lifting of martial law, are unusual now.
 An exception is car searches, which are routinely conducted at roadblocks. Other-
 wise, a warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained before a search,
 exept when incidental to arrest. However, critics claim that the "incidental to ar-
 rest *provision is often interpreted broadly by police to justify searches of locations
 other than actual sites of arrests.
 There continue to be reports, which many observers find credible, that police and
 security agencies interfere with the right to privacy, including allegations of surveil-
 lance and interception of correspondence and telephone calls. In March legislators
 complained about National Security Bureau (NSB) tapping the phones of main-
 lander KMT politicians and of DPP members, a charge the NSB denied. An Aus-
 tralian scholar complained in June that he had been closely watched and followed
 since his arrival in Taipei a short time earlier. According to EY regulations, judicial
 and security authorities may file a written request to a prosecutor's office to monitor
 telephone calls to collect evidence against a suspect involved in a major crime. The
 authorities claim they do not monitor the telephones of oppsition figures.
 A major improvement in the right to privacy occurrdin 1992 when the "second
 personnel offices," maintained by the Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau to
 monitor civil servants' political and ideoloical loyalties, were replaced by politically
 neutral "government ethics departments charged with anticorruption duties and
 the security of government agencies. The MOJ claims, and most critics agree, that
 it has kept its promise to destroy "second personnel office" dossiers relating to the
 political loyalties of civil servants and employees of state-run corporations.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-In May 1992, Taiwan revised sedition statutes
 to eliminate provisions outlawing "conspiracy" to commit sedition and to limit the
 purview of the sedition law to cases involving violence or threats. After the revision,
 the authorities released all prisoners convicted on sedition charges and dropped
 pending sedition cases. According to a prominent lawyer, no new sedition charges
 were filed during 1993.
 
 
 623
 A 1992 revision of the National Security Law (NSL) removed prohibitions on 'ac-
 tions against the Constitution." However the NSL-and related statutes such as the
 Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and Assembly Law-still retain prohibi-
 tions against advocating Communism or espousing the division of national territory.
 No prosecutions for violations of these provisions were undertaken in 1993.
 Censorship of the print media (more than 70 newspapers publish regularly) is
 rare, but the Publications Law empowers the police to seize or ban printed material
 that is seditious, treasonous, sacrilegious, interferes with the lawful exercise of pub-
 lic functions, or violates public order or morals. No seizures of materials on political
 grounds occurred in 1993, although there were several raids to seize pornographic
 materials. The Government Information Office (GIO) decided that the September
 publication in Taipei of the biography of mainland leader Deng Xiaoping written by
 is daughter did not violate the Publications Law or any other concerned regula-
 tions.
 Four professors were found guilty in July of libel for leading a boycott against a
 newspaper they alleged slantedits reporting in favor of theR   and against Tai-
 wan; they have appealed their sentences. In September the Taipei district court con-
 victed a Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) legislator of interference with a public
 function for insulting a vice justice minister at an LY Judiciary Committee meeting.
 The court ruled that execution of the sentence, 50 days of forced labor and a fine
 of about $24 (NT 600), be delayed for a 1-year pobationary period. The legislator
 has ignored the entire case on the grounds of LY immunity and plans no appeal.
 In ontrast with the relatively open and highly competitive environment in which
 the print media now operate, television and raio remained tightly controlled. The
 KMT, the Taiwan provincial government, and the military are the largest share-
 holders of and operate the three broadcast television stations. The GIO argues that
 these stations are really civilian businesses since government agencies control less
 than half of their stock shares that their programming is guided by the market
 rather than by the GIO or the kMT, and that they rely on revenues from commer-
 cials and services rather than government funds. Critics claim that television cov-
 erage has been slanted to favor the KMT viewpoint and that reports on sensitive
 subjects, such as opposition demonstrations, have been similarly biased. A television
 journalist, cited as best news anchor in March, was quoted as saying that the award
 had actually been given to the 'best puppet" because of political interference in tele-
 vision news reporting.
 Authorities have claimed only 12 of 33 radio stations have been owned by military
 and civil authorities, but they have counted among ostensibly 'private stations
 such entities as the KMT-controlled Broadcasting Corporation of China. More than
 three-fourths of Taiwan's radio frequencies have been held by government, party,
 and other noncommercial entities.
 Although there are a number of unregistered cable television networks, no re-
 uests to open new radio and television stations had been approved from 1969 until
 993. The GIO accepted applications in May for the use of 28 FM frequencies and
 announced in December that 13 new radio stations, including a radio station run
 by an opposition DPP LY member which had been operating illegally, would be
 given FM channels. In May the Minister of Transportation and Communications
 (MOTC) announced that 2 VHF frequencies would be made available by the end of
 the year and new stations could start operation as early as 1996. In June the MOTC
 announced that in addition 4 UHF frequencies, 2 more FM frequencies and 34 AM
 frequencies would be made available in 1994. In July the LY passed a new cable
 television law, dividing the island up into over 50 districts, each of which is allowed
 up to 5 local cable television companies. By December, more than 600 previously il-
 legal cable TV operations had registered with the GIO to legalize their operations
 under interim cable television regulations which apply until the cable television law
 takes full effect. The authorities are also setting up a new public television network
 to begin operation in 1995.
 Critics charge that the limited broadcast ranges of new radio and television sta-
 tions do not constitute a counterweight to the authorities' monopoly on island-wide
 broadcasting. Moreover, some critics are concerned that the KMT, with its vast eco-
 nomic resources, or large corporations will try to control these new "investment are-
 nas." Also regulations restrict the rights of those previously convicted of sedition to
 station ownership or management, although major opposition leaders are not af-
 fected because their rights have been restored through presidential amnesty. Per-
 sons who have been convicted of sedition continue to be banned from working in tel-
 evision or radio stations.
 The authorities lifted controls on the percentage of time television and radio sta-
 tions could broadcast in dialects in July. Although the Taiwanese dialect is the
 mother tongue of most of the island's inhabitants, 80 percent of broadcasting in the
 
 
 past had to be done in Mandarin. Now broadcasting is done in Mandarin, Taiwan-
 ese, Hakka (television and radio) and aboriginal dialects (radio only).
 Restrictions on academic freedom have continued to diminish, and expression of
 dissenting political views is common. Teachers are sometimes pressured to discour-
 age students from demonstrating and risk being disciplined if they express unortho-
 dox views. No tenure system exists to protect teachers. However, the trend has been
 to disregard political loyalty when considering the factors affecting professional ad-
 vancement. In December the LY revised existing law to prohibit political parties
 from establishing party branches at universities, as well as in court and military
 areas.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly and asso-
 ciation is provided for in the Constitution but is somewhat restricted in practice.
 The Civic Organization Law requires all civic organizations to register but authori-
 ties have refused to approve registration of some groups such as the Taiwan Asso-
 ciation for Human Rights (TAHR), that use the word qlaiwan" in their titles. The
 TAHR, however, continues to operate. According to the Parade and Assembly Law,
 as amended in 1992, peaceful demonstrations are permitted if approved in advance
 by the authorities and if they do not advocate Communism or advocate Taiwan's
 separation from China. The new law also reduced from 7 to 6 the number of days
 before a demonstration that an application must be filed. Penalties for violating or-
 ders to disperse, however, were increased.
 Opposition leaders who organized demonstrations have been prosecuted and fined
 in the past for alleged harm to public order, interference with public functionaries
 (usually the police), assembly without a permit, or for diverging from officially au-
 thorized routes. Demonstrators are also liable for "insults or slander" of public offi-
 cials. Prosecutors deny that politics has played a part in decisions to bring charges
 under the Parade and Assembly Law, but the authorities have not asserted that
 those being prosecuted personally advocated or engaged in violence. Observers say
 that there were few prosecutions under the Parade and Assembly Law in 1993.
 However, several people were indicted after the anti-KMT alliance riots in
 Kaohsiung in March, and their cases are pending.
 The July 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the EY the
 power to dissolve political parties. This power now resides in a Constitutional Court
 composed of members of the judiciary's Council of Grand Justices, which was inau-
 gurated in October. Grounds for such dissolution include objectives or actions that
 are deemed to jeopardize the existence of the Republic of China. No cases were
 heard by the Constitutional Court during 1993.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The constitutional provision for freedom to practice reli-
 gion is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere to Confu-
 cianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism or a combination of these beliefs. Other reli-
 gions include Christianity and Islam. here is no established or favored religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Legislature revised the NSL in 1992, easing restrictions on over-
 seas Taiwanese and others entering Taiwan. Restrictions on the entry of PRC citi-
 zens were also eased somewhat by the revision of the NSL in 1992 but remain
 strong. Former Taiwan residents still require permission to enter the island, but
 entry restrictions were revised to cover only those about whom there are facts suffi-
 cient to create a strong suspicion of engaging in terrorism or violence. The NSL revi-
 sion was followed by a Ministry of Interior NOI) announcement that the list of ex-
 cluded overseas dissidents had been reduced from 282 to fewer than 5.
 The reversal of policy was symbolized by New York Law School Professor Chen
 Lung-Chih who had been blacklisted for years for serving as "foreign minister" for
 World United Formosans for Independence, a Taiwan independence group. Chen re-
 turned to Taipei twice in 1993, the second time as the opening speaker at a con-
 ference on Taiwan's bid to enter the United Nations organized by the opposition
 DPP and funded by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
 In September 1993 the deputy director of the MOI's Entrance and Exit Bureau
 announced that the "blacklist problem" no longer existed. In October a former Tai-
 wan legislator, who went to the mainland a decade ago and served as a member
 of the Standing Committee of the PRC's National Congress (PNC), returned to Tai-
 wan after his retirement from that organization. Also in October, the last of the
 major dissident leaders, Shih Ming, returned to Taiwan after more than 40 years'
 exile in Japan. Shih, who has refused to accept the legitimacy of the KMT-led re-
 gime-including its right to regulate his entrance to Taiwan-was released on bail
 pending hearings on illegal entry and sedition charges. After Shih's release on bail,
 the prosecutor for the High Court formally dropped the arrest order against him,
 making the end of Taiwan's four-decade-long "wanted list" of sedition suspects. The
 High Court prosecutor held an investigative hearing December 2 to determine
 
 
 625
 whether Shih violated sedition laws by advocating overthrowing the government by
 means of violence or threats. The prosecutor's investigation was continuing at year'
 end. Charges involving illegal entry as well as document forgery (for falsifying a
 passport) were also still pending at the district court against independence activist
 George Chang. In addition, the entrance of a number of foreign supporters of the
 Taiwan opposition remains restricted.
 Except for military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom of internal
 travel. An exit permit is required for travel abroad and may be refused for a number
 of reasons, including failure to complete compulsory military service. Entry permits
 for Taiwan passport holders residing overseas may also be refused. Reasons for
 entry and exit refusals must be given, however, and appeals may be made to a spe-
 cial board. In September new measures guaranteed that Taiwan passport holders
 who normally reside abroad may return and regain their household registrations,
 which are required if they wish to be candidates in elections. Nonresident Taiwan
 citizens, however, are usually issued "overseas Chinese" passports and require entry
 permits to travel to Taiwan.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Taiwan has made fundamental, rapid progress in moving away from its authori-
 tarian political system to a more pluralistic one. The KMT, which established itself
 in Taiwan after the Japanese surrender in 1945, remains the ruling party but has
 become increasingly factionalized. A group of KMT legislators split offin August to
 set up a new opposition party, the Chinese New Party (CNP). In addition, the DPP,
 having won one-third of the seats in the 1992 LY elections, became a stronger oppo-
 sition power.
 Reflecting their constitutional claim to be the government of all of China, the au-
 thorities maintain not only provincial and local government systems but also an
 array of central-level political bodies generally identical to those found on the main-
 land before 1949. In the past, centers of power on Taiwan have been the Presidency,
 the EY, the military and security apparatus, and the KMT Central Standing Com-
 mittee. Currently, the Presidency, the EY, and the LY appear to have the most
 power.
 Both the President and Vice-President have been elected by the National Assem-
 bly (NA), although a movement toward direct election is under way. The Premier
 is appointed b;y the President with the approval of the LY. The NA has jurisdiction
 over constitutional revisions and meets in regular session only once every 4 years,
 although it holds extraordinary sessions in most years. The elections of a new NA
 and LY in 1991 and 1992, respectively, created institutions broadly representative
 of the island's population. There had been no general elections to these two bodies
 since before the 1949 KMT retreat to Taiwan.
 The LY elected in December 1992 underwent some changes in makeup. With the
 establishment of the CNP and other changes the KMT holds 94 seats, the DPP 52,
 the CNP 7, and the independents and the Chinese Socialist Democratic Party the
 remaining 7. The 1992 LY election was considered generall free and fair, and cases
 involving vote-buying and other irregularities in those elections were resolved in
 1993. By March 31, district prosecutors had rocessed 417 suspected vote-buying
 cases, completed the investigations of 345 of them, and brought formal charges in
 18. After the 1991 NA elections, the prosecutors investigated 250 cases and brought
 formal charges in 50.
 In November local mayor/magistrate elections were conducted in a generally free
 and competitive atmosphere, although opposition members and observers reiterated
 claims of bias by the broadcast media (see section 2.A.). There were some claims
 of election irregularities, but prosecutors found insufficient evidence to invalidate
 any of the resuIts.
 Originally composed overwhelmingly of mainlanders, the KM'rs membership of
 over 2 million is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. (Taiwanese comprise an esti-
 mated 85 percent of Taiwan's population, with post-1949 Chinese mainlanders and
 their offspring comprising most of the remainder.) During the KMT's 14th party
 congress in August, Taiwanese Chairman Lee Teng Hui's supporters capturedcon-
 trol of 80 percent of the leadership positions. The benefits the KMT enjoys from its
 ownership of enterprises, access to public funds, and assistance from administrative
 and security agencies give it a significant advantage, and the line between govern-
 ment and party interests has often been blurred in practice. For example, the Fi-
 nance Minister concurrently heads the KMT's special p arty branch for financial af-
 fairs, and the Chairman of the Vocational Assistance Commission for Retired Serv-
 icemen concurrently heads the KMT's party branch for retired servicemen. However,
 this party-state structure has come under increasing opposition and media criticism.
 
 
 626
 Passage of the civic organizations law in 1989 legalized the formation of addi-
 tional political parties. At present, there are 74 registered parties. The major opposi-
 tion party, the DPP, was formed in 1986 in defiance of martial law; it registered
 as a political party in April 1989. The DPP claimed a membership of 50,000 in Sep-
 tember. The newly-formed Chinese New Party claimed a membership of 30,000 the
 same month. Other opposition parties are much smaller.
 Although women in Taiwan are guaranteed equal rights under the Constitution,
 their role in politics remains limited. At an international conference on women in
 December in Taipei, attended by 360 women leaders from 24 countries, one leading
 Taiwanese woman lawyer said that there were social, traditional, and family bar-
 riers against women entering politics, but not legal ones. Senior regime women lead-
 ers include Minister Without Portfolio and KMT Central Standing Committee (CSC)
 member Shirley Kuo (a former finance minister), KMT Deputy Secretary-General
 and CSC member Jeanne Tchong-Kwei Li, as well as the Director-General of the
 National Health Administration, 15 of 161 LY members, 42 of 325 NA members, 13
 of 77 Provincial Assembly members, 3 of 29 Control Yuan members, 205 of 1,221
 judges, and one major general in the armed forces.
 The opposition parties have faced several disadvantages, among them the authori-
 ties' virtual monopoly of television and radio although this is beginning to change
 (see also Section 2.a.). With the exception ot those whose rights were restored by
 presidential amnesty, persons convicted of sedition also lost their rights to vote, hold
 public office, and work in, manage, or own television or radio stations.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Taiwan's two principal human rights organizations are the establishment-oriented
 Chinese Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the opposition-aligned Taiwan
 Association for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination between the two bodies is lim-
 ited. Despite the authorities' refusal to register it, TAHR continues to operate. As
 noted in Section 2.b both organizations investigate human rights complaints, many
 of which come to public attention through the media and statements by lawmakers
 from all political parties.
 The authorities permit representatives of most international human rights organi-
 zations to visit Taiwan and meet citizens freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The law prohibits sex discrimination, and most discriminatory sections
 of the Legal Code relating to divorce, property, and child custody have been elimi-
 nated in recent years. Taiwan's laws now provide for equitable distribution of con-
 jugal property in divorce cases, although husbands are given management of any
 postdivorce joint properties.
 Enforcement of other sex discrimination laws remains a problem. While labor
 laws provide for maternity leave, employers do not always grant it. Women have
 also complained of being forced to quit jobs because of age or childbearing restric-
 tions, and restrictive quotas reportedly exist within certain ministries. Women often
 receive less frequent promotions and lower salaries than their male counterparts.
 A women's rights movement is active and growing, however, and women's rights
 groups formed an alliance during the 1992 LY elections to promote candidates who
 support their agenda.
 Women active in politics, human rights, and women's organizations single out
 intrafamily violence, especially wife beating, as a serious problem. Social welfare
 groups and municipal governments have established assistance centers to deal with
 this issue, but strong social pressure is sometimes exerted on abused wives to con-
 ceal their abuse to avoid "disgracing" their families. Greater mobility, education,
 and )ob opportunities-there are now 2.4 million women workers in Taiwan-are
 making women more independent, less inclined to tolerate domestic abuse, and in-
 creasingly willing to complain of mistreatment or to seek divorces. Taiwan's divorce
 rate is reportedly the highest in Asia, with one divorce for every 4 marriages in
 1992, although divorced persons still make up less than 2 percent of the population,
 according to the MOI.
 Rape remained a serious problem, and rape victims are socially stigmatized. One
 expert estimated that at least 7,000 rapes occur in Taiwan each year, but only 10
 percent are reported to the police. Under Taiwan law the authorities may not pros-
 ecute for rape; only the victim may file a complaint. because rape trials are public,
 women are reluctant to prosecute their attackers. However, feminist and social wel-
 fare organizations have assisted rape victims, and victims are now more willing to
 come forward and press charges. The Criminal Code establishes the punishment for
 
 
 627
 rape as not less than 5 years' imprisonment, and those convicted are usually sen-
 tenced to 5 to 10 years of imprisonment. The standard practice followed by the MOJ
 is to assign female prosecutors to rape cases and to have the cases heard before fe-
 male judges. One well-publicized case in which a secretary was raped by a busi-
 nessman in the presence of a senior MOJ investigator, brought an especially strong
 reaction from women's groups. The officer was sentenced to 19 months' imprison-
 ment for his actions, and the bureau's director publicly apologized to the victim, her
 family, and the country's women for the officer's inaction.
 Children.-The human rights of children in Taiwan are protected by the Constitu-
 tion and a number of laws and are normally well respected. Children are generally
 not subject to abuse or maltreatment by the authorities. However, a significant
 problem of child prostitution does exist (see below), and there is a minor but grow-
 ing use of child labor (see Section 6.d.).
 An extensive and well-supported compulsory educational system testifies to the
 quantity and quality of support devoted to children by the authorities. The Constitu-
 tion guarantees free primary education to all children from 6 to 12 years of age and
 that those from poor families shall be supplied with books by the government. It
 also provides that "national, provincial, and local governments shall extensively es-
 tablish scholarships to assist students of good scholastic standing and exemplary
 conduct who lack the means to continue their school education." Later laws have
 extended compulsory education through age 15. The Ministry of Education (MOE)
 says that 99.79 percent of children complete elementary school and that 99.54 per-
 cent complete the compulsory intermediate school years. According to the Constitu-
 tion, spending on education shall be no less than 15 percent of the central budget,
 25 prcent of the provincial and special municipality budgets, and 35 percent of the
 county and city budgets. MOE says that 30 percent of its overall budget, approxi-
 mately $1 billion, is spent on compulsory education.
 Child prostitution remains a serious problem in Taiwan. Child prostitutes can be
 as old as 18, but most range from 12 through 16 years of age. The Juvenile Welfare
 Law enables juvenile welfare bodies, prosecutors, and victims to apply to courts for
 termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment of qua iied guardians
 if parents have forced their children into prostitution. In cases where children are
 engaged in prostitution of their own free will, and the parents are incapable of pro-
 viding safe custody, the courts may order competent authorities to provide counsel-
 ing education for not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years.
 However, legal loopholes and cultural barriers remain obstacles to prosecution.
 For example, in cases where both parents have sold a child into prostitution, the
 current law requires the victim to lodge a complaint before prosecution is under-
 taken. In many cases, the child is reluctant or afraid to do so. According to some
 reports, violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion are used by brothel
 owners to prevent girls from escaping. Laws directed against customers and pimps
 of child prostitutes are weak. In October, 59 legislators endorsed a new bill stiffen-
 ing penalties against customers of child prostitutes, although at year's end the bill
 remained in committee.
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group, less than 2 per-
 cent of the total population of 21 million, consists of the 344,000 aborigines, de-
 scendants of the Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan when the first
 Chinese settlers arrived. In general, the civil and political rights of aborigines are
 fully protected under Taiwan laws. Although they face no official discrimination and
 have reserved seats in the National, Legislative, and Provincial Assemblies which
 allow their representatives to participate in the overall political process, the aborig-
 ines have had little impact over the years on major decisions affecting their lands,
 culture, traditions, and the allocation of their natural resources.
 While their impact has been limited, aborigines participate in most levels of the
 political system. In addition to the representatives filling the six seats in the Na-
 tional and Legislative Assemblies and two seats in the Provincial Assembly reserved
 for aborigines-half of each elected by the plains aborigines and half by mountain
 aborigines--other leaders who are aborigines include the Chief of the Ministry of In-
 terior's Aborigine Affairs section, the Deputy Director of the Provincial Aborigine Af-
 fairs Bureau, and the Chairman of the Pingtong County KMT Committee. Some
 barriers are being broken: the election of an aborigine as magistrate in Taitung
 County in November marks the first significant position won by an aborigine in a
 vote of the general public.
 The NA amended the Constitution in 1992 to upgrade the status of aboriginal
 people, protect their right of political participation, and ensure cultural, educational,
 and business development. In addition, the authorities have instituted social pro-
 grams to help them assimilate into the dominant Chinese. society. To pay greater
 attention to the needs of the aborigines, aboriginal affairs sections within social wel-
 
 
 628
 fare departments at various levels of the bureaucracy have been raised to full de-
 partments. As part of its efforts to preserve ethnic identities, the Ministry of Edu-
 cation now includes some aboriginal language classes in primary schools.
 Although aborigines face no official discrimination, they encounter significant cul-
 tural and economic barriers. Aborigines complain that they are prevented from own-
 ing ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities' control. Furthermore,
 they are not allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on legal documents. The
 average income of Taiwan's aborigines remains less than half of the national aver-
 age. Researchers have found alcoholism to be a significant problem among the abo-
 rigines, with alcohol addiction rates exeeding 40 percent among members of 3 of
 the 9 major tribes. One estimate is that 10 percent of the aboriginal population suf-
 fers from chronic alcohol abuse. Earlier in the year, aborigine rights activists pro-
 tested MOI plans to create national parks that include aboriia lands on Orchid
 Island and at Jade Mountain, Taiwan's highest mountain. In October they returned
 to demonstrate at the LY against the impact of tourism on their lands. The sale
 of aboriginal  iris by their parents into prostitution is a serious social problem. Al-
 though aborigines constitute under 2 percent of Taiwan's population, nearly 20 per-
 cent of the child prostitute population consists of aborigines, according to reliable
 statistics.
 Although the aborigines face serious problems, the Aboriginal Rights Promotion
 Association, the only private aborigines support organization, has apparently run
 out of funds. It decided in October to move its office from Taipei county to the home
 of its chairman in Nantou county because of its financial difficulties.
 People with Disabilities.-According to official statistics, there are 230,000 dis-
 abled people in Taiwan. A leading expert in the field estimates, however, that the
 number is somewhere between 400,000 and 500,000 and could be as high as
 700,000, one-third of whom are severely handicapped and receive shelter or nursing
 care from the authorities.
 Taiwan's Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strengthened in 1990. It pro-
 hibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum fines at approximately
 $2,239 for violators. New public buildings, facilities, and transportation equipment
 must be accessible to the handicapped. Existing public buildings are to be brought
 into conformity by 1995. The law requires lar er government and private orgamza-
 tions to hire, respectively, 2 and 1 percent disabled persons. Organizations failing
 to do so are required to pay, for each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly
 salary (aproxaed we  8) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institu-
 tions involved in welfare for the disabled. Specialists note that many organizations
 complain that it is difficult to find qualified disabled workers and prefer to pay the
 fines involved.
 A handicapped legislator states that support for the disabled is limited mostly by
 a lack of bureaucratic support for the allocation of resources. He noted that since
 1990 the Disabled Welfare Fund has accumulated approximately $122 million, but
 it has spent only about $140,000 because of a lack of personnel. As a result, only
 10 percent of the 101,000 severely handicapped students receive special education,
 and education department funding for families to hire tutors directly for the remain-
 ing children is unrealistically low. Although voting rights for the disabled are pro-
 tected, candidates for public office require high school diplomas, and few disabled
 persons receive full high school educations. The provincial government last year
 added 15 people to deal with the problems of the disabled. In addition, in conjunc-
 tion with plans to increase welfare assistance to low-income elderly persons, the
 Cabinet in October also approved granting or increasing monthly allowances to an
 estimated 30,000 low-income disabled persons.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Labors right of association remains seriously limited
 by a number of laws and regulations. Labor unions may draw up their own rules
 and constitutions, but they must submit these to the authorities for review. Unions
 may be dissolved if they do not meet certification requirements or if their activities
 disturb public order. According to official sources, no unions have been dissolved, al-
 though certification has been denied if there were competing unions. In the latter
 cases, the unions were asked to reoncle their differences an d file as a single union.
 Civil servants, teachers, defense industry workers, and administrators acting on be-
 half of employers are prohibited from organizing labor unions. The Labor Union
 Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by their respective membership
 by secret ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes rejected KMT or
 management-endorsed union slates. Some workers have established independent
 unions and federations under other names, such as "friendship organizations" and
 "brotherhood alliances." These groups may register with the MOI as legal civic orga-
 
 
 629
 nizations but not as labor unions; thus they are not protected by the labor union
 law and do not have the right to bargain with their members' employers.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including cities,
 counties, and provinces, may have competing labor confederations, which effectively
 means there can only be one Taiwan-wide labor federation. The Chinese Federation
 of Labor (CFA) is closely associated with the KMT and also is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Taiwan is not a member of the
 International Labor Organization.
 Revisions of the law governing labor disputes, effective June 1988, recognize la-
 bor's right to strike but impose serious restrictions that make legal strikes difficult.
 Before a strike can be called, it must be approved by a majority vote of the full
 membership of the union. The authorities have required their official approval be-
 fore such a meeting can be called. Both labor and management are forbiden to dis-
 rupt the "working order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress.
 Applications for local government arbitration must be made jointly by manage-
 ment and labor. Stiff penalties may be levied should no-strike/no-retaliation clauses
 be violated, but employers have sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked
 out workers without any legal action being taken against them. One county, how-
 ever, has been active in responding to violations. During a July 1992 strike, the
 Keelung Bus Company locked out workers and closed down all bus routes, even
 though the Taipei county government had announced that the dispute had entered
 the arbitration stage. The county frned the company approximately $12,300, but
 higher authorities overturned the fine and returned the case to the county for recon-
 sideration. The county reinstated the fine, and the company has again appealed.
 The drive for independent labor unions lost momentum in recent years due to
 generally higher wages, tougher tactics on the part of employers, the small scale
 and poor organization of most labor unions, and prosecution of labor activists by the
 authorities in the past; none was charged during 1993. For example, labor activist
 En Kun-Chan was sentenced to 22 months' imprisonment in 1992 for allegedly vio-
 lating the Parade and Assembly Law and with interference with official functions
 for his part in a protest against two footwear companies which refused to provide
 back pay and severance pay after the firms were closed.
 In addition, the movement of a number of labor-intensive factories overseas and
 the importation of foreign workers has made the employment situation in Taiwan
 increasingly competitive, reducing labor activism to a minimum. There were three
 major strikes in 1989 and two in 1992, but only one occurred in 1993, when the
 staff of Taipei's Grand Hotel in October protested plans to lay off more than 100
 employees. However, an estimated 2,000 workers, representing more than 140 inde-
 pendent labor organizations demonstrated at the LY on October 5 and presented a
 petition, signed by more than 15,000 workers, demanding their own revisions to the
 Labor Standards Law to improve pay and working conditions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-As of June 1993, some 3.1
 million workers, approximately 35 percent of Taiwan a work force, belonged to 3,656
 officially registered labor unions. The workers fall into two categories: 660,000 work
 in the manufacturing industry; 2.45 million are members of professional or crafts
 unions, generally working in small or family units. The high number of union mem-
 bers among professional and crafts workers is primarily a result of the eligibility
 of labor union members for health insurance. Under the labor union law, employers
 may not refuse employment to, dismiss, or otherwise unfairly treat workers because
 they are union members. In practice, however, union leaders have sometimes been
 dismissed without reasonable cause by employers, and authorities have failed to en-
 force this section of the law.
 Labor laws governing union activities apply equally within export processing
 zones (EPZ's). Labor organizing practices are the same in EPZ's. EPZ firms are sub-
 ject to the same labor laws as firms on the outside, allow organized unions, and fol-
 low normal practices in concluding collective bargaining agreements with their
 unions.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the Collective Agreements Law but is
 not mandatory. As of June 1993, 294 formal collective agreements were in force,
 about the same number as in 1991. Since such agreements are made only in large-
 scale enterprises, and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this cat-
 egory, the proportion of workers covered remains small. Wages are set generally by
 employers in accordance with market conditions. Legal restrictions on the right to
 strike and provisions for involuntary mediation of labor/management disputes when
 the authorities deem the dispute to be sufficiently serious or to involve "unfair prac-
 tices" seriously weaken collective bargaining. Most collective actions by workers con-
 sist of such illegal actions as work stoppages and mass leave taking.
 
 
 630
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Under the Labor Standards Law,
 forced or compulsory labor is prohibited. Violation of the law is punishable by a
 maximum jail sentence of 5 years. Except for allegations concerning prostitution
 (see Section 5), there were no reports of forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Standards Law stipu-
 lates that the minimum age for employment is 15 (i.e., after compulsory education
 ends), and interaction between this law and a compulsory education law effectively
 keeps child labor at a very low level. As of May 1993, 9,000 child workers between
 the ages of 15 and 16 were hired by manufacturing industries, and some labor ex-
 perts believe that employment of younger children may slowly be increasing as the
 cost of living rises and as managers seek cheaper sources of labor. Minimum age
 laws are enrorced by county and city labor bureaus; in general they lack the re-
 sources necessary to prevent violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Taiwan Labor Standards Law was enacted
 in 1984 to provide minimum labor standards. According to the Council of Labor Af-
 fairs (CLA) in June 1993 the law covered 3.52 million of Taiwan's 5.97 million paid
 workers. (The CIA carries out the functions of a labor ministry, but it does not
 enjoy Cabinet rank.) The law has enjoyed only limited success in several areas, and
 many observers believe that it and other labor laws should be strengthened and ex-
 tended to cover additional workers. By law the workweek is limited to 48 hours (8
 hours per day, 6 days per week), with certain provisions for overtime.
 Taiwan's current minimum wage, put into force after Cabinet approval in August,
 is approximately $500 (NT 13,350) per month. There is general agreement that the
 legly established minimum wage is less than that needed to assure a decent
 standard of living; however, the average manufacturing wage is more than double
 the legal minimum wage and that for service industry employees is 10 percent high.
 er still. In addition most large firms provide their employees with allowances for
 transportation, meals, housing, and other benefits which can amount to another 60
 to 80 percent of base salary.
 The 1991 Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to include work-
 ers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and appeared to strengthen pen-
 alties for safety violations, but it still provides only minimum standards for working
 conditions and health and safety precautions. According to Article 13 of the Occupa-
 tional Safety and Health Law, workers have the legal right to remove themselves
 from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment. Some
 critics see the law as a step backwards, noting for example that general contractors
 are not responsible for the safety of workers of subcontractors under the revised
 law. In Taipei county in the last 3 years, the leading cause of accidental death has
 been construction accidents (approximately 80 per year) compared to approximately
 70 per year for traffic accidents. However, rising labor consciousness andcontinuing
 labor shortages have resulted in improvements in working conditions.
 The CIA does not effectively enforce many workplace laws and regulations, pri-
 marily because it employs too few inspectors. As of June 1993, there were 283 in-
 spectors for approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational Safety
 and Health Law, an increase of only 16 inspectors compared to the year before. Be-
 cause the new law expanded coverage to include more enterprises, the inspection
 rate has declined. Since most enterprises are small, family-owned operations em-
 ploying relatives who will not report violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage,
 anKdsafety sections of various labor laws is hard to document but is thought to be
 minimal. Nonetheless, Taiwan's occupational injury rate has declined steadily from
 0.82 percent in 1980 to 0.39 percent in 1991 and to 0.355 percent in 1992, according
 to CIA statistics.
 Because of Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there was a legal influx of foreign work-
 ers in 1993. Foreign workers receive the same protection under labor legislation as
 local workers.
 Authorities say illegal workers are entitled to the same work conditions as native
 workers, but in many cases illegal foreign workers are given board and lodging but
 no medical coverage, accident insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by local workers.
 Conditions in many small and medium-sized factories that employ illegal labor are
 poor, with old and poorly maintained equipment resulting in the potential for a high
 rate of industrial accidents. The accident numbers, however, remain low, according
 to CLA and Manila Economic and Cultural Office (MECO) statistics. Illegal workers
 remain vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation of passports, imposition of
 involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working hours without over-
 time pay.
 Various church groups in the Philippines in 1992 denounced the poor working
 conditions of Filipinos employed on board Taiwan fishing vessels, as well as squalid
 conditions found on offshore Taiwan floating "hotels" for fishing crews on Taiwan
 
 
 631
 fishing boats. MECO says the use of offshore "hotels" has ended. The church groups
 also noted that a large number of Filipino fishermen have been reported as missing
 at sea.
