TAIWAN (Republic of China)
The 1988 report on Taiwan (the Repubhc of China) is comprehensive, generally accurate, and addresses certain weaknesses that we noted in the 1987 report. In one important correction of the 1987 report, it explicitly recognizes that citizens do not have the ability to change their government because the majority of the parliamentary seats are held by "representatives of mainland China" elected there in 1947-48. There are several sections, however, that need to be strengthened, including the account of the treatment of ex-prisoners and the section on freedom of the press.
This year's report, like last year's, fails adequately to address the restrictions on the political rights and employment opportimities of former poUtical prisoners. These restrictions deny the right to vote, the right to run for office, and the r^t to practice specified professions. The restrictions bar several major opposition figures from seeking elective office, including the current and immediate past chairs of the Democratic Progressive Party.
The section on freedom of assembly omits a key detail. While it correctly notes that the Assembly and March Law bans demonstrations that violate the constitution or advocate communism or independence, it fails to mention that the law makes the organizers of a demonstration responsible for the conduct of the participants. The government has repeatedly brought charges against rally leaders under this provision, including those involved in the March 29 demonstration in favor of a general parliamentary election and the May 20 farmers' rights demonstration.
The discussion of freedom of the press is the weakest section of the report. Its conclusion that "in practice, outright censorship of newspapers and m^azines appears to have ended" is simply unwarranted. While accurately observing that certain licensing restrictions have been eased, the report fails to note that the government retains broad authority to deny and suspend licenses.
183
Critique
A number of foreign publications were censored in 1988, and the opposition magazine Freedom Era Weekly had its license suspended 12 times during the year. (The magazine operates under 17 different licenses and has continued to publish even though each suspension is for a period of one year.) The magazine had discussed such sensitive topics as independence for Taiwan and the role of the military in politics.
The military has also used libel laws as a means of censorship. Three army generals brought separate suits in 1988 against the publisher of Freedom Era Weekly under circumstances resembling politically motivated libel suits of past years. Criminal charges have also been used to restrict freedom of expression; a journalist, Chen Wei-tu, was charged with sedition in late 1988 for writing about a possible military coup.
As in the past, the report states that the authorities generally respect the right to practice reli^on. In fact, the government has banned some religious groups, such as the Unification Church and certain Buddhist sects, and it has denied the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan the right to print Bibles in romanized Taiwanese script.
184
