 TAIWAN
 Taiwan has a constitutional system headed by President Lee Teng-hu, who was
 elected by the National Assembly (NA) in 1990. President Lee, who is also the
 Chairman of the Nationalist Party (KMT), appoints the Executive Yuan (EY), or
 Cabinet, which has been headed since February 1993 by Premier Lien Chan. The
 Legislative Yuan (LY) approves the selection of the Premier. Members of the NA
 andLY were chosen in free and fair elections in 1991 and 1992, respectively. The
 
 
 574
 KMT remains the country's dominant political force, but two opposition parties also
 command considerable public support.
 During 1994 Taiwan made significant progress in its transition to a democratic,
 multiparty political system-a process which began with the lifting of martial law
 in 1987-by holding generally free and fair popular elections for three previously ap-
 pointed positions, the governor of Taiwan province and the mayors of the cities of
 Taipei and Kaohsiung, and by passing constitutional amendments that provide for
 the direct election of both the President and Vice President. The first direct presi-
 dential election is scheduled for 1996.
 The Ministries of Interior (MOI), Justice (MOJ), and National Defense (MND) are
 responsible for law enforcement relating to internal security. The National Police
 Administration (NPA) of the Ministry of Interior, the NPA's Criminal Investigation
 Bureau (CIB), and the Ministry of Justice Investigation Bureau (MJIB) carry out
 their law enforcement functions in accordance with laws designed to respect and
 safeguard individual human rights. Reports of occasional abuses by these agencies,
 however, continue to exist. The National Security Bureau and military police units
 also play a limited law enforcement role.
 Taiwan has a dynamic, free market economy, although state and party-run enter-
 prises dominate some major sectors, including finance, transportation, utilities
 shipbuilding, steel, telecommunications, and petrochemicals. The economy continued
 its shift toward the service sector and capital and technology-intensive industries,
 due to shortages of unskilled labor and high domestic labor and land costs.
 Although the overall human rights environment improved, there continued to be
 human rights abuses. These included a few alleged cases of extrajudicial killings
 and torture by the security forces, infringements on internationally accepted stand-
 ards of due process, restrictions on the freedoms of press and assembly, child pros-
 titution and abuse, discrimination and violence against women, restrictions on work-
 ers' freedom of association, and limitations on workers' freedom to strike.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. In October the family of a Tainan prisoner who died in August accused the
 prison staff of beating the prisoner to death and charged that the authorities were
 conspiring to cover up the circumstances. This case was still under investigation at
 years end. In September the family of a soldier in Kaohsiung claimed that excessive
 exercise he was ordered to undertake as a form of punishment caused his death.
 A legislator raised this incident in an emergency interpellation to the Ministry of
 National Defense, but it remained unresolved at year's end.
 Several cases of extrajudicial killing from 1993 were resolved. In January a mili-
 tary court sentenced a lieutenant and four sergeants to prison terms ranging from
 18 months to 12 years for torturing to death Chen Shih-Wei in July 1993 at a mili-
 tary reformatory on Green Island. In March the Taichung district court sentenced
 the deputy chief of Taichung citys third police precinct to 10 years in prison for the
 torture death of a rape suspect in August 1993; four other policemen were acquitted
 for lack of evidence.
 In October the Taipei Shihlin district court ruled that the death of Wang Kang-
 Lu, Secretary General of the World United Formosans for Independence, in an Octo-
 ber 1993 Taipei car crash was an accident rather than a "political assassination"
 as charged by his family and supporters. The driver of the vehicle which struck the
 taxi in which Mr. Wang was riding and the taxi driver were both sentenced topris-
 on, for 20 months and 8 months respectively, for negligence resulting in death. Also
 in October, the Taipei district court sentenced four wardens at the Taipei detention
 center to from 14 to 30 months in prison for torturing a homicide suspect in Septem-
 ber 1993. Although the suspect later died, the judge ruled that the death resulted
 from a preexisting physical condition rather than from torture.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were credible reports that police occasionally physically abused persons in
 their custody. In addition to claims that a prisoner was beaten to death in Tainan
 (see Section L.a.), a deaf-mute university student indicated at a press conference in
 August that Taoyuan county police tortured him because he was a suspect in the
 murder of a female college student.
 The authorities did make efforts to investigate, prosecute, and punish officials re-
 sponsible for torture and other mistreatment. Although the basic responsibility for
 investigating mistreatment lies with prosecutors, the Control Yuan (CY), an equal
 government branch which investigates official misconduct, investigated several such
 
 
 575
 
 cases during the year. In one major case in August, the CY criticized the Taipei city
 police for arresting under "emergency procedures" three young men suspected of in-
 volvement in a 1988 kidnaping and murder case, holding them for arraignment for
 24 hours without notifying their relatives and using violence and threats among
 other interrogation tactics. The CY impeached four Taipei city policemen for using
 "violence, threats, temptation, and cheating" while interrogating one of the suspects
 and three superior officers for allowing the misconduct. The case was referred to the
 Judicial Yuan (JY), the equal brancht of government comprising the national judicial
 system, for decision and remained under review at year's end.
 While the 1993 torture death of a suspect in Taichung resulted in the conviction
 of the offending policeman (see Section La.), two other cases of police torture of sus-
 pects in 1993 remained under investigation without indictments being issued. How-
 ever, progress was made in dealing with an earlier case. The Taichung district pros-
 ecutor indicted the former criminal investigation team leader from Taichung coun-
 ty's Fengyuan police subbureau for torturing four suspects in a 1990 murder case;
 the suspects were later found not guilty. In April the Judicial Yuan's Committee on
 the Discipline of Public Functionaries ordered the former chief of the subbureau sus-
 pended from duty for 1 year and the former chief of the subbureau's criminal inves-
 tigation section discharged from public service without possibility of being rehired
 for 2 years for their failure to prevent the torture.
 The law allows suspects to have attorneys present during interrogations, pri-
 marily to ensure that abuse does not take place. The Ministry of Justice (MOJ)
 claims that each interrogation is recorded and that all allegations of mistreatment
 are investigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur in
 local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and when attorneys are
 generally not present. Detainees who are physically abused have the right to sue
 the police for torture, and confessions obtained through torture are inadmissible in
 court proceedings. No such suits were reported during 1994.
 Although corporal punishment is forbidden under military law, there continued to
 be occasional reports of physical abuse of military personnel. In addition to the case
 involving possible excessive punishment resulting in a soldier's death in Kaohsiung
 (see Section l.a.), newspapers reported the cases of an air force member in Taichung
 beaten by superiors for going outside the unit's chain of command and a Taouan
 air force conscript who suffered maltreatment and harassment during training
 which resulted in his mental breakdown. Although the Ministry of National Defense
 denied the accuracy of both stories, it noted that a number of management steps
 had been taken to reduce the problem of abuse in the military, including setting up
 centers within all military units to hear complaints about mistreatment.
 Some international human rights organizations have criticized the continuous
 shackling for months of prisoners awaiting executions and the "harvesting" of or-
 gans from executed prisoners for transplants. MOJ officials claim that shackles are
 necessary because such prisoners are considered to be dangerous and the prisons
 are not sufficiently secure. The MOJ states that the requirement for both a prisoner
 and his family to consent to organ donations reduces the likelihood of donations
 being forced.
 Prison overcrowding at Taiwan's 43 detention centers remained a problem despite
 some expansion of existing facilities and amendment of the Criminal Code in Janu-
 ary to allow prisoners to be paroled after serving one-third, rather than one-half,
 of their sentences. The more than 50,000 inmates in detention exceed the facilities'
 maximum capacity by 15,000. The Justice Minister blamed overcrowding for an Oc-
 tober riot at ualien prison which left 20 injured; the prison, reportedly designed
 for 1,151 inmates, houses 2,000. According to the MOJ, the number of prisoners has
 grown rapidly in recent years because of increased arrests of narcotics law violators
 who now make up 30 percent of the overall inmate population. The MOJ is setting
 up drug treatment facilities to reduce the number of addicts in the prison popu-
 lation.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal      ants continued to be poor. The
 Entry and Exit Bureau admitted that the thredtention camps are overcrowded
 but blamed mainland Chinese authorities for delays in accepting the timely repatri-
 ation of illegal immigrants. Mainland detainees spent an average of 113 days in de.
 tention. An expansion project for the centers is under way.
 In July a group of 12 black inmates almost all from African countries, at the San
 Haia illegal aliens detention center claimed that 6 policemen had beaten and tor-
 tured a black inmate the previous month. They also charged the camp's police with
 racial discrimination and ill-treatment of the black inmates. The National Police Ad-
 ministration (NPA) claims there is no discrimination against any detainee because
 of religion, race, color, or language.
 
 
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Police may legally arrest without a war-
 rant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be imprisonment of 5 years or more and may question persons without a formal
 summons. The authorities must within 24 hours ifter detention, give written notice
 to the detainee, or a designated relative or friend, stating the reason for the arrest
 or questioning. Indicted persons may be released on bail at judicial discretion.
 The Criminal Procedure Code (CPC) specifies that the authorities may detain a
 suspect for up to 2 months during the investigative phase before filing a formal in-
 dictment. The prosecutor's office may extend the investigative detention for one ad-
 ditional 2-month period. A suspect may be held for up to 3 months during trial pro-
 ceedings and the court may extend the trial detention for two additional 3-month
 periods. he authorities generally have followed these procedures, and trials usually
 take place within 3 months of indictment.
 The authorities generally respect a detainee's request to have a lawyer present
 during the investigation phase, but defense lawyers continue to complain that peo-
 ple often are not advised of their right to have legal representation during police
 interrogation. In addition, there is no legal requirement that indigent people b pro-
 vided with counsel during police interrogation, although such counsel is provided
 during trials.
 A continuing departure from international standards of due process is the secret
 witness system under the "Antihodlum" Law. This system allows police to conduct
 "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums" and use the testimony of unidentified informants
 in detaining the suspects. Lawyers for the alleged hoodlums are not permitted to
 cross-examine these informants. While defense attorneys have been given the right
 to examine documentary evidence, critics charge that evidence in these cases is
 often weak or fabricated. Although the testimony of the secret witnesses is included
 under the criminal statutes for perjury, critics claim that the detainees often lack
 the means to prove peju.
 The Judicial Yuan (JY)aims that the secret witness system is required to wipe
 out hoodlums and maintain social order and security. The system is not used in nor-
 mal criminal procedures; "antihoodum" punishments are "administrative proce-
 dures." Based on evidence provided by the police, a specialized court determines
 whether or not an accused hoodlum should receive reformatory education. This deci-
 sion may be appealed by the accused to a higher court. Courts may not determine
 the length of reformatory education; reformatory authorities make this decision
 based on the behavior of the detainee. The usual term is 3 to 6 months for a first
 offense, and detention of repeat offenders may be extended for up to 3 years.
 Critics say that these specialized courts simply rubber-stamp police decisions, and
 while virtually all detainees appeal their sentences, most remain unchanged. Ac-
 cording to JY statistics, of the 1,763 hoodlum cases referred to the special courts
 in 1993, 73 percent (1,287) were determined to warrant reformatory education.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Judicial Yuan (JY) is one of the five equal
 branches of Taiwan's political system. It consists of a President, a Vice President,
 and a 16-member Council of Grand Justices. It interprets the Constitution as well
 as laws and ordinances. Subordinate JY organs include the Supreme Court, high
 courts, district courts, the Administrative Court, and the Committee on the Dis-
 cipline of Public Functionaries. The Constitution provides for equality before the
 law. Judges, rather than juries, decide trials.
 All judges are appointed by, and responsible to, the JY. Although some in the past
 have characterized the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to polit-
 ical and personal pressure, most observers believe the judiciary now is generally
 independent and impartial. The only public criticism in 1994 came from illegal radio
 station owner Hsu Jung-Chi who claimed his convictions for inciting illegal dem-
 onstrations were a form of political persecution (see Sections 2.a. and 2.b.). To
 strengthen judicial autonomy, under its new president, Shih Chi-yang, the JY began
 a 1-year trial reform program in November which includes having each district's
 presiding judge elected by the district judges rather than appointed from above.
 The law provides for the right of fair public trial, and this is generally respected
 in practice. Taiwan's legal system does not provide for trial by jury. In a typical
 court case, parties and witnesses are interrogated by a single judge but not directly
 by a defense attorney or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to
 consider evidence a party wishes to submit if the judge considers it irrelevant; re-
 fusal to hear evidence can be a factor in an appeal. Trials are public, but attendance
 at trials involving juveniles or potentially sensitive issues which might attract
 crowds may require court permission.
 A defendant as     e right to an attorney. If the defendant is suspected of commit-
 ting a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment, or if the de-
 fendant is disabled or elderry, the judge may assign an attorney. Criminal law ape-
 
 
 577
 cifically provides the defendant with protection from self-incrimination. Persons con-
 victed in cases in which the sentence exceeds 3 years have the right to appeal to
 the high court and to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court automatically reviews
 life imprisonment and death sentences.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Pritn.y Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and sections of the criminal and civil codes contain provisions for pri-
 vacy. The authorities generally do not make warrantless searches, which were com-
 mon before the liting of martial law. A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge,
 must be obtained before a search, except when incidental to arrest. Critics, however,
 claim that the 'incidental to arrest" provision is not only unconstitutional but often
 interpreted broadly by plice to jus  searches of locations other than actual sites
 of arrests. Moreover, police continue to search cars routinely at roadblocks.
 According to the National Police Administration, warrantless searches are allowed
 only in specialized circumstances, such as to arrest an escapee or if facts indicate
 a person is in the process of committing a crime and the circumstances are urgent.
 In any such case, the police must ffieareport with the prosecutor or court within
 24 hours. Evidence        P olld without a warrant, according to regulations, is not ex-
 cluded from introduction during a trial; however, a policeman who carries out an
 illegal search can be sued for illegal entry and sentenced up to 1 year's imprison-
 ment.
 Although in the past allegations were made that police and security agencies
 interfere with the right to privacy through such means as surveillance and intercep-
 tion of correspndence and telephone calls, there were no reports of such inter-
 ference for political purposes in 1994. According to EY regulations, judicial and se-
 curity authorities may fiea writtn request to a prosecutor's office to monitor tele-
 phone calls to collect evidence against a suspect involved in a major crime.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liblerties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech,
 teaching, writing, and publication, but some restrictions exist in practice, especially
 in relatson to Taiwan's electronic media. During the year, the authorities continued
 themeasured steps, beu   in 1993, to liberalize the previously tight control by the
 authorities and the KMT over broadcast television andradio.
 In August the Office of the High Court Prosecutor formally dropped sedition
 charges against Shih Ming, the las of the major dissident leaders, who had re-
 turned to Taiwan illegally in 1993 after more than 40 yearse exile in Japan. The
 prosecutor determined that Mr. Shih had not tried to overthrow the Taiwan authori-
 ties with threats or violent acts (see also Section 2.d). The dropping of sedition
 charges against Mr. Shih officially confirmed the end of Taiwan's four-decade-long
 "wanted list" of sedition suspects.
 In 1992 the Taiwan authorities revised sedition statutes to eliminate provisions
 outlawing 'conspiracy" to commit sedition and to limit the purview of the Sedition
 Law to cases involving violence or threats. After the revision, the authorities re-
 leased all prisoners convicted on sedition charges and dropped pending sedition
 cases.
 Also in 1992, the Taiwan authorities revised the National Security Law (NSL),
 removing prohibitions on 'actions against the Constitution." However, the NSL-
 and related statutes such as the Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and As-
 sembly Law-still retain prohibitions against advocating communism or espousing
 the division of national territory.
 Taiwan has a vigorous and active free press despite the Publications Law which
 empowers the police to seize or ban printed material that is seditious, treasonous,
 sacrilegious, interferes with the lawful exercise of public functions, or violates public
 order or morals. There were no reports of censorship of the print media during the
 year. Nor were there seizures of materials on political grounds, although the police
 conducted raids to seize pornographic materials.
 In February the Government Information Office (GIO) reiterated that any publica-
 tions imported from mainland China should be sent to the GIO Publications Depart-
 ment for screening before sale or publication in Taiwan. The GIO bans the importa-
 tion of publications which advocate communism or United Front organizations, en-
 danger public order or good morals, or violate regulations or laws. However, few
 local publishing companies observe this regulation. The Department estimated that
 10,000 copies of mainland publications are imported annually.
 L a well-publicized libel case, four professors found guilty in 1993 for leading a
 boycott against a newspaper they alleged slanted its reporting in favor of mainland
 China and against Taiwan were successful in their appeal. In August the high court
 reversed the lower court verdict and affirmed the defen   right to criticize the
 
 
 578
 media. The high court, however, rejected a libel suit filed by one of the defendants
 against the newspaper involved.
 The KMT, the Taiwan provincial government, and the military continue to oper-
 ate the three island-wide broadcast television stations and to be their largest share-
 holders. The GIO claims that these stations are really civilian businesses since the
 authorities control less than half of their stock shares. The GIO notes that their pro-
 gramming is guided by the market rather than the GIO or the KMT and that they
 rely on revenues from commercials and services rather than public funds. Critics,
 notably the two principal opposition parties, claim that coverage on the three broad-
 cast television stations has en slanted to favor the KMT viewpoint and that re-
 ports on sensitive subjects, such as oppoition demonstrations, have been similarly
 biased. A breakthrough occurred in Odtober when a leading newspaper and one of
 the television channels sponsored a live debate among the three Taipei mayoralty
 candidates-Taiwan's first televised debate among election candidates.
 More than three-fourths of Taiwan's radio frequencies have been held by the au-
 thorities, the KMT, and other noncommercial entities. In the past, the Taiwan au-
 thorities claimed only 12 of the 33 radio stations legally operating were owned by
 military and civil agencies, but they counted among ostensibly 'private" stations
 such entities as the KMT-controlled Broadcasting Corporation of China.
 Past refusals by the authorities to approve requests to establish new radio and
 television stations led to the establishment of a number of illegal underground cable
 television and radio stations. Many of these stations broadcast in the Taiwanese dia-
 lect rather than in Mandarin and reflect the views of or support for the opposition
 Democratic Progressive Party (DPP).
 In 1993 the authorities began a multiyear process to loosen controls on television.
 The LY passed a Cable Television Law dividing the island into 51 districts, each
 of which is allowed up to five local cable television companies. By the end of 1993,
 more than 600 previously illegal cable television operations had registered with the
 GIO to legalize their operations under interim cable television re.ulations, which
 apply until the Cable Television Law takes full effect. The authorities are also set-
 ting up a new public television network to begin operation in 1995. In addition, two
 more broadcast television frequencies are being made available.
 Also in 1993, the GIO began a five-stage process to open radio frequencies. In the
 first two stages, the GIO approved licenses for 24 20-kilometer-range FM stations;
 included were 6 pro-DPP stations, 3 of which were already operating illegally.
 Critics charge that the limited broadcast ranges of the new television and radio
 stations do not constitute a counterweight to the authorities' monopoly on island-
 wide broadcasting. Some critics have also been concerned that the IMT, with its
 vast economic resources, or large corporations will try to control these new "invest-
 ment arenas."
 The authorities' control of the media continued to be a volatile issue. On July 30,
 GIO staff members and 6,719 policemen raided 14 underground pro-DPP radio sta-
 tions across the island for operating illegally- included was the antiestablishment
 "Voice of Taiwan" (VOT) in suburban Taipei. he underground radio supporters and
 the DPP claimed that the raids infringed on freedom of the press and the people's
 right to know, and were designed to muzzle the opposition on the eve of sensitive
 negotiations between Taiwan and mainland China as well as stifle debate prior to
 the December elections.
 In an August 1 demonstration in Taipei protesting the raids, hundreds of dem-
 onstrators attacked the GIO headquarters and other public and KMT buildings.
 More than 30 demonstrators and police were injured. Reporters and cameramen
 were targeted for attack by the demonstrators who feared being identified from
 news films. Twelve demonstrators were indicted for violations of the Parade and As-
 sembly Law (see also Section 2.b.), interfering with public functions, and causing
 bodily harm; four were sentenced to from 3 to 5 months in prison (a sentence which
 may be converted to a fine). Charges against the others were dropped for lack of
 evidence. In a separate incident a few  ys later, a GIO staff member involved in
 the July 30 raids was stabbed and severely injured on his way to work. Four sus-
 pects were indicted in December upon completion of the investigation into the inci-
 dent and face trial. The violence continued into October when six to eight persons
 broke into the VOT studios and used baseball bats to smash broadcasting equip-
 ment and beat staff members. The VOT claimed the attack was carried out by plain-
 clothes policemen, a charge which was never substantiated.
 In response, GIO Director General Jason Hu tried to encourage underground sta-
 tions to become legal by announcing in August that the GIO would lower the mini-
 mum capitalization costs required for 99 new 5-kilometer-range community radio
 stations from approximately $2 million to $40,000 and accelerate the pace of the li-
 censing process for these stations. In December the GIO approved 46 of 174 applica-
 
 
 579
 tions for the community radio stations, including 10 from already operating illegal
 stations.
 Among other restrictions regulating the media are those precluding people pre-
 viously convicted of sedition from owning, managing, or wonking in television and
 radio stations. However, major opposition leaders, many of whom were convicted of
 sedition after the December 1979 Kaohsiung incident, are not affected because their
 rights were restored through presidential amne3ties.
 The authorities lifted controls on the percentage of time television and radio sta-
 tions could broadcast in dialects in 1993. Although the Taiwanese dialect is the
 mother tongue of most of the island's inhabitants, the authorities had previously re-
 quired that 80 percent of broadcasting be in Mandarin. Broadcasting is now done
 in Mandarin, Taiwanese, Hakka (television and radio), and aboriginal dialects (radio
 only).
 There a ppear to be few restrictions on academic freedom. The expression of dis-
 senting political views is common. However, school authorities still sometimes pres-
 sure schoolteachers to discourage students from joining demonstrations.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, but the Taiwan authorities restrict these
 rights somewhat in practice. The Civic Organization Law requires all civic organiza-
 tions to register, however, the authorities have refused to approve registration of
 some groups--such as the Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR), the Tai-
 wan Association of University Professors, and the Taiwan Environmental Protection
 Alliance--which use the word "Taiwan" in their titles (a usage which is regarded
 by the authorities as promoting Taiwan independence). These groups, however, con-
 tinue to operate.
 The Parade and Assembly (P&A) Law permits peaceful demonstrations as long as
 they do not promote communism or advocate Taiwan's separation from mainland
 China and are approved in advance by the authorities. The 1992 amendments to
 the law increased penalties for violating orders to disperse. Demonstration organiz-
 ers can be prosecuted and fined for harm to public order, interference with public
 flmctionaries (usually the police), assembly without a permit, or diverging from offi-
 cially authorized routes. Demonstrators are also liable for "insults or slander" of the
 authorities.
 Critics question the need for all assemblies to apply for advance permits; in Au-
 gust, groups demonstrating peacefully at the LY were dispersed under P&A law pro-
 visions because they lacked permits. In general, the authorities disperse such gath-
 erings rather than prosecute peaceful P&A Law violators. Those prosecuted under
 the P&A Law in 1994 included the group indicted for participating in the violent
 August 1 demonstration in Taipei (see Section 2.a.) and another 22 people indicted
 for participating in the brawling which prevented the Chinese New Party from hold-
 ing a September 25 rally in Kaohsiung (see Section 3). In addition, VOT radio owner
 Hsu Jung-Chi was sentenced in October twice for violating the P&A law. He re-
 ceived 8 months' imprisonment for inciting a February demonstration by taxi driv-
 ers in front of the Ministry of Finance to protest the high cost of mandatory insur-
 ance and was sentenced to a further 5 months for inciting another demonstration
 in April to protest the razing of the KMT headquarters building. Hsu remains free
 on b while appealing these sentences. Charges against Hsu are also pending for
 organizing the August 1 demonstration in Taipei.
 A 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the BY the power
 to dissolve political parties. This power now resides in the Constitutional Court,
 composed of members of the Judiciarys Council of Grand Justices. Grounds for dis-
 solution include objectives or actions which are deemed to jeopardize the existence
 of the "Republic of China." The Constitutional Court heard no cases in 1994.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Taiwan authorities respect this right in practice. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The authorities do not restrict freedom of internal travel except for a
 few military and other restricted areas. Foreign travel by Taiwan passport holders
 resident on the island requires an exit permit. Nonresident Taiwan passport holders
 are usually issued 'overseas Chinese" passports and require entry permits to travel
 to Taiwan. According to 1992 revisions to the National Security Law (NSL), entry
 permits may be refused only if there are facts sufficient to create a strong suspicion
 that a person is engaged in terrorism or violence. Reasons for entry and exit refus-
 als must be given, and appeals may be made to a special board. No exit or entry
 permit refusals were reported during 1994.
 
 
 580
 In 1993 new measures guaranteed that holders of Taiwan passports who normally
 reside abroad may return and regain their household registration, a document re-
 quired for participation as a candidate in an election.
 In late 1993, the Ministry of Interior (MOI) announced that the "blacklist prob-
 lem,* the listing of overseas dissidents excluded from returning to Taiwan, no longer
 existed. However, a few foreign supporters of the Taiwan opposition claim that their
 entrance remains restricted.
 Although dissident leader Ming Shih (see Section 2.a.) returned to Japan, the Tai-
 pei district prosecutor's office indicted him in October on charges of violating the
 SL and forgery because he had entered Taiwan with an altered passport. Charges
 involving illegal entry as well as document forgery were also still pending at the
 district court against independence activist George Chang.
 While the 1992 NSL amendments eased restrictions on the entry into Taiwan of
 persons from Taiwan who reside overseas, relatively tight restrictions on the entry
 of Chinese from the mainland remain in force. The Entry and Exit Bureau states
 the restrictions are required to maintain Taiwan's stability and prosperity (since
 Taiwan is an attractive destination for illegal immigration by mainland Chinese
 who can blend relatively easily into Taiwan society). Some 60,000 mainland Chinese
 visited Taiwan from November 1988 through the end of 1993; in the same period,
 5.5 million trips were made by Taiwan residents to the mainland.
 Taiwan has no law under which noncitizens can ask for asylum. However, the au-
 thorities have been reluctant to return to the mainland those who might suffer polit-
 ical persecution there. In 1994 the authorities resettled abroad five detainees-in-
 cluding student activist Xu Lifang, who had entered Taiwan in 1991 on a counterfeit
 Salvadoran passport, as well as four others who had claimed in 1993 that they had
 left the mainland for political reasons. In general however, Taiwan does deport to
 the mainland, under provisions of the Mainland Rlations Act, those mainlanders
 who illegally enter the island.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 In 1994 Taiwan made significant progress in its transition to a democratic,
 multiparty political system. An extraornary session of the National Assembly (NA)
 passed constitutional amendments which require direct popular election of the
 President and the Vice President beginning in 1996. (The NA, which meets regu-
 larly only every 4 years, has authority over constitutional revisions.) Currently
 these two officials are elected by the NA. Other amendments established procedures
 to impeach or recall the President and Vice President and to allow overseas Chinese
 who return to Taiwan to vote in presidential elections. In early July, the Legislative
 Yuan (LV) passed legislation which allowed the direct popular election of the Gov-
 ernor of Taiwan province and the mayors of the two large cities of Taipei and
 Kaohsiung, all of whom had previously been appointed by the KIMT. Other demo-
 cratic advances were Taipei county's first use of a plebiscite to elicit voter opinion
 and its first recall campaign, both of which arose out of a campaign by the Environ-
 mental Protection Alliance against a proposal to build a fourth nuclear power plant
 in the county. Elections for the NA in 1991 and the LY in 1992 allowed voters to
 choose directly the full membership of these central legislative institutions for the
 first time since the 1940's.
 The December gubernatorial and mayoral elections were generally free and fair
 and were vigorously contested. Over 75 percent of eligible voters participated. How-
 ever, allegations of vote-bung and some campaign violence marred the elections.
 The KMT won the first eiection ever held for governor of Taiwan province as well
 as the first election since 1979 for mayor of Kaohsiung, Taiwan's second largest city.
 The DPP won the first election since 1964 for mayor of Taipei, a race in which the
 Chinese New Party (CNP), a breakaway KMT faction, came in second.
 While there are now over 70 (mostly very small) political parties functioning in
 Taiwan only 3 of them hold real power the Nationalist Party (KMT), the DPP, and
 the CNP. The KMT, although much reduced in size from the days when it was the
 only significant party, is still, with 2 million members, by far the largest. It also
 benefits from its domination of the broadcast media, from ownership of enterprises
 and business holdings estimated to be worth in excess of $6 billion, and from the
 fact that its members still hold most key positions in the authorities, sometimes con-
 currently with important party positions.
 The DPP, established in 1986 even before additional political parties were legal-
 ized, remains the main opposition party; it has one-third of the members in the LY
 (50 of 153 at year's end), holds 7 (of 23) mayor and magistrate posts-including the
 mayor of Taipei, and has an estimated 70,000 members. The CNP, established in
 1993 by younger KMT members who opposed the KM's domination by the "main-
 
 
 581
 stream' supporters of Chairman Lee, holds seven LY seats and claims 44,000 mem-
 bers. The CNP demonstrated its strength in northern Taiwan by winning 11 of the
 52 seats on the Taipei municipal council during the December election. The DPP
 and CNP, supported at times by the five independent legislators, played a ma4or
 role in the LY despite the KMs maori . During the LY's second session, begin-
 ning in September, for example, thet its traditional majorities on the for-
 eign affairs, national defense, and education committees, giving its political oppo-
 nents an increased voice in legislative debates on these issues.
 Following March elections or ci  and county council speakers and deputy speak-
 ers, Justice Minister Ma Ying-Jeou, supported by President Lee Teng-Hui, led a
 widespread crackdown on election briber. More than 330 of the 883 council mem-
 bers who had been elected in January, along with 131 others were indicted as a re-
 sult of this investigation. The overwhelming majority of these were KMT members.
 Of those indicted, more than 280 received sentences ranging from a few months to
 more than 7 years in prison; the council members remain in office, however, pending
 appeals of their sentences to the high court.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but their role in politics,
 while increasing, remains limited. Nevertheless, a number of women hold senior po-
 sitions in the Government and the KMT, including Minister without Portfolio and
 KMT Central Standing Committee (CSC) member Shirley Kuo (a former finance
 minister), KMT Deputy Secretary General and former CSC member Jeanne Tchong-
 Kwei Li, the Director General of the National Health Administration, and one major
 general in the armed forces. In addition, 15 of 153 LY members 42 of 325 NA mem-
 bers, 13 of 77 provincial assembly members, 3 of 29 Control yuan members, and
 205 of 1,221 judges are women.
 Aborigine representatives participate in most levels of the political system, par-
 tially through six reserved seats in the national and legislative assemblies and two
 seats in the provincial assembly--half of each elected by the Plains Aborigines and
 half by Mountain Aborigines. Other appointed officials who are Aborigines include
 the chief of the Ministry of Interior's Aborigine Affairs Section, the deputy director
 of the provincial Aborige Affairs Bureau, and the chairman of the Pingtung county
 KMT Committee. In addition, the elected magistrate of Taitung county is an aborig-
 ine.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The principal human rights organizations are the establishment-oriented Chinese
 Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the opposition-aligned Taiwan Associa-
 tion for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination between the two bodies is limited. De-
 spite the authorities' refusal to register it (see Section 2.b.), TAHR continues to op-
 erate. Both organizations investigate human rights complaints, many of which come
 to public attention through the media and statements by lawmakers from all politi-
 calparties.
 The authorities permit representatives of international human rights organiza-
 tions to visit Taiwan and meet citizens freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality of citizens before the law "irrespective of
 sex, religion, race, class, or party affiliation." Other laws guarantee the rights of dis-
 abled persons. While the authorities are committed to protecting these rights, some
 areas of discrimination continue to exist.
 Women.-The law prohibits sex discrimination, and many discriminatory sections
 of the Legal Code relating to divorce, property, and child custody have been elimi-
 nated in recent years. In September the Council of Grand Justices (CGJ) declared
 unconstitutional a Civil Code provision dating back to the 1930's which gives fathers
 priority in child custody disputes. However, the CGJ ruling invalidating this provi-
 sion does not take effect for 2 years.
 Taiwan does not have an equal employment rights law, and enforcement of exist-
 ing sex discrimination laws remains a problem. Labor laws provide for maternity
 leave, but employers do not always $rant it. Women have also complained of being
 forced to quit jobs upon marriage or because of age or pregnancy. Women often com-
 plain of less frequent promtions and lower salaries than their male counterparts.
 Domestic violence, especially wife beating, is a serious problem. According to a
 survey by the Taiwan provincial Social Affairs Department in March, 17.8 percent
 of married women have been beaten by their husbands. The DPP Women's Develop-
 ment Committee said other statistics showed 35 percent of married women were vic-
 tima of spouse abuse. The issue was highlighted by he conviction in February of
 
 
 Teng Ju-Wen, who was sentenced by the district court to 5 1/2 years in prison for
 murdering her husband, despite her claim to have been a victim of her husband's
 abuse for many years; her sentence was later reduced to 3 1/2 years on appeal. Ac-
 cording to Taiwan laws, a prosecutor may not investigate domestic violence cases
 until a spouse files a formal lawsuit. Although some cases are prosecuted, strong
 social pressure discourages abused women from reporting incidents to the police in
 order to avoid disgracing their families.
 Rape also remains a serious problem, and its victims are socially stigmatized. One
 expert believes that only 10 percent of the estimated 7,000 rapes occurring annually
 are reported to the police. Under Taiwan law, the authorities may not prosecute for
 rape; only the victim may file a complaint. The Criminal Code establishes the pun-
 ishment for rape as not less than 5 years' imprisonment, and those convicted are
 usually sentenced to from 5 to 10 years in prison. The standard practice followed
 by the MOJ is to assign female prosecutors to rape cases and to have the cases
 heard before female judges. Because rape trials are public, women have been reluc-
 tant to prosecute their attackers-although support from feminist and social welfare
 organizations has made victims more willing to come forward and press charges. In
 aMay demonstration in Taipei, 1,000 people demanded better legislation to prevent
 sex-related crimes and called on the Minister of Education to resign for failure to
 handle sexual harassment and rape cases on college campuses.
 In April a group of Taiwan women married to foreigners held a press conference
 to claim discrimination because their husbands are not given residence or working
 rights in Taiwan and their children are not allowed to enter public schools. After
 the issue was raised, the authorities announced that foreign husbands would be al-
 lowed to stay in Taiwan for 6 months at a time rather than being given residence
 permits for shorter periods. The authorities noted that special registration permits
 are available to allow the children of Taiwan women with foreign husbands to at-
 tend public schools. Officials note, however, that some of these regulations will con-
 tinue to exist until nationality laws are amended.
 Prostitution, including coerced prostitution and child prostitution (see below), is
 also a problem in Taiwan although there is little public attention to the adult pros-
 titution issue. When the police discover illegal prostitution, the cases are prosecuted
 according to the Criminal Code. However, the authorities do accept the existence of
 registered houses of prostitution, especially in urban areas including Taipei and
 Kaohsiung.
 Children.-The Constitution has provisions to protect children's rights, and the
 authorities are committed to support them. Education for children between 6 and
 15 years of age is compulsory and enforced. The Constitution provides that spending
 on education shall be no less than 15 percent of the central budget, 25 percent of
 the provincial and special municipality budgets, and 35 percent of the county and
 city budgets.
 Child prostitution is a serious problem involving between 40,000 and 60,000 chil-
 dren, an estimated 20 percent of them abori inal children (see Indigenous People
 section below). Most child prostitutes range from 12 through 16 years of age. The
 Juvenile Welfare Law enables juvenile welfare bodies, prosecutors, and victims to
 apply to courts for termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment of
 qualified guardians if parents have forced their children into prostitution. If chil-
 drn are engaged in prostitution of their own free will, and the parents are incapa-
 ble of providing safe custody, the courts may order competent authorities to provide
 counseling education for not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years. How-
 ever legal loop holes and cultural barriers remain obstacles to prosecution. For ex-
 ample, f bth parents have sold a child into prostitution, the current law requires
 the victim to lodge a complaint before prosecution is undertaken. Tn many cases, the
 child is reluctant or afraid to do so. According to some reports, violence, drug addic-
 tion, and other forms of coercion are used by brothel owners to prevent girls from
 escaping. In addition, laws directed against customers and pimps of child prostitutes
 are weaK.
 Child abuse is also a significant problem. The Chinese Child Welfare Foundation
 reported in July that 2,080 child abuse cases occurred in Taiwan from June 1993
 through July 1994--an increase of 245 from the previous year, the Foundation said
 that 80 percent of the abuse came from childrens divorced parents. The 1993 revi-
 sion of the Child Welfare Act mandates that any persons discovering cases of child
 abuse or neglect must notify the police, social welfare, or child welfare authorities,
 that child welfare specialists must do so within 24 hours, and that the authorities
 involved must issue an investigation report within 24 hours. Both the MOI Social
 Affairs Department and private organization specialists assert that these require-
 ments are being followed.
 
 
 583
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of the ab-
 original descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan when the
 fir t Chinese settlers arrived. The ethnic identification of these indigenous people
 was clarified in July as the NA passed a constitutional amendment officially  ag-
 ing their name from "mountain people" to "Aborigines." According to Ministry of In-
 terior statistics, there were 357,000 Aborigines in Taiwan in 1993. More than 70
 percent are Christian.
 In general, the civil and political rights of aborigines are fully protected under
 law. The NA amended the Constitution in 1992 to upgrade the status of Aboriginal
 people, protect their right of political participation, and ensure cultural, educational,
 an business development. In addition, the authorities have instituted social pro-
 grams to help them assimilate into the dominant Chinese society. As part of its ef-
 forts to preserve ethnic identities, the Ministry of Education now includes some Ab-
 orginalanguage classes in primary schools.
 Although they face no official discrimination, the Abo riines have had little im-
 pact over the years on major decisions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and
 the allocation of their national resources. In addition, they complain they are pre-
 vented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities" con-
 trol, some of which have been designated as national parks. A group held a dem-
 onstration at Taiwan's major tourist site, Taroko Gorge, in October to demand they
 be allowed to hunt and raise crops on ancestral lands even if those lands are now
 within national parks. Aborigines claim also that they face significant cultural and
 economic barriers. The average income of Taiwan's Aborigines remains less than
 half of the national average. According to MOI statistics, only 52 percent receive ele-
 mentary educations. Researchers have found alcoholism to be a significant problem
 among the Aborigines, with alcohol addiction rates exceeding 40 percent among
 members of three of the nine major tribes. Aborigines are not allowed to use non-
 Chinese personal names on legal documents.
 The sale of Aboriginal girls by their parents into prostitution is a serious social
 problem (see Children section above). The authorities have targeted 30 aboriginal
 villages for visits by social workers, prevision of allowances, and vocational training
 to reduce the child prostitution problem. While the results of this particular pro-
 gram are not yet available, the MOI Social Affairs Department points out that the
 police discovered fewer cases of child prostitution in 1994 than in 1993, indicating
 a possible reduction in the problem.
 People With Disabilities.-The Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strength-
 ened in 1990. It prohibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum
 fimes at approximately $2,400 for violators. New public buildings, facilities, and
 transportation equipment must be accessible to the handicappedExisting public
 buildings are to be brought into conformity by 1995.
 The MOI changed its official statistics in 1994 to show more than 280,000 dis-
 abled people in Taiwan rather than the 230,000 it recognized in 1993. A leading ex-
 pert in the field, however, noted that, although the statistics have changed, the ac-
 tual number of disabled is far larger than 280,000. The true figure is probably be-
 tween 400 000 and 500,000-possibly as high as 700,000. One-third of the disabled
 are severely handicapped and receive shelter or nursing care from the authorities.
 The Disabled Welfare Law requires large government and private organizations
 to hire disabled persons, 2 and 1 percent of their work forces respectively. Organiza-
 tions failing to do so must pay, for each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly
 Sately                  0) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institu-
 tions nvelved in welfare for the disabled. However, many organizations complain
 that it is difficult to find qualified disabled workers and appear to prefer to pay the
 fines involved. The authorities have noted the impact of a traditional belief that the
 disabled lack the ability to do real work.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-A number of laws and regulations limit the right of
 association. Labor unions may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but they
 must submit these to the authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved if they
 do not meet certification requirements or if their activities disturb public order. Ac-
 cording to the authorities, no unions have been dissolved, although certification of
 new unions was denied in several cases during 1994 because competing unions were
 already in existence. The Labor Union Law prohibits civil servants, teachers, and
 defense industry workers from organizing and bars administrative staff who act on
 behalf of employers from joining labor unions.
 The Labor Union Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by secret
 ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes re4ected KMT or management-
 endorsed union slates. Some workers have established independent unions and fed-
 
 
 584
 erations under other names, such as "friendship organizations' and "brotherhood al-
 liances." These groups may register with the MOI as legal civic organizations but
 not as labor unions; thus they are not protected by the Labor Union Law and do
 not have the right to basin with their members' employers.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including a city
 county, or province, can have competing labor confederations- therefore there is only
 one Taiwan-wide labor federation: the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL). The CFL
 is closely associated with the KMT. A standing member of the CFL's board of direc-
 tors is a member of the KMTs Central Standing Committee. The restriction on is-
 land-wide unions was challenged, however, in September when 12 unions from
 state-run enterprises announced they would withdraw from the CFL and establish
 a new national federation of labor unions of state-run enterprises. Of the CFL's 2.9
 million members, more than 300,000 work at state-run enterprises. The drive for
 independent labor unions lost momentum in recent years due to generally higher
 wages tougher tactics on the part of employers, the small scale and poor organiza-
 tion o? most unions, and prosecution of la or activists by the authorities in the past.
 No labor activists were charged during 1994.
 Taiwan is not a member of the International Labor Organization. The CFL is af-
 filiated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for the categories of
 workers noted in Section 6.a. above, the Labor Union Law and the Settlement of
 Labor Disputes Law give workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. As
 of June, some 3.3 million workers, approximately 35 percent of Taiwan's 9-million
 labor force, belonged to 3,654 registered labor unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss,
 or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union members. In practice,
 however, union leaders have sometimes been dismissed without reasonable cause by
 employers, and observers point out that the law sets no specific penalties for viola-
 tions. According to the National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists, about
 400 trade unionists and supporters have been fired since Taiwan's labor movement
 began to expand after the 1987 lifting of martial law. Some observers believe that
 the firing of seven Evergreen Heavy Iiidustries union leaders in August was in fact
 due to their union activities.
 The Collective Agements Law provides for collective bargaining but does not
 make it mandatory. Since such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises,
 and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fail into this category, the propor-
 tion of workers covered remains small. Employers set wages generally in accordance
 with market conditions.
 The law governing labor disputes recognizes the right of unions to strike but im-
 poses restrictions that make legal strikes difficult and seriously weaken collective
 argaining. For example, the authorities require involuntary mediation of labor/
 management disputes when they deem the disputes to be sufficiently serious or to
 involve unfair practices." The law forbids bth labor and management from disrupt-
 ing the "working order when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. The law
 mandates stiff penalties for violations of no-strike/no-retaliation clauses, but em-
 ployers have somemes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers with-
 out any legal action being taken against them. According to a January press report,
 the Council of Labor Aff  airs (C tid that from 1990 to September 1993, there
 were 30 strikes, of which 22 involved workers at bus companies asking for increased
 pay and reduced hours. (The CLA carries out the functions of a labor ministry but
 lacks cabinet rank.)
 Firms in export processing zones are subject to the same laws regarding treat-
 ment of labor unions as other firms and follow normal practices in concluding collec-
 tive bargaining agreements with their unions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Corn ulsory Labor.-The Labor Standards Law pro-
 hibits forced or ompulsory labor. there have been no reports of these practices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Standards Law stipu-
 lates age 15, after compulsory education required by law ends, as the minimum age
 for employment. As a result, child labor remains at a very low level. County and
 city labor bureaus enforce minimum age laws. As of October, 11,915 workers be-
 tween the ages of 15 and 16 were employed by manufacturing industries.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Taiwan Labor Standards Law (      bSL) man-
 dates labor standards. According to the CIA, in May the law covered 3.54 million
 of Taiwan's 6.1 million salaried workers. The law is not well enforced in areas such
 as overtime work and pay or retirement payments.
 The law limits the workweek to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days per week) and
 requires 1 day off in every 7 days. As of Augusta the minimum wage was set at ap-
 proximately $540 (NT 14,010) per month. rea is less than that needed to assure
 
 
 585
 
 a decent standard of livin for a worker and his family. However, the average man.
 ufacturipg wage is more tan double the legal minimum wage, and the average for
 service industry employees is even higher.
 The 1991 revised- Ocupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to in-
 clude workers in agriculture, fishin, and forestry industries and appeared to
 strengthen penalties for safety violations; however, it still provides only minimal
 standards for working conditions and health and safety precautions. Article 13 of
 the Occupational Safety and Health Law gives workers the right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
 Some critics see the law as a step backward; they note, for example, that general
 contractors are not responsible for the safety of those working for subcontractors
 under the revised law.
 The 1993 Labor Inspection Law was designed to strengthen the enforcement of
 labor standards and health and safety regulations. It increased the number of enter-
 prises and types of safety issues to be inspected; gave inspectors quasi-judicial
 rights; required preexamination of dangerous working places such as naphtha crack-
 ing plants, pesticide factories, and firecracker factories; and raised penalties for vio-
 lations. Critics say, however, that the CIA does not effectively enforce workplace
 laws and regulations because it employs too few inspectors. In 1994 there were
 fewer than 300 inspectors for the approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the
 Occupational Safety and Health Law. Because the new law expanded coverage to
 include more enterprises, the inspection rate actually declined. Since most enter-
 prises are small, family-owned operations employing relatives who will not report
 violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor
 laws is hard to document but is thought to be minimal in the smaller enterprises.
 Because of Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there has been a legal influx of foreign
 workers in the last several years. The law stipulates that foreign workers who are
 employed legally receive the same protection as local workers. However authorities
 say that in many cases illegal foreign workers are given board and lodging but no
 medical coverage, accident insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by individuals from
 Taiwan. In addition, critics say that conditions in many small and medium-sized
 factories which employ illegal labor are dangerous, due to old and poorly maintained
 equipment, Illegal workers remain vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation
 of passports, imo~sition of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of
 working hours without overtime pay.
 In October a Council of Agriculture survey showed that 75 percent of boat owners
 admitted to hiring illegal mainland Chinese seamen to work on fishing boats. Be-
 cause of Taiwan restrictions on the entry of mainlanders (see Section 2.d.), the
 mainland fishermen were generally poorly housed on "floating hotels" located 12
 nautical miles offshore, outside Taiwan's jurisdiction; 90 percent of the owners
 called conditions on these floating hotels inhumane. The plight of these workers was
 highlighted in July when one of several floating hotels was caught in the first ty-
 phoon of the season and sank, drowning 10 mainland workers and one from Taiwan.
