 TAIWAN
 More than thirty years of dynamic economic development
 contrasts sharply with the pace of political development in
 Taiwan, where the ruling authorities have emphasized stability
 rather than change. Nonetheless, the authorities have created
 an array of democratic institutions from village to province
 level, with candidates inside and outside the dominant
 Nationalist Party. Actual power, however, remains in the hands
 of the small leadership group elected in mainland China before
 1945, which came to Taiwan after World War II and controls the
 Nationalist Party (Kuomintang), the military, and the executive
 bureaucracy. A high degree of political control is exercised
 through the security apparatus, which operates under martial
 law provisions enacted in 1949 and which the authorities
 justify by the threat of military action or subversion from
 mainland China.
 The enhancement of human rights is publicly endorsed by the
 authorities but remains incompletely realized in Taiwan.
 Although individuals may run for elective office, coordinated
 opposition activity is greatly restricted. The publication of
 opposition political views is closely controlled and the
 activities of outspoken oppositionists are monitored, both at
 home and, apparently, abroad. Native Taiwanese, descendants of
 Chinese who migrated from the mainland mostly in the eighteenth
 century and who now constitute 85 percent of the population,
 dominate the economy but are under-represented within the
 ruling elite. Recent evidence suggests that torture and other
 forms of physical intimidation are still occasionally used by
 police, but probably are not officially condoned.
 Nineteen eighty-two saw the continuation of a slow trend toward
 improvement in the human rights situation in Taiwan. Publica-
 tion and public expression of oppositionist sentiment have
 become gradually freer, although there are still strict limits
 to what is acceptable. The authorities continue to recruit
 qualified Taiwanese to fill important economic and political,
 military, and security posts, a process which will contribute
 to an increased share of political power by the Taiwanese.
 With the rise of a prosperous middle class, popular concern
 about human rights is increasing. Despite Taiwan's diplomatic
 isolation and concern about the island's future after the pass-
 ing of the current President, Chiang Ching-kuo, the outlook for
 continued improvement in human rights appears favorable.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Killing
 No killings for political reasons have been substantiated in
 Taiwan in 1982, or indeed in recent years. However, the murder
 in February 1980 of the mother and twin daughters of jailed
 oppositionist Lin Yi-hsiung and the suspected murder in July
 1981 of a Taiwan-born US resident, Professor Chen Wen-cheng,
 are widely believed to have been politically motivated;
 b.   Disappearance
 In recent years, there have been no credible reports of persons
 being abducted or secretly arrested by the security services.
 There are no known terrorist organizations operating on the
 island.
 
 
 691
 c.   Torture
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture. The Code
 of Criminal Procedure states that an accused shall be *frankly,
 examined, but that no violence, threat, inducement, fraud, or
 other improper means shall be used. This language is repeated
 in the Military Trial Law.
 The death in police custody of a Taipei taxi driver, Wang
 Ying-hsien, in May 1982 focused public attention on the use of
 physical violence by police in interrogating criminal suspects,
 a practice many believe police resort to frequently. Wang was.
 picked up on suspicion of robbing a bank and died while in
 police custody. The actual robber was captured a few hours
 later and Wang's daughter challenged the police account of
 Wang's death. The autopsy report, released on August 20,
 confirmed that Wang was beaten but ruled that his death was
 caused by drowning in the Hsintien River. Although his death
 was officially declared a suicide, five policemen were tried
 and convicted for illegally arresting Wang and causing him
 bodily harm.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Imprisonment is the usual form of punishment for both political
 and nonpolitical offenders. According to the authorities, nine
 executions were carried out in 1981, seven of convicted
 murderers, and two of persons convicted of robbery.
 Taiwan's civilian prisons are severely overcrowded. In April
 1982 the press reported that civilian prisons, built to
 accommodate 11,261 prisoners, were then holding 17,162 or 5,901
 over capacity. Prisoners are forced to share cramped living
 quarters and have fewer opportunities for work, exercise, and
 family visits. Overcrowding was partially responsible for
 severe rioting which broke out in the juvenile section of
 Hsinbhu Prison in March 1982.
 Conditions in the military prisons administered by the security
 police, where political prisoners are confined, are reportedly
 less crowded. Prisoners receive the same food as soldiers and
 have work and recreation opportunities. Although conditions
 for the Kaohsiung-incident prisoners have reportedly improved
 since their arrest in 1980, six non-Nationalist Party
 legislators charged in July 1982 that these prisoners continue
 to be denied access to regular work programs and recreational
 activities, are prohibited certain amenities accorded other
 prisoners, and are subject to special rules which keep them
 separate from one another. A few of the Kaohsiung-incident
 prisoners are alleged to still suffer from the effects of
 pretrial mistreatment.
 There is no known discrimination in the treatment of prisoners
 because of class, race, sex, or religion.
 e.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Taiwan's law of habeas corpus requires that, following an
 individual's arrest, the arresting authorities notify in
 writing the individual and his designated relative or friend
 within 24 hours of the reason for his arrest or detention.
 The Code of Criminal Procedure specifies that the authorities
 may detain an accused for up to two months during investigation
 prior to the filing of the formal indictment, and for up to
 three months during trial. During the investigation phase,
 
 
 692
 however, the prosecuting officer may apply to the court for one
 extension of two months. The period of detention may also be
 extended during the time the accused is on trial. In recent
 cases, including the Kaohsiung incident, the authorities
 generally have followed the requirements of the above
 provisions, with exceptions occurring more frequently in the
 military system.
 Major changes in the Code of Criminal Procedure, affecting the
 rights of criminal suspects, were enacted by the Legislative
 Yuan in July 1982. Suspects were granted the right to legal
 counsel during the investigation phase, including the right to
 have a lawyer present during interrogation by police. This was
 viewed by legal experts as a positive step in the protection of
 arrestees' rights. However, despite the opposition of the
 legal establishment, the pressi and many legislators, the
 authorities also forced passage of changes which allow police
 to arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect of committing a
 crime for which the punishment would be five years or more in
 prison. Police power was further augmented to allow police to
 call in suspects or witnesses for questioning without a formal
 summons. The authorities justified the new police powers by
 insisting that the revisions would only legalize long-standing
 police practices.
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. They have
 stated that at the end of 1975 there were 254 persons in prison
 on sedition charges. Some persons have been released and
 others arrested since that time, but this is the most recent
 figure made public by the authorities. In December 1982 the
 authorities disclosed that 92 prisoners convicted of sedition
 and related offenses are currently being held in the Green
 Island military prison, compared with 115 reported to be there
 by Amnesty International in February 1980. Nearly 20 of these,
 originally arrested for communist activities, have been im-
 prisoned for more than 30 years and were excluded from a
 general amnesty in 1975. Many of these prisoners, all in their
 fifties and sixties, are reported to be in poor health.
 Many minor crimes in Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute
 and punish offenders. This law sometimes has been used against
 political activists. A substitute law, long sought by legal
 reformers, was put forward by the authorities in October 1981
 but quickly withdrawn after being publicly criticized by
 lawyers and legislators. Critics complained that the law was
 even harsher than the one it was meant to replace, particularly
 provisions for "educational punishment" in military prisons for
 those accused by police of disturbing 'social peace.' In March
 1982 the authorities reintroduced the 'educational punishment'
 provisions as a separate 'hoodlums' law. Although they with-
 drew it again in the face of heavy criticism, the authorities
 have indicated that they still intend to enact a police powers
 law incorporating 'educational punishment.'
 f.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 which do not incorporate trial by jury. Under a 1980 judicial
 reorganization, district and high courts were shifted from the
 control of the Executive Yuan to the Judicial Yuan, for the
 first time formally separating the courts from the prosecution
 function. It is generally held in Taiwan legal circles that
 the change has given the judiciary greater independence of
 action.
 
 
 693
 Under martial law, which has been in effect in Taiwan since
 1949, civilians who commit certain offenses, including sedi-
 tion, may be tried in military court. Opposition to basic
 policy (such as expressing views contrary to the authorities,
 claim to represent all of China, or supporting an independent
 legal status for Taiwan) is considered seditious and thus
 punishable under martial law.
 The authorities occasionally transfer "important' civilian
 cases (involving such crimes as homicide, kidnapping, and armed
 robbery) to the military courts. The authorities state that
 the military courts' swifter and generally more severe justice
 acts as a deterrent to potential criminals. Sentences are
 reviewed only within the Ministry of National Defense. In May
 1982, the case of Li Shih-ko, who confessed to carrying out
 Taiwan's first armed bank robbery and murdering a policeman,
 was referred to the military courts for action. Li's trial on
 May 18 lasted less than two hours and the sentence, death, was
 carried out eight days later.
 Neither civil nor martial law provides the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination. Following the July 1982
 revision of the criminal procedures code, suspects may for the
 first time have a lawyer present during interrogation. How-
 ever, the authorities have indicated that the lawyer's role is
 to protect his client from mistreatment, rather than to provide
 legal counsel during questioning. In some cases, windows have
 been installed in police station interrogation rooms in order
 that lawyers (or family members) may see the suspect without
 hearing the questioning.
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant is not a common
 practice in Taiwan, but does occur on occasion. The Code of
 Criminal Procedure requires that searches be authorized by
 warrants, signed by a prosecutor or, during a trial, by a
 judge. However, exceptions to this rule, previously few in
 number, were substantially increased by the revision of the
 code in July 1982. When making warrantless arrests, police may
 also make necessary searches of person or property without
 prior authority. Other types of violations of the home, such
 as monitoring telephone calls, are widely believed to exist.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and the press.
 These rights are limited, however, by the enforcement of
 martial law restrictions. Individuals are not free publicly to
 question the regime's basic political policy of anti-communism
 and claim to sovereignty over all of China. Persons who speak
 favorably of communism or the People's Republic of China, or
 persons (usually native Taiwanese) who question the legitimacy
 of Taiwan's mainlander authorities by suggesting support for
 Taiwan independence or self-determination, can expect to be
 charged with sedition and tried in a military court.
 Information brought to light during the investigation of the
 death of Professor Chen Wen-cheng in 1981 suggests that the
 security authorities closely monitor political expression, both
 at home and overseas. During questioning by the security
 
 
 694
 police immediately prior to his death, Chen was reportedly
 confronted with recordings of an international telephone call
 between himself in the US and an opposition figure in Taiwan
 who was later jailed in connection with the Kaohsiung incident,
 and of a speech he gave in Pittsburgh supporting the Kaohsiung
 incident defendants. Although the Taiwan authorities later
 denied the existence of the Pittsburgh recording, the dis-
 closures sparked a resurgence of allegations that Taiwan agents
 carry out a systematic program of surveillance and intimidation
 of Taiwanese students on American university campuses who are
 suspected of advocating Taiwan independence or self-
 determination. Indeed, Taiwan newspaper articles have noted
 the role of Taiwan security service units in the United States
 and Japan in monitoring dissident Taiwanese political activi-
 ties. Although there have been reports of such surveillance
 from several US universities, the Taiwan authorities deny that
 they carry out surveillance on American campuses.
 Censorship of publications occurs frequently. It is carried
 out through provisions of the publications law which empower
 the security police to seize or ban printed material that
 *confuses public opinion and affects the morale of the public
 and the armed forces.q In 1982, the authorities allowed a rise
 in the number of domestic political opinion magazines, the more
 popular of which support non-Kuomintang politicians and criti-
 cizetthe party. One-or more issues of several of these were
 banned-during the year. -Nominally the bans are in reaction to
 articles critical of the policies of the authorities or which
 discuss sensitive subjects, but they are widely viewed as
 tactics of intimidation. The limits of acceptable political
 criticism are not clear-cut. Even periodicals which are
 cautious in their selection of articles for publication have
 been banned from time to time. The ban of a single issue of a
 magazine:may be followed by suspension of the publication's
 license for.one .year. In 1982, three magazines received this
 punishment.
 Books are also occasionally banned by the security police.
 Control over the daily newspapers is exercised indirectly,
 through guidance from the central authorities' information
 office and theKuomintang, and restrictions on the number of
 newspapers. Nevertheless, newspapers have expanded their
 coverage in areas previously forbidden, such as news from
 mainland Chiha. Competition-among the island's three
 television stations has also led to an expansion of their
 coverage of mainland and other sensitive international news,
 despite the fact that all three are partially or wholly owned
 by the authorities. Mounting criticism (Kuomintang as well as
 non-Kuomintang) of security police censorship, as well as of
 other elements of martial law administration, has compelled the
 authorities to defend their control apparatus. In June 1982
 the Executive Yuan justified regular "selective postal checks'
 as necessary to intercept parcel bombs and illegal correspon-
 dence with mainland China. It was denied, however, that the
 authorities monitor telephone conversations.
 Foreign publications are available, but are also subject to
 censorship by the'security police and sometimes pages carrying
 articles offensive to the authorities are removed or blacked
 out before they are distributed. Some foreign publications are
 available through subscriptions only and are not allowed to be
 sold on newsstands. Occasionally, the credentials of foreign
 correspondents are suspended for-articles which challenge
 important official views or positions.
 
 
 695
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of Assembly. is guaranteed by the Constitution. While
 assembly for nonpolitical purposes is generally permitted,
 public assembly for political purposes, except during elec-
 tions, is often prevented under martial law provisions. During
 the authorized 15-day campaign periods which preceded island-
 wide elections on November 14, 1981 and January 16, 1982, all
 candidates, including oppositionists, were allowed to hold
 rallies. Those rallies, however, were closely monitored by the
 authorities under the Elections and Recall Law of 1980, which
 makes candidates liable for prosecution for 'seditious'
 statements.
 Prior to the authorized campaign periods, some oppositionists
 held rallies characterized as 'private parties.' The authori-
 ties' response was moderate but firm and such 'parties' were
 peacefully broken up. The same tactic, used by Kuomintang
 candidates, usually drew no response from the authorities.
 Planned revisions of the election law announced by the authori-
 ties will outlaw the use of "private parties' in future
 elections.
 There is no tradition of trade unionism in Taiwan, and labor
 unions do not exercise significant influence either in the
 economic or political sphere. While labor unions are permitted
 to organize, walkouts and strikes are prohibited under martial
 law. Collective bargaining, although provided for by legisla-
 tion, does not exist.
 c.  -Freedom of Religion
 Freedom to practice religion is guaranteed by the Constitu-
 tion. Most Taiwan inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism,
 Buddhism, animism, or a combination of beliefs. Other reli-
 gions include Christianity and Islam. Some pseudo-Buddhist
 sects and Sun Myong Moon's Unification Church have been banned,
 due to parents' complaints that these groups were a corrupting
 influence on Taiwan youth. The groups were accused of leading
 youth to engage in 'abnormal behavior" that involved turning
 their backs on their families, shifting their allegiance from
 state to church, and actively proselytizing for further con-
 verts. Action was taken on the basis of the police offenses
 law, a catch-all statute which allows the police to punish
 minor offenders without referral to the courts.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. In 1977 the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan
 (179,000 members), long suspect for its advocacy of Taiwanese
 rights, issued a 'Declaration on Human Rights" to which the
 church leadership has since repeatedly reaffirmed its commit-
 ment. By calling for Taiwan's transformation into a "new and
 independent country," the declaration has placed Taiwan's
 Presbyterian leaders (almost all native Taiwanese) in a clear
 position of questioning Taiwan's mainlander-controlled politi-
 cal institutions.
 Friction between the Presbyterian Church and the authorities
 came to a head in 1980 when the church's general secretary,
 Reverend Kao Chun-ming, and several other Presbyterians were
 convicted in military court of harboring sedition defendant
 Shih Ming-te. While admitting he had assisted Shih, Rev. Kao
 denied seditious intent; he declared his religious vocation
 
 
 696
 precluded his betraying someone who had sought help and per-
 mitted him only to advise Shih to give himself up. Although
 relations between the church and the authorities have relaxed
 somewhat recently, the authorities continue to monitor church
 activities closely. The authorities have warned church members
 to avoid involvement in oppositionist political efforts or
 Taiwan independence activity.
 In 1982 the authorities established a religious council, made
 up of representatives of the island's major religious bodies,
 to advise them on church matters. There are fears that the
 council may be used to justify unpopular official policies.
 Similar concerns have been expressed about legislation proposed
 in 1981 to regulate church activities. The proposed legisla-
 tion is opposed by the island's major religious organizations
 as a threat to freedom of religion, although the authorities
 argue that the law is necessary to 'define the scope of reli-
 gion" and to *protect freedom of religion.' An additional
 proposed measure would for the first time place religious
 educational institutions under the control of the Ministry of
 Education. The authorities argue that this would improve the
 quality of instruction and provide accreditation for the
 diplomas granted by these schools. Critics point out that it
 would also empower the Ministry of Education to control
 curricula and to place a military training officer in each
 school. Although action on these measures has so far been
 withheld, the authorities have not renounced their-intention to
 enact them.
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence.
 There is general freedom of internal travel in Taiwan, except
 to military and other restricted areas. Emigration and private
 travel abroad have become freer since 1979. After the last
 calendar day of the year in which they turn fifteen, males may
 not leave Taiwan until completion of their military service.
 Since 1980, businessmen have been permitted to travel to and do
 business directly with certain Eastern European countries.
 Moreover, it is widely believed that the authorities are
 willing-to-overlook some personal travel to mainland China if
 handled'discreetly.
 Permission to leave Taiwan may be delayed or withheld for
 security reasons or because the persons involved have criti-
 cized the political establishment. Statistics rbleased by the
 authorities indicate that in 1980, the last year for which we
 have figures, 949,306 persons applied for exit permission. Of
 that number, over 20,000 are reported to have been refused, 327
 for security reasons and the rest for unspecified causes.
 In general, the authorities recognize the right of repatriation
 of those Chinese holding Taiwa passports who normally reside
 in Taiwan. Those issued "overseas Chinese" passports do not
 automatically have the right to travel to Taiwan for permanent
 residence. In principle, Taiwan will not authorize the entry
 of Chinese, even those who have long held Taiwan passports, if
 they have lived in communist-controlled areas wtthin the
 preceding five years.
 Under its program of assistance to Indochinese refugees,
 Taiwan, through June 1982, has granted permanent resettlement
 to more than 4,700 such refugees, nearly all of them ethnic
 Chinese. It has also provided temporary asylum to nearly 2,000
 
 
 697
 Vietnamese 'boat people* (refugees escaping by boat) awaiting
 acceptance by other countries.
 e.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Reflecting their claim to be the Government of all of China,
 the Taiwan authorities possess an array of political bodies
 over and above those which pertain solely to the island of
 Taiwan. The locus of power on Taiwan is the presidency and the
 central executive branch. While representation of native
 Taiwanese in local and central legislative bodies has been
 increasing, Taiwanese are seriously under-represented in the.
 powerful executive branch, in which persons who arrived from
 the mainland after 1945 hold the most powerful positions.
 There have been recent increases in the number of Taiwanese
 holding executive branch positions, however. The Vice
 President, about one-third of the cabinet (including the Vice
 Premier, the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of
 Communications, and three Ministers without Portfolio), and the
 Governor of Taiwan, among others, are Taiwanese. Nevertheless,
 critics point out that their power and influence both
 individually and collectively are limited.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are the
 National Assembly, which elects the President and Vice
 President, and the Legislative Yuan, which is the Central
 Legislature. There have been no general elections to these two
 bodies since 1948, the authorities taking the position that
 such elections cannot be held until they re-establish control
 over the mainland. In October 1982 the Minister of the
 Interior explained that if overall elections were held the
 winners could not represent all of China, but only Taiwan
 province. Beginning in 1969, 'supplementary elections" for
 these central bodies have been held to choose additional
 representatives from Taiwan and the adjacent islands. The
 advanced age and incapacity of many of the members of the
 Legislati4ve Yuan elected on the mainland in 1948 forced the
 authorities in 1982 to lower the number of legislators required
 for a quorum. Supplemental legislators elected on Taiwan now
 constitute the most active group in the Legislative Yuan.
 Since 1950, democratic institutions have been in operation at
 the provincial and local levels. Universal suffrage exists for
 all citizens twenty years of age and over. Elections havp been
 held regularly for provincial, county and municipal offices,
 with Kuomintang candidates competing with independents and
 oppositionists. The Taiwan provincial governor and the mayors
 of Taipei and Kaohsiung, however, are appointed by the central
 authorities.
 Despite the existence of two small, nominal opposition parties,
 Taiwan is dominated by one party. The Nationalist Party has
 ruled Taiwan since 1945 and is a 'revolutionary* party whose
 structure and control mechanisms are based on early Soviet
 models. Party organs exist at all levels of the ruling
 structure, as well as in the military, schools, and other
 public institutions. New opposition parties are forbidden
 under martial law and candidates who oppose the Kuomintang in
 elections run as independents or 'non-party' candidates. Even
 though the large majority of candidates elected are from the
 Kuomintang, independent candidates, nearly all Taiwanese, have
 increasingly been successful in the recent past. In the
 
 
 698
 provincial elections in November 1981, a loose coalition of
 "mainstream non-Kuomintang" candidates won about 30 percent of
 the votes cast, with non-aligned independents and members of
 the legal opposition parties winning an additional 10 percent.
 Independents won a similar share of votes in the previous
 provincial elections in 1977.
 Independents face several disadvantages in the election
 process. The election law enacted in 1980 generally favors
 Kuomintang candidates, because its provisions, many of which
 are ambiguous, are interpreted by the central election
 committee which is controlled by the Kuomintang. The law
 forbids the participation of students, formerly a prime source
 of campaign workers for independent candidates, and allows only
 officially sponsored rallies in which all candidates partici-
 pate together in the last few days before an election. Inde-
 pendent candidates are further disadvantaged by press self-
 censorship. The daily press tends to give little publicity to
 the views of the independents. Periodicals which publicize the
 views of independent candidates are subject to frequent
 censorship by the security police. However, such periodicals
 were not silenced during the provincial elections in November
 1981, as they were during previous elections, and they have
 since been allowed to increase in number.
 Women constitute 48 percent of Taiwan's population. The few
 laws-which discriminate against them relate mostly to divorce
 issues and inheritance. Nearly 500 women were elected to city
 and town councils in June 1982, taking about 13 percent of the
 total seats up for election, while in the December 1980
 'national' elections women candidates were the top two
 vote-getters. Regulations governing elections make some
 provision for guaranteed minimal representation of women in
 local and central legislative institutions. Enrollment of
 women in institutions of higher learning has increased 97
 percent since 1952, to 411,000 in 1982. The number of women
 employed in ministries and other official agencies has in-
 creased by 40 percent since 1973. A fledgling women's rights
 movement is slowly growing.
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group is made up of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesian immigrants who were already
 established in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived.
 Many of these. aboriginal "mountain people," who comprise about
 one per cent of Taiwan's total population, live on restricted-
 access reservations, but-most.must compete with the Chinese
 majority for educational and job opportunities. There is no
 official policy of discrimination against the aborigines, and
 the authorities have instituted educational incentives and
 other social programs to ease their transition into Chinese
 society. The barriers created by de-facto cultural and
 economic discrimination, however, are frequently insurmount-
 able. 'Mountain people' are often relegated to low-paying,
 menial jobs by Chinese employers and many are forced to seek
 long-term employment overseas as fishermen or laborers. The
 rapid disintegration of tribal culture and the difficulty of
 'making it' in Chinese society have produced a general malaise
 within many aborigine communities, which is the source of the
 widespread alcoholism and 'laziness' sometimes caricatured by
 unsympathetic Chinese. Special designated seats in both
 central and provincial legislative bodies are reserved for
 aborigine representatives.
 3.   Authorities' Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 
 
 699
 The Taiwan authorities on occasion have permitted representa-
 tives of international human rights organizations, as well as
 private individuals interested in human rights issues, to visit
 Taiwan and meet with appropriate officials.
 Taiwan's martial law was the subject of hearings before the
 Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House Foreign
 Affairs Committee in May 1982. Prior to this, four members of
 Congress issued an appeal to the Taiwan authorities calling for
 an end to the 33-year-old martial law.
 The Chinese Human Rights Association, which in the past has
 focused its attention primarily on human rights questions in
 mainland China, has recently devoted more of its efforts to
 human rights in Taiwan. In 1982, the Association sponsored
 tours for law-makers and legal experts to examine Taiwan's
 crowded prisons and established a legal aid service for Taipei
 residents. The association has also put together a human
 rights report on Taiwan, which was to be released in late 1982.
 Freedom House, in its 1982 report, rates Taiwan as 'Partly
 Free."
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Taiwan has established an excellent record of providing for the
 social and economic needs of its people. In general, the
 opportunity to participate in economic benefits is available to
 the population as a whole without discrimination. The per
 capita gross national product (GNP) in 1981 was over $2,500.
 Unemployment in the first half of 1982 averaged 1.62 percent.
 The authorities' fiscal 1983 budget allocated more than 30
 percent of the total budget to education, science, culture, and
 social programs.
 Although economic growth has recently fallen short of the
 spectacular rates achieved earlier (GNP grew at a rate of 3.91
 percent in the first half of 1982, compared with the 1969-1979
 average rate of 10 percent), the economy remains healthy. The
 prospects for continuing economic well-being are favorable as
 the authorities attempt to shift the focus of their
 export-based economy to high-technology industries.
 Taiwan has developed an effectivepublic health program and a
 system of health stations throughout the island - a total of
 more than 11,000 medical care facilities. In 1980, Taiwan had
 more than 7.5 physicians, 6.6 nurses, and 22 hospital beds for
 every 10,000 persons. Health promotion programs include
 maternal and child disease control and environmental sanita-
 tion. Major epidemic disease has been reduced, although
 limited outbreaks, such as a surge in polio cases in August
 1982, still occur. Because of these public health programs and
 a generally good diet (per capita daily caloric intake exceeds
 2,800), life expectancy has increased to 70 years for men and
 nearly 75 years for women. Taiwan's birth control efforts have
 been successful in bringing the birth rate in 1981 down to
 1.77. This has been crucial in alleviating population tensions
 on the island, where the population density per square mile of
 cultivable land exceeds 5,000.
 Education is one of the main concerns of the authorities and
 the population in general. Statistics show that 90.2 percent
 of the population over age six are literate. Of school-age
 children, 99.8 percent are currently in school and free
 compulsory education is available through junior high school.
 About 60 percent of junior high school graduates pass examina-
 
 
 700
 tions and enter three-year senior high and vocational school
 programs. Entry into Taiwan's extensive system of higher
 education is also based on competitive exams, and departures
 from a strict merit system are almost nonexistent. In 1982,
 more than 20 percent of college-age youth were enrolled as
 undergraduate or graduate students.
 
  701
 U.S.VdRSdAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF O0LLARS)
 COUNTRY: TAIWAN
 1980     1981     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............0.0              0.3      0.0
 GRANTS .............       .0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.AIO       .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ............... 0.0            3.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)...         0.3       0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE.......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..     ............    .0.0      3.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ...........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTALTAL.....,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.C.DEV & WFP,          0.0      0.0      0.'0
 VOL.RELI!F AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS  ...........         .0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......  ....... 0.0            0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.NAP GRANTS.....              0.0      0.0      0.0.
 B.CREDIT SALES-PHS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEO.TRNG .           0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS....,.,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS......   , ........0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..... ........0.0             0.0      0.0
 --------------- ------ -----------------------------------=
 OTHER US LOANS .........         68.2     69.5    224.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        68.Z     69.5    224.0
 ALL OTHER ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE. FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1980     1981     1982      1946-82.
 TOTAL .........   15.2      17.4     ZO.2    507.0
 IBRO               0.0      0.0       0.0    309.8
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      9.8
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0     15.8
 ID0                0.0       0.0     '0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0     92.4
 AFO.               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               8.2      17.4      0.0     43.6
 OTHER-UN           7.0       0.0     20.2     35.6
 EE                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 702
