 TAIWAN
 With the popular election of President Lee Teng-hui in 1996, Taiwan completed
 its transition to an open, democratic system. Lee, who is also the Chairman of the
 Nationalist Party (KMT), appoints the Premier, who heads the Executive Yuan
 (EY), or cabinet. Constitutional amendments adopted in July provided the Legisla-
 tive Yuan (LY) with the authority to bring down the Cabinet with a no confidence
 vote and removed the previous power of the LY to confirm the appointment of the
 Premier. The current LY members were elected in a free and fair election in 1995.
 While the ruling KMT remains the single most powerful political force, it now holds
 only a razor-thin majority in the LY, where two opposition parties play increasingly
 significant roles. The Judicial Yuan (JY) is constitutionally independent of the other
 branches of the political system, but corruption and political influence remain seri-
 ous problems.
 The National Police Administration (NPA) of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the
 NPA's Criminal Investigation Bureau, and the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Investiga-
 tion Bureau are responsible for law enforcement relating to internal security. The
 police and security agencies are under effective civilian control. Some members of
 the police occasionally committed human rights abuses.
 Taiwan has a dynamic, export-oriented, free-market economy. Liberalization of
 the economy has undercut the dominant role that state-owned and party-run enter-
 prises had played in such major sectors as finance, transportation, utilities, ship-
 bulding, steel, telecommunications, and petrochemicals. As the economy has
 evolved, services and capital- and technology-intensive industries have become the
 most important sectors. Major exports include computers, electronic equipment, ma-
 chinery, and textiles. Citizens generally enjoy a high standard of living and an equi-
 table income distribution.
 The authorities generally respect human rights; however, occasional problems re-
 main in some areas. Principal problems include police abuse of detainees; physical
 abuse of military inductees, which appears to be declining; prison overcrowding; po-
 litical and personal pressures on the judiciary; some restrictions on freedom of as-
 sembly and association; discrimination and violence against women; child prostitu-
 tion and abuse; restrictions on workers' freedom of association and on their ability
 to strike. The authorities are also increasingly resorting to use of the libel law, ap-
 parently to deter criticism of senior leaders.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution does not directly address the issues of torture and punishment.
 The Code of Criminal Conduct, however, stipulates that no violence, threat, induce-
 ment, fraud, or other improper means shall be used against accused persons. How-
 ever, there were credible reports that police occasionally physically abused persons
 in their custody. The law allows suspects to have attorneys present during interro-
 gations, primarily to ensure that abuse does not take place (see Section 1.d.). The
 MOJ says that each interrogation is recorded and that any allegation of mistreat-
 ment is investigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur
 in local police stations where interrogations are not recorded and when attorneys
 are often not present. Informed observers note that police forces emphasize the con-
 fession of suspects as the principal investigative tool. Law enforcement agencies re-
 main weak in scientific investigative skills so that, when political leaders demand
 that cases be solved, there is pressure on the police to coerce confessions. Inter-
 national observers have also noted that the judicial system sometimes accepts such
 confessions even when they contradict available physical evidence or logic. The Na-
 tional Police Administration denies that abuse of suspects by police takes place. It
 asserts that regulations forbid such abuse and that any member of the police force
 who abused suspects would be punished for doing so. Nevertheless, there are credi-
 ble reports that the physical abuse of prisoners is a common investigative technique.
 
 
 Detainees who are physically abused have the right to sue the police for torture,
 and confessions shown to have been obtained through torture are inadmissible in
 court proceedings. There were no such suits reported during the year.
 The authorities state that they have made efforts to investigate, prosecute, and
 punish officials responsible for torture and other mistreatment. Although the basic
 responsibility for investigating mistreatment lies with prosecutors, the Control Yuan
 coequal branch of the political system that investigates official misconduct,
 also investigates such cases. The Control Yuan President complained that his
 branch lacked the authority to do its job properly. Human rights gups point to
 the almost total lack of human rights training in the education of police officers and
 security personnel. They beieve that the measures that the authorities have taken
 to protect human rights are not sustainable in the long term without the creation
 of an ethos of respect for human rights in these institutions. Women's and children's
 rights groups are active in monitoring police and judicial performance and periodi-
 cally mount campaigns to correct abuses.
 Although corrapunishment is forbidden under military law, there continued to
 be reports of serious physical abuse of military personnel. The Ministry of National
 Defense has addressed these complaints by promulgating regulations specifying the
 appropriate treatment of lower ranking personnel and by conducting regular po Us
 of servicemen to discover any abuse. The authorities have also established a tele-
 phone hot line to report alleged abuses within the military. The Ministry of National
 Defense has attributed some of the blame for abuse of recruits to a supposed soften-
 ing of youth by modern life, which supposedly makes them less capable of accepting
 the rigors of combat training. However, the Ministry also has recognized that some
 trainers have used inappropriate methods to address these supposed deficiencies. In
 order to standardize, rationalize, and make transparent the military basic training
 program, the Ministry appointed professional researchers to design practical train-
 ing and curriculums or   I military personnel who have contact with new recruits.
 Pressure from parents of recruits and a program to retain recruits have also contrib-
 uted to an apparent reduction in the incidence of abuses.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. However,
 overcrowding at the 45 prisons and detention centers remained a problem despite
 the addition of one new facility and a 1994 Criminal Code amendment allowing pris-
 oners to be paroled after serving one-third, rather than one-half of their sentences.
 The 55,701 inmates detained as of November exceeded the facilities planned capac-
 ity by 10,981. According to the MOJ, the number of prisoners has grown rapidly in
 recent years because of increased arrests of narcotics law violators. These violators
 now make up more than 50 percent of the overall inmate population. The MOJ has
 set up drug treatment facilities to reduce the number of addicts in the prison popu-
 lation. Conditions in illegal immigrant detention centers are poor (see Section 2.d.).
 The authorities permit visits by human rights group monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and
 detention, and the authorities generally observe this prohibition. Police legally may
 arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which the
 punishment would be imprisonment of 5 years or more and may question persons
 without a formal summons. However, the authorities must, within 24 hours after
 detention, give written notice to the detainee or a designated relative or friend, stat-
 ing the reason for the arrest or questioning. Indicted persons may be released on
 bail at judicial discretion.
 The Criminal Procedure Code specifies that the authorities may detain a suspect
 for up to 2 months during the investigative phase before filing a formal indictment.
 The court may extend the investigative detention for an additional 2-month period.
 A suspect may be held for up to 3 months during trial proceedings, and the court
 may extend the trial detention for two additional 3-month periods. The authorities
 generally have followed these procedures, and trials usually take place within 3
 months of indictment.
 The authorities generally respect a detainee's request to have a lawyer present
 during the investigation phase, but defense lawyers continue to complain that peo-
 ple often are not advised of their right to have legal representation during police
 interrogation. While there is no legal requirement that the police advise suspects
 of their right to counsel, arresting officers' checklists do provide for such notifica-
 tion. The National Police Administration (NPA) says that the form a suspect signs
 at the conclusion of interrogation includes a question as to whether the suspect
 wishes legal representation. The NPA asserts that, under police procedure, a sus-
 pect cannot be formally charged unless this form is signed. There is no legal require-
 ment that indigent people be provided counsel during police interrogation, although
 such counsel is provided during trials. Informed observers report that the "public
 defense counsels do not provide effective defense assistance. They are frequently
 
 
 756
 not fully qualified lawyers, they typically do not appear until the final debate hear-
 ing of the trial, and they seldom spend a significant amount of time discussing the
 case with their clients.
 The "Antihoodlum" Law of 1985 was a departure from international standards of
 due process in that it included a secret witness system that allowed police to con-
 duct "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums" and to use the testimony of unidentified in-
 formants in detaining the suspects. Lawyers for the alleged hoodlums were not per-
 mitted to cross-examine these informants. While defense lawyers have been gven
 the right to examine documentary evidence, critics charge that evidence in these
 cases was often weak or fabricated. In 1995, however, the Council of Grand Justices
 (CGJ) declared unconstitutional the administrative procedures that had been used
 to sentence hoodlums to reformatory education. The authorities have drafted new
 antigang legislation, which is under consideration by the LY. This new legislation
 requires that "secret" witnesses must testify openly but provides procedures for
 their subsequent protection, "in exceptional cases."
 The authorities do not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and for equality before the law. In the past, some observers have characterized
 the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to political and personal
 pressure and influence.
 The Judicial Yuan is one of the five coequal branches of the political system. The
 JY is headed by a president and a vice president and also contains the 16-member
 Council of Grand Justices (CGJ), which interprets the Constitution as well as laws
 and ordinances. Subordinate JY organs include the Supreme Court, high courts, dis-
 trict courts, the Administrative Court, and the Committee on the Discipline of Pub-
 lic Functionaries.
 Dissatisfaction exists among judges and others about the slowness of strengthen-
 ing the rule of law. Corruption within the judiciary remains a problem. During the
 year, there were a number of indictments of judges for accepting bribes in exchange
 for favorable judgments. In December 1996, the Judicial Yuan President invited
 legal scholars to study and to recommend measures for judicial reform. In January
 the Judicial Yuan, as a first step in the reform process, revoked the previous proce-
 dure-whereby the decisions of junior judges were automatically reviewed by senior
 judges. A number of additional steps to improve judicial performance were also un-
 dertaken, including promulgating a "judges code and setting up evaluation teams
 of independent scholars to examine judicial performance. However, investigative ef-
 forts apparently have concentrated on people outside the judicial system who falsely
 claim that they are able to influence judges in order to defraud defendants. A num-
 ber of judges have called for even more significant changes, and a nongovernmental
 judicial reform foundation, consisting of lawyers, legal scholars, and legislators, was
 established in March to promote andmonitor the reform process.
 The law provides for the right of fair public trial, and this is generally respected
 in practice. Judges, rather than juries, decide trials, and all judges are appointed
 by, and responsible to, the JY. n a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor.
 The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to
 submit if the judge considers it irrelevant; refusal to hear evidence may be a factor
 in an appeal. Trials are public, but attendance at trials involving juveniles or poten-
 tially sensitive issues that might attract crowds may require court permission. In
 addition, as the result of a CGJ ruling, legislation was passed in December giving
 judges the sole authority to order pretrial detention of suspects, a power previously
 shared by prosecutrs.
 A defendant has the right to an attorney. If the defendant is suspected of commit-
 ting a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment or if the defend-
 ant is disabled, the judge may assign an attorney. A law passed in December states
 that a suspect may not be compelled to testify. The Code of Criminal Procedure
 states that a confession shall not be the sole evidence used to find a defendant
 guilty; this requirement itself is not strictly enforced, with convictions frequently re-
 sulting from a combination of a confession and circumstantial evidence of varying
 quality. Any convicted person has the right to appeal to the next higher court level.
 Persons sentenced to terms of imprisonment of 3 years or more may appeal beyond
 that level. The Supreme Court automatically reviews life imprisonment and
 deathsentencs. Under the law, prosecutors have the right to appeal verdicts of not
 guilty.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and sections of the Criminal and Civil Codes contain provisions pro-
 tecting privacy. A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained be-
 
 
 fore a search, except when "incidental to arrest." Critics, however, claim that the
 incidental to arrest provision is not only unconstitutional but often interpreted
 broadly by police to justify searches of locations other than actual arrest sites. More-
 over, police continue to search cars routinely at roadblocks. According to the Na-
 tional Police Administration, warrantless searches are allowed only in special cir-
 cumstances, such as to arrest an escapee or if facts indicate a person is in the proc-
 ess of committing a crime. In any such case, the police must file a report with the
 prosecutor or court within 24 hours. A policeman who carries out an illegal search
 may be sued for illegal entry and sentenced to up to 1 year's imprisonment. Few
 prosecutors or judges did in fact file cha esa aast policemen found to have ob-
 tained evidence illegally. Furthermore, such evidence is not automatically excluded
 from consideration by the court; instead, its admission is left to the discretion of the
 judge. More often than not, such evidence is admitted and frequently provides the
 basis for conviction.
 According to Executive Yuan regulations, judicial and security authorities may file
 a written request to a prosecutors office to monitor telephone calls to collect evi-
 dence against a suspect involved in a major crime. However, according to the Con-
 stitution, permission for telephone tapping and other such interference with privacy
 of communications must be granted according to law, rather than by administrative
 regulation.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press and the authorities generally respect these rights in practice. Al-
 though these rights are formally circumscribed by a statute prohibiting advocacy of
 communism or division of national territory, these provisions are not enforced in
 practice.
 Print media represent the full spectrum of views within society. Residual political
 influence, however, still exists over the electronic media, particularly television sta-
 tions. The KMT, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the military continue to
 be the largest shareholders in three island-wide broadcast television stations. Al-
 though considerable progress has been made toward loosening KMT control of the
 broadcast media, some critics still claim that coverage on these three stations has
 been biased in favor of the KMT and against opposition parties. A fourth island-
 wide broadcast television station, based in Kaohsiung and associated with the larg-
 est opposition party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), opened in June. The
 oem ng of this station, known as Formosa Television, eliminated the KMT's monop-
 oly of broadcast television and represents a significant move toward more complete
 media independence. In any event, the proliferation of cable television stations,
 some of which carry programming openly hostile to the ruling party, has greatly di-
 minished the importance of KMT control over three of the four broadcast television
 stations. Over 70 percent of households receive cable television, which includes local,
 privately financed channels, as well as many major international networks. Several
 mainland Chinese and Japanese channels are also widely carried on cable.
 Controls over radio stations were more limited than those over television stations
 and are being further liberalized. From 1993 to November 1997, the Government
 Information Office (GIO) received 529 applications for radio broadcast frequencies.
 A total of 169 frequencies were made available and 118 of these were apportioned;
 of the 51 still available, many are in remote areas. Many of the newly authorized
 radio stations, however, have limited broadcast ranges, leading critics to charge that
 the stations do not constitute a genuine counterweight to the authorities' monopoly
 on island-wide radio broadcasting.
 Observers have noted that licensing requirements oblige prospective radio station
 owners to have more capital than is required to actually operate a station. This in
 itself inhibits individuals or groups from applying for radio station licenses. There
 are reportedly over one hundred unlicensed 2nderground" radio stations, many as-
 sociated with opposition parties, operating illegally.
 In 1992 the authorities revised sedition statutes to limit the purview of the Sedi-
 tion Law and the National Security Law (NSL) and to remove prohibitions on "ac-
 tions against the Constitution." However, the NSL and related statutes such as the
 Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and Assembly Law still retain prohibitions
 against advocating communism or espousing the division of national territory, even
 though these provisions are no longer enforced in practice.
 During the year there were three cases in which senior leaders charged publica-
 tions with libel. Liu Tai-ying, the Chairman of the ruling KMT's party-owned enter-
 p rises, sued Yazhou Zhoukan (Asiaweek) magazine and two of its employees for libel
 or reporting that he had considered making a political donation to the campaign
 of an American presidential candidate. In this case, the court ruled in favor of the
 
 
 defendants. In another case, Tsai Chao-yang, the Minister Transportation and Com-
 munications, sued a local magazine, Business Week, for alleging that he had spent
 a large amount of public money renovating his residence. The court ruled that the
 magazine's editor and reporter could not prove the accuracy of their story and sen-
 tenced them to 4 and 5 months' incarceration respectively. In a third case, the head
 of the National Security Bureau (NSB), Yin Tsung-wen, sued a Taipei newspaper
 for reporting that he had ordered his agents to tap the telephones of National As-
 sembly delegates who were protesting a proposed constitutional change. After the
 newspaper printed a retraction, the NSB Director dropped his suit. To date, these
 libel actions do not appear to have lessened the vigor with which the media question
 the actions of Taiwan's leaders.
 There is a vigorous and active free press despite the Publications Law, which em-
 powers the police to seize or ban printed material that is seditious, treasonous, sac-
 rilegious, interferes with the lawful exercise of public functions, or violates public
 order or morals. There were no reports of censorship of the print media during the
 year, nor were there any seizures of materials on political grounds. The police do
 sometimes conduct raids to seize pornographic materials.
 The Government Information Office (010) has demanded that any publications
 imported from mainland China be sent to the GIO Publications Department for
 screening before sale or publication in Taiwan. The GIO still seeks to ban the impor-
 tation of publications that advocate communism or the establishment of united front
 organizations, endanger public order or good morals, or violate regulations or laws.
 However, few local publishing companies observe this regulation, and substantial
 People's Republic of China-origin material is imported every year. Moreover, cable
 television systems broadcast uncensored television channels from mainland China.
 Among other restrictions regulating the media are those precluding people pre-
 viously convicted of sedition from owning, managing, or working in television and
 radio stations. Major opposition leaders, many of whom were convicted of sedition
 after the December 1979 Kaohsiung incident, are nevertheless not affected because
 their rights were restored through presidential amnesties.
 There are few restrictions on academic freedom. The expression of dissenting po-
 litical views is common.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, but the authorities restrict this right somewhat in practice.
 The Parade and Assembly Law permits peaceful demonstrations as long as they do
 not promote communism or advocate Taiwan's separation from mainland China and
 are approved in advance by the police department in the locality of the demonstra-
 tion. In practice the authorities do not interfere with demonstrators advocating
 independence for Taiwan. In 1996 the authorities indicted a telecommunications
 union leader, Chang Shi-chung, under the Parade and Assembly Law as a result
 of a peaceful demonstration, which authorities charged was excessively noisy, held
 outside the Legislative Yuan in January (see Section 6.a.). Two Aborigine dem-
 onstrators, who were prosecuted under the law for an unauthorized demonstration
 in 1995, served 1-year jail sentences. One of them, Lin Wen-hsiung, now works at
 the Executive Yuan's Aboriginal Affairs Commission. Of the four senior leaders of
 the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) who were prosecuted for leading
 unauthorized demonstrations in 1992, two have paid a fine, one-a current LY
 Member-served 41 days in jail, and the case of the fourth remains unresolved as
 he has so far declined either to pay his fine or go to jail.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, but the authorities also re-
 strict this right somewhat in practice. The Civic Organization Law requires all civic
 organizations to register; however, the central authorities have refused to approve
 registration of some groups-such as the Taiwan Association for Human Rights
 (TAHR), the Taiwan ssociation of University Professors, and the Taiwan Environ-
 mental Protection Alliance-which use the word "Taiwan" in their titles (a usage
 that some authorities still frown on as promoting Taiwan independence). The au-
 thorities note that the Civic Organization Law requires that the name of a civic or-
 ganization must correspond to the administrative district it covers; i.e., the "Repub-
 lic of China" for island-wide organizations. The lack of registration entails some in-
 convenience to the operations of these groups. For example, they may not solicit do-
 nations from the public, and contributors may not take income tax deductions for
 their contributions. Nonetheless, they operate actively, freely, and effectively. In
 1997 the Taiwan Association for Human Rights registered with the DPP-led Taipei
 city government, which does not impose such restrictions on the use of the word
 "Taiwan." The registration removes most of the legal impediments but raises as yet
 unanswered questions about the legality of the group's operations, such as fundrais-
 ing, outside of Taipei.
 
 
 759
 A 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the Executive Yuan
 the power to dissolve political parties. This power now resides in the Constitutional
 Court. Grounds for dissolution include objectives or actions that are deemed to jeop-
 ardize the existence of the "Republic of China." The Constitutional Court heard no
 cases under this law in 1997.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The authorities do not restrict freedom of internal travel. Foreign travel
 by Taiwan passport holders is common.
 Nonresident Taiwan passport holders are usually issued "overseas Chinese- pass-
 ports and must seek entry permits for travel to Taiwan. According to 1992 revisions
 to the National Security Law, entry permits may be refused only if there are facts
 sufficient to create a strong suspicion that a person is engaged in terrorism or vio-
 lence. Reasons for entry and exit refusals must be given, and appeals may be made
 to a special board. No exit or entry permit refusals were reported during 1997. In
 1993 new measures provided that holders of Taiwan passports who normally reside
 abroad may return and regain their household registration, a document required to
 vote or participate as a candidate in an election.
 Since 1988 Taiwan has substantially relaxed strictures against travel by Talwan
 residents to the Chinese mainland, and such travel is common. Relatively tight re-
 strictions on the entry of Chinese from the mainland remain in force.
 There is no law under which noncitizens may ask for asylum, and there were no
 applications for refugee status in 1997. While the authorities have been reluctant
 to return to the mainland those who might suffer political persecution there, they
 regularly deport to the mainland, under provisions of the Mainland Relations Act,
 mainlanders who illegally enter the island for economic reasons. In July the authori-
 ties returned to mainland China two hijackers of People's Republic of China nation-
 ality who had completed sentences imposed by Taiwan courts. There were no reports
 of forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal immigrants (most from mainland China)
 continued to be criticized by local media. The Entry and Exit Bureau admitted that
 the three detention camps are overcrowded but blamed mainland Chinese authori-
 ties, who insist on extensive background checks, for delays in accepting the timely
 repatriation of illegal immigrants.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right. In 1996 Taiwan for the first time carried out the direct,
 popular election of its president, thus completing its transition to a democratic,
 multiparty political system. The transition began with the lifting of martial law in
 1987. After generally free and fair popular elections for the LY in 1992, the second
 direct election of all LY members took place in December 1995. Previously, the
 President and Vice President had been indirectly elected by the National Assembly
 (NA), which now stands for popular election every 4 years and is charged mainly
 with amending the Constitution.
 The KMT remains the largest political party, with 2 million members, although
 voters gave it only a slim majority in the December 1995 elections for the LY. The
 KT holds only 80 of the 157 seats in the legislature. The Democratic Progressive
 Party, which traditionally had advocated independence for Taiwan and has an esti-
 mated 140,000 members, controls 45 LY seats. It won 12 of 23 mayor and county
 magistrate posts in November, including that of Taipei County. Since the DPP al-
 ready held the mayoralty of Taipei municipality, 72 percent of Taiwan's population
 was living in DPP-led localities at year's end. The New Party was established in
 1993 by younger KMT members who opposed the Party's domination by "main-
 stream ethnic Taiwanese supporters of President and Party Chairman Lee Teng-
 hui. The New Party has 19 seats in the LY and claims a membership of 86,000.
 The KMT benefits from its ownership of the major television channels and of en-
 terprises and business holdings estimated to be worth in excess of $6 billion, and
 from the fact that its members still hold most key positions in the political system,
 sometimes concurrently with important party positions. In recent years, opposition
 parties have grown rapidly, however, and freely contest elections, criticize the au-
 thorities, and influence national policy through the legislative process. In 1994 a
 member of the DPP was elected mayor of Taipei, a position that makes him a mem-
 ber of the Cabinet.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but their role in politics,
 while increasing, remains limited. Nevertheless, a number of women hold senior ad-
 ministrative and KMT positions, including Minister of Interior Yeh Ching-feng, Min-
 
 
 760
 ister without Portfolio and KMT Central Standing Committee (CSC) member Shir-
 ley Kuo (a former Finance Minister), CSC member Hou Tsai-feng, and one major
 eneral in the armed forces. In addition, 22 of 157 LY members, 61 of 334 National
 ssembly members, 16 of 79 Provincial Assembly members, 2 of 26 Control Yuan
 members, and 255 of 1,300 judges are women.
 Aborigine representatives participate in most levels of the political system, par-
 tially through 6 reserved seats in the NA and LY and 2 seats in the Provincial As-
 sembly-half of each elected b the plains Aborigines and half by mountain Aborig-
 ines. An Aborigine serves as Chairman of the Aboriginal Affairs Commission. The
 magistrate of Taitung County is an Aborigine first elected in 1993 and reelected in
 1997.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The principal human rights organiations are the establishment-oriented Chinese
 Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the opposition-aligned Taiwan Associa-
 tion for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination between the two bodies is limited. De-
 spite the authorities' refusal to register it (see Section 2.b.), the TAHR operates free-
 ly. Both organizations investigate human rights complaints, many of which come to
 public attention through the media and statements by lawmakers from all political
 parties. The authorities permit representatives of international human rights orga-
 nizations to visit and meet with citizens freely. Women's and children s human
 rights groups monitor police and judicial performance and campaign to correct
 abuses (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality of citizens before the law "irrespective of
 sex, religion, race, class, or party affiliation." Constitutional amendments enacted in
 July also provide for the rights of disabled persons. While the authorities are com-
 mitted to protecting these rights, some areas of discrimination continue to exist.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence and rape, remains
 a serious problem. Wife beating is especially widespread. The DPP Women's Devel-
 opment Committee claimed that 35 percent of married women were victims of
 spousal abuse. The authorities have funded domestic violence hot lines, which have
 handled some 17,000 cases over the past decade. According to the law, a prosecutor
 may not investigate domestic violence cases until a spouse files a formal lawsuit.
 Although some cases are prosecuted, strong social pressure discourages abused
 women from reporting incidents to the police in order to avoid disgracing their fami-
 lies. Rape also remains a serious problem, and its victims are socially stigmatized.
 One expert estimates that 7,000 rapes occur annually-10 times the number re-
 ported to the police. Because rape trials are public, women have been reluctant to
 prosecute their attackers. Support from feminist and social welfare organizations,
 however, has made victims more willing to come forward and press charges. Under
 the law, the authorities may not prosecute for rape without the victim's formal com-
 plaint. The Criminal Code establishes the punishent for rape as not less than 5
 years' imprisonment, and those convicted are usually sentenced to from 5 to 10
 years in prison.
 During the year, 1,140 persons were arrested for the crime of rape, 664 were in-
 dicted, and 228 were convicted. In the other cases the charges were either dropped
 for lack of evidence, or because the victim withdrew her complaint, or the cases
 were still before the courts.
 In May two massive demonstrations in Taipei protested the perceived deteriora-
 tion of personal safety, with a particular emphasis on violince against women.
 These demonstrations led to the resignations of several senior officials, including the
 Minister of the Interior. The same month, the authorities created a supraministerial
 commission charged with providing psychological assistance, legal counseling, voca-
 tional training, and health care for women in need.
 Prostitution, including coerced prostitution and child prostitution, is also a prob-
 lem although there is little public concern about adult prostitution. When the police
 discover illegal prostitution, the cases are prosecuted according to the Criminal
 Code. However, under the "Prostitute Management Regulations," prostitution is
 legal in registered houses of prostitution in one section of Kaohsiung. In September
 the Taipei municipal government ended legal prostitution in registered houses of
 prostitution in specified areas of that city.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, and the LY has in recent years begun a sys-
 tematic review and revision of those portions of the legal code relating to divorce,
 property, and child custody. As a result, recent legislation has eliminated many dis-
 
 
 761
 criminatory sections of the code. In 1994 the CGJ declared unconstitutional a Civil
 Code provision dating back to the 1930's that gave fathers priority in child custody
 disputes. In 1996 the LY passed legislation that clarified a woman's right to her
 own property. In 1997 the LY repealed legislation requiring that a child take the
 father's name; the parents may now choose to give the child either the father's or
 mother's family name.
 There is no equal employment rights law, and enforcement of existing sex dis-
 crimination laws remains a problem. Labor laws provide for maternity ieave, but
 employers do not always grant it. Women also have complained of being forced to
 quit jobs upon marriage or because of age or pregnancy. Women often complain of
 less fequent promotions and lower salaries than their male counterparts. According
 to the Council on Labor Affairs, salaries for women average 85 percent of those for
 men performing roughly equal jobs.
 In the past, many women married to foreigners said that their husbands had a
 more difficult time obtainingresidency than the foreign wives of male citizens. They
 also complained that their children were not allowed to enter public schools. In 1995
 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced a relaxation of the regulations governing
 foreign husbands' residence permits that allows the foreign husbands of citizens to
 remain in Taiwan for 6 months at a time rather than the shorter periods granted
 previously. The LY also passed new legislation permitting the children of foreign fa-
 thers to attend public schools. However, the Citizenship Law continues to stipulate
 that the transmission of citizenship may occur exclusively through the father. A citi-
 zen mother with a foreign husband thus cannot apply for a Taiwan passport for her
 child.
 Children.-The Constitution has provisions to protect children's rights, and the
 authorities are committed to supporting them. Education for children between 6 and
 15 years of age is compulsory and this rule is enforced. Children are also provided
 health care under the national health insurance scheme.
 Child abuse is a significant problem. The 1993 revision of the Child Welfare Act
 mandates that any persons discovering cases of child abuse or neglect must notify
 the police, social welfare, or child welfare authorities, that child welfare specialists
 must do so within 24 hours, and that the authorities involved must issue an inves-
 tigation report within 24 hours. Both the Ministry of Interior Social Affairs Depart-
 ment and private organization specialists assert that these requirements are fol-
 lowed.
 Child prostitution is a serious problem involving between 40,000 and 60,000 chil-
 dren, an estimated 5 percent of whom are Aborigines, according to reports by police
 and social workers. Most child prostitutes range from 12 through 16 years or age.
 The juvenile welfare law enables juvenile welfare bodies, prosecutors, and victims
 to apply to courts for termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment
 of qualified guardians if parents have forced their children into prostitution. If chil-
 dren are engaged in prostitution of their own free will, and the parents are incapa-
 ble of providing safe custody, the courts may order competent authorities to provide
 counseling for not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal
 loopholes and cultural barriers remain obstacles to enforcement. For example, if
 both parents have sold a child into prostitution, a problem associated mostly with
 Aborigine families, the law requires the child to lodge a complaint before prosecu-
 tion is undertaken. In many cases, the child is reluctant or afraid to do so.
 According to some reports, violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion
 are used by brothel owners to prevent child prostitutes from escaping. In 1995 the
 LY passed legislation providing for as much as 2 years' incarceration for customers
 of prostitutes under the age of 18. The legislation also requires the publication of
 the names of violators in newspapers. Several hundred persons have been arrested
 under this law, and 146 were indicted; as yet none are known to have been con-
 victed.
 People With Disabilities.-The Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strength-
 ened in 1990. It prohibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum
 fines at approximately $2,400 for violators. under these revisions, new public build-
 ings, facilities, and transportation equipment must be accessible to the disabled,
 while existing public buildings were to be brought into conformity by 1995. Although
 new buildings appear to meet many accessibility requirements, there does not as yet
 appear to be sub6stantial effort aimed at refitting older buildings to accommodate
 disabled people.
 A leading expert in the field estimates that the number of disabled is between
 400,000 and 500,000-possibly as high as 700,000. One-third of the total are se-
 verely disabled and receive shelter or nursing care from the authorities. The Dis-
 abled Welfare Law requires large public and private organizations to hire disabled
 persons equal to 2 and 1 percent of their work forces respectively. Organizations
 
 
 failing to do so must pay, for each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly sal-
 ary (approximately $570) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institu-
 tions involved in welfare for the disabled. Many organizations complain that it is
 difficult to find qualified disabled workers, andthey appear to prefer to pay the
 fines involved. The authorities have noted the impact of a traditional belief that the
 disabled lack the ability to do real work.
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's only non-Chinese          1no 1up consists of the Ab-
 original descendants ef Malayo-Polynesians already established in Taiwan when the
 first Chinese settlers arrived. According to MOI statistics, there are 357,000 Aborig-
 ines. More than 70 percent are Christian, while the dominant Han Chinese are
 largely Buddhist or Taoist. The civil and political rights of Aborigines are fully pro-
 tected under law. The National Assembly amended the Constitution in 1992 and
 again in July to upgrade the status of Aboriginal people, protect their right of politi-
 cal participation, and ensure cultural, ationtiona anand business development. In ad-
 dition the authorities have instituted social programs to help Aborigines assimilate
 into the dominant Chinese society. A new cabinet-level agency, the Aboriginal Af-
 fairs Commission, was created, although critics noted that its budget was quite
 small. Aspart of its efforts to preserve ethnic identities, the Ministry of Education
 now includes some A riginal-langage classes in primary schools.
 Although they face no official iscrimination, Aborigines have had little impact,
 over the years, on major decisions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and the
 alocation of their natural resources. In addition, they coMplain that they are pre-
 vented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities' con-
 trol, some of which have been designated as national parks or conservation areas.
 Land rights remain a crucial issue for Aborigines, along with social discrimination,
 educational under-achievement, low economic status, and high rates of alcoholism.
 Some Aboriginal leaders have come to believe that only some form of autonomy can
 preserve their land rights, which are constantly threatened by Han developers who
 use connections and corruption to gain title to Aboriginal land. According to MOI
 aistoics, only about 50 percent of Aborigine children complete elementary school.
 In the past, Aborigines were not nllowedto use non-Chinese personal names on
 legal documents but this was changed by legislation in 1996.
 The sale of Aboriginal girls into prostitution by their parents is a serious social
 problem (see Children above). However, recent reports have indicated that in the
 period from June 1994 to July 1995, the percentage of all arrested child prostitutes
 who were of Aboriginal origin dropped from 15 percent to 5 percent. This reduction
 may have come about due to intensive efforts on the part of social workers and non-
 governmental organizations to combat the practice of selling female children into
 prostitution.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In 1995 the Judicial Yuan decided that the right to
 organize trade unions is protected by the Constitution. But, until new legislation im-
 plementing this decision is passed, teachers, civil servants, and defense industry
 workers are still not permitted to form labor unions. Even with this ruling, there
 are a number of laws and regulations limiting the right of association. Labor unions
 may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but they must submit these to the
 authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved if they do not meet certification re-
 quirements or if their activities disturb public order. However, there were no in-
 stances of the authorities dissolving local labor groups or denying new unions cer-
 tification.
 The Labor Union Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by secret
 ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes rejected KMT or management-
 endorsed union slates.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including a city,
 county, or province, can have competing labor confederations. There is only one Tai-
 wan-wide labor federation, the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL) which is closely
 associated with the ruin  KMT. In August Lee Cheng-hung, Board Chairman of the
 CFL, was elected to the XMT's Central Standing Committee.
 The restriction on island-wide unions was challenged in 1994 when 12 unions
 from state-run enterprises announced that they would withdraw from the CFL and
 establish a new national federation of labor unions of state-run enterprises. The
 Council of Labor Affairs (CLA) turned down their application, as well as the appeal
 of that rejection. In the meantime, the trade unions have retained their seats in the
 CFL. Twenty trade unions with a combined membership of 4,000 are affiliated as
 the National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists. Although the affiliates are
 legal, the Federation is considered illegal. In general, the drive for independent
 labor unions has lost momentum in recent years due to the extremely low unem-
 
 
 763
 ployment rates, higher wages, the shift from manufacturing to service industries,
 the small scale and poor organization of most unions, and prosecution of labor activ-
 ists by the authorities in the past.
 The law governing labor disputes recognizes the right of unions to strike but im-
 poses restrictions that make legal strikes difficult and seriously weaken collective
 bargaining. For example, the authorities require mediation of labor/management
 disputes when they deem the disputes to be sufficiently serious or to involve "unfair
 practices." The law forbids both labor and management from disrupting the "work-
 ng order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. The law mandates
 stiff penalties for violations of no-strike/no-retaliation clauses. Employers in the past
 sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers without any legal
 action being taken against them, although there were no such cases reported in
 1997. The CLA reported that from 1990 to August 1995, there were 31 strikes, of
 which 22 involved workers at bus companies asking for increased pay and reduced
 hours. There were no strikes recorded in 1996. One strike involving a pay dispute
 at a trucking company occurred in July 1997.
 In July Tseng Mao-hsing, a labor activist, was convicted of creating a public haz-
 ard and sentenced to 22 months' incarceration. Tseng led 80 laid-off workers from
 a garment factory to lie down on railroad tracks to demand severance pay. The 80
 workers were sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment, but the sentences were suspended
 subject to their subsequent good behavior.
 Taiwan was expelled from the International Labor Organization in 1971 when the
 People's Republic of China replaced Taiwan in the United Nations. The CFL is affili-
 ated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for the categories of
 workers noted in Section 6.a., the Labor Union Law and the Settlement of Labor
 Disputes Law give workers the right to organize and bargain collectively. As of
 March, some 3 million workers, approximately 32.1 percent of Taiwan's 9.4-million
 person labor force, belonged to 3,706 registered labor unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss,
 or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union members. In practice,
 however, union leaders have sometimes been dismissed without reasonable cause by
 employers, and observers point out that the law sets no specific penalties for viola-
 tions. According to the illegal National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists,
 over 400 trade unionists and supporters have been fired since Taiwan's labor move-
 ment began to expand after the 1987 lifting of martial law. At least 20 trade union
 officers were discharged by employers in 1997.
 The Collective Agreements Law provides for collective bargaining but does not
 make it mandatory. Since such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises,
 and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this category, the propor-
 tion of workers covered remains small. Employers set wages genera y in accordance
 with market conditions.
 Firms in export processing zones are subject to the same laws regarding treat-
 ment of labor unions as other firms and follow normal practices including collective
 bargaining agreements with their unions.
 c. Prohiition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Standards Law pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of these practices, apart
 from coerced prostitution (see Section 5). The law prohibits forced and bonded labor
 by children, and the authorities generally enforce this prohibition effectively. How-
 ever, some parents of Aboriginal children sell them into prostitution, and the re-
 quirements of the law make prosecution difficult at times (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The au-
 thorities prohibit forced and bonded child labor and generally enforce this prohibi-
 tion effectively, although the sale of Aboriginal children into prostitution remains
 a problem (see Section 6.c.). The Labor Standards Law stipulates age 15, after com-
 pulsory education required by law ends, as the minimum age for employment. Coun-
 ty and city labor bureaus enforce minimum age laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Standards Law (LSL) mandates
 labor standards. According to the CIA, the law covers 3.6 million of Taiwan's 6.3
 million salaried workers. The law is not well enforced in areas such as overtime
 work and pay or retirement payments.
 The CLIA raised the minimum monthiy wage by 3.13 percent to $485 (NT$ 15,840)
 effective October 16. While sufficient in cheaper areas, this is less than what is
 needed to assure a decent standard of living for a worker and family in metropolitan
 areas such as Taipei. However, the average manufacturing wage is more than dou-
 ble the legal minimum wage, and the aversge for service industry employees is even
 higher. The law limits the workweek to 48 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days per week)
 and requires 1 day off in every 7 days.
 
 
 The 1991 Revised Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to in-
 clude workers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and appeared to
 strengthen penalties for safety violations. It nevertheless still provides only minimal
 standards for working conditions and health and safety precautions. The Occupa-
 tional Safety and Health Law gives workers the right to remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment. Some critics,
 however, see the law as a step backward; for example, they note that, under the
 revised law, general contractors are not responsible or the safety of those working
 for subcontractors.
 The 1993 Labor Inspection Law was designed to strengthen the enforcement of
 labor standards and health and safety regulations. It increased the number of enter-
 prises and types of safety issues to be inspected; gave inspectors quasi-judicial pow-
 ers; required pre-examination of dangerous working places such as naphtha-crack-
 ing plants, pesticide factories, and firecracker factories; and raised enalties for vio-
 lations. Critics allege that the CLA does not effectively enforce workplace laws and
 regulations because it employs too few inspectors. There are 212 inspectors for the
 approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational Safety and Health
 Law. Because the new law expanded coverage to include more enterprises, the in-
 spection rate actually declined. Since many enterprises are small, family-owned op-
 erations employing relatives unlikely to report violations, actual adherence to the
 hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to document but is
 believed to be minimal in these smaller enterprises.
 Because of an acute labor shortage, there has been a legal influx of foreign work-
 ers in the last several years. The law stipulates that foreign workers who are em-
 ployed legally receive the same protection as local workers. However, authorities say
 that in many cases illegal foreign workers, many from Thailand and the Philippines,
 receive board and lodging from their employers, but no medical coverage, accident
 insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by citizens. In addition, observers say that con-
 ditions in many small and medium-sized factories that employ illegal foreign labor
 are dangerous, due to old andpory maintained equipment. It was reported in May
 that foreign workers empgging tunnels were discharged and returned to
 their home countries without medical treatment when they exhibited the symptoms
 of decompression sickness, acquired from working in pressurized casements under-
 ground, In contrast, following a September explosion, the media reported that Thai
 workers would receive medical treatment and compensation for injuries suffered in
 the accident equivalent to that received by citizens. Illegal foreign workers remain
 even more vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation of passports, imposition
 of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working hours without over-
 time pay. There are also occasional reports of mistreatment of legal foreign workers.
 According to available statistics, there are almost 246,000 legal foreign workers, in-
 cluding approximately 137,000 workers from Thailand and 95,000 workers from the
 Philippines. The unemployment rate among citizens in mid-1997 was 2.6 percent,
 leading the CIA to suggest relaxing restrictions on the number of foreign workers
 entering Taiwan to allow an additional quota of 38,000 individuals.
