TAIWAN (Republic of China)
The report on Taiwan provides a fair assessment of hmnan rights conditions during a period of significant political chaise. Nonetheless, there are some misleading statements and several important omissions.
Most important, the report does not discuss significant restrictions on internationally recognized human rights that are contained in the new National Security Law, including the prohibition of assemblies and associations that "violate the constitution or advocate communism or the diwsion of the national territory," i.e., the territories that include the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) and Taiwan. Although the report discusses identical restrictions in a draft law on assembly and demonstrations, and notes that activists who had peacefully called for independence were charged with sedition in 1987, these restrictions in the National Security Law should have been described given the importance of the law in post-martial law Taiwan.
The report also omits a number of very important political cases, which should have been discussed to give the reader a better understanding of the limits of reform. These cases include a nimiber of long-term prisoners who remained in custody during 1987 for having peacefully expressed their views, including Pai Ya-tsan, Chang Hua-min, Shih Mmg-teh, Wang Ching-hsiung, Hsu Chao-hung and Hou Teh-fu. Similarly, the section on freedom of assembly should have discussed the "6/12" case, involving a prosecution of opposition activists in connection with a demonstration held on June 12,1987. In that case, opposition leaders were charged under the Criminal Code in connection with violence that broke out at the demonstration. Eyewitness accounts suggest that violence was not instigated by the opposition demonstrators, but began when counterdemonstrators broke through a police line, wielding broken-off flagpoles as clubs. There is no indication that the opposition leaders engaged in, advocated or encouraged violence.
151
Critique
Discussion of particular cases would also have helped illuminate the issues described in the fair trial section. For example, in the trial of the independence activists mentioned above, the court displayed a lack of impartiality, refusing to consider videotapes, witness testimony, and other exculpatory evidence that the defense wished to introduce. Given the human r^ts significance of this case, it is very likely that the American Institute in Taiwan (ATT) — the U.S. government-funded, non-profit corporation that represents U.S. interests in the absence of diplomatic relations — had a good deal of information about the conduct of the trial, even though it had, regrettably, declined to send an observer.
The report omits mention of the restrictions imposed on the civil rights of ex-poUtical prisoners, who suffer under burdensome and, in some cases, lifelong deprivations. These include the right to vote, the right to run for public office, the right to campaign for candidates, the right to practice numerous professions, the right to hold any managerial position in any company, and the right to serve as a publisher.
In the section on freedom of the press, the report states that only one locally published magazine was banned after the lifting of martial law, which conflicts with information that we obtained in Taiwan. According to our information, dozens of issues of a number of magazines were banned after the lifting of martial law.
The report mentions only in passing prison protests and rioting that took place in late 1987. It should have described a number of factors that raise legitimate questions about the actions of the authorities in these incidents, which took place on Green Island and Taitung. According to reports from Taiwan, some eight inmates died during the riots at Green Island. Although the authorities claimed that these deaths were all suicides, officials were also reported to have paid substantial sums to the families of the dead inmates as part of an agreement by which the families refused to give information to the press or to human rights lawyers.
In discussing the right of the citizens of Taiwan to change their government, the report begins with a curious statement:
152
Taiwan
[TJhe aging KMT leadership...continues to place significant restrictions on the right of Taiwan's citizens to change their government.
In fact, the citizens of Taiwan are denied the right to change their government, as surviving mainland legislators elected in 1948 continue to hold seats in bodies in which only a minority of the members are elected. Although the section does explain this system in some detail, the topic sentence that introduces this discussion is seriously inaccurate.
The section on freedom of movement accurately describes progress in this area, in particular the new policy of permitting family visits to the mainland. However, the report contains an inadequate discussion of the government's continued refusal on political grounds to permit certain non-resident citizens to visit or to return to live in Taiwan. Moreover, the report does not even mention the government's refusal on political groimds to permit visits by foreign passport-holders who were born in Taiwan. This refusal, which conflicts with evolving international standards on promoting contacts among family members living in different countries, should be mentioned in next year's report. At least hundreds are affected by these restrictions.
153
Critique
