 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity, long dominated by the Nationalist Party (KMT)
 in an essentially authoritarian system, continued its
 transition to a more open and pflralistic system in 1990.
 Despite occasional street demonstrations and altercations in
 the legislative chambers, this process continued to develop in
 a positive and generally peaceful manner.
 Dissatisfaction with Taiwan's political institutions was
 reflected in student demonstrations in March. These were
 touched off by widespread public reaction against the efforts
 of senior parliamentarians--elected four decades ago on the
 Chinese mainland--to expand their role in the political
 process as well as by intraruling party divisions over
 selection of the President. President Lee Teng-hui
 subsequently announced the convening of a National Affairs
 Conference (NAC) for Jund 28. The NAC called for a number of
 significant political and constitutional reforms (see Section.
 3.). The President separately issued a Presidential Decree
 pardoning or granting limited amnesty to 27 current or former-
 politicalprisoners.
 The Legislative Yuan (LY), Taiwan's lawmaking body, continued
 to expand as a forum for policy debate, reaching a significant
 milestone toward popular control of the-political process in
 early August when for the first time supplemental legislators
 from Taiwan outnumbered elderly members representing Chinese
 mainland eonstituencies- The LY also became- more pluralistic
 as the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) increased
 its representation. from 11 to 21 seats, and for the first time
 fielded a candidate for the position of LY speaker. DPP and
 younger generation KMT legislators representing Taiwan
 constituencies influenced the policymaking process through
 interpellations and criticism of the Executive Yuan, or
 Cabinet. However, Taiwan's contral parliamentary bodies, the
 National Assembly (electoral collegeY and the LY, remained
 constitute under a representational formula that maintained
 the predominant role- of the KMT. The authorities have-
 initiated reforms to enhance the representative nature of
 thesq bodies; but.changes remain controversial, both within
 the KMT and between the KMT and the dpposition. Moreover, -
 while the Judicial Yuan's Grand Justices have mandated the
 retirement of all senior parliamentarians by the end of 1991,
 this decision has encountered resistance from some of the
 elders who rejected the ruling-as unconstitutional.
 Native Taiwanese comprise an estimated 85 percent of the
 island's population, with Chinese mainlanders and their
 offspring comprising the remainder. As increasing numbers of
 Taiwanese and younger generation "mainlanders" ascend to
 leading administratiire and political positions, the dominant
 position of old guard KMT mainlanders continues to erode.
 However, leadership of the military and security agencies has
 remained predominantly mainlander.
 The military's role in politics has been reduced considerably
 since the lifting of martial law in 1987. Nevertheless,
 comments by Premier (and former army general and defense
 minister) Hau Pei-Tsun have raised concerns about the
 military's commitment to the reform process, and the military
 continues to play a significant role in coordinating the
 numerous "antihooligan" sweeps which have taken place since
 Hau became Premier in May 1990.
 
 
 868
 TAIWAN
 Citing deteriorating social conditions in Taiwan, security
 authorities in July launched a new "law and order" campaign.
 In 1990 police arrested 2,277 alleged hoodlums. On the basis
 of quasi-judicial procedures, 1,627 were sent for reformatory
 education (see Section l.d.) While there were complaints that
 police in certain localities threatened labor rights activists
 with prosecution under the antihoodlum law or similar laws, no
 cases of actual prosecution of labor activities under these
 statutes were reported.
 Taiwan's economy continued to grow moderately in 1990, with
 per capita income reaching a level of approximately $7,500.
 The unemployment rate remained under 2 percent, with a
 resulting demand for illegal immigrant labor. While basically
 a free market economy, major sectors--including finance,
 steel, shipbuilding, transportation, telecommunications,
 utilities, and petrochemicals--continued to be dominated by
 state-run enterprises.
 The human rights situation continued to improve in 1990 with
 the convening of the NAC and more representative parliamentary
 bodies, as well as greater freedoms of travel and expression.
 Nonetheless, significant restrictions still remained. The
 principal areas of concern included restrictions on freedom of
 speech, press, movement, association, the right of citizens to
 change their government, and worker and women's rights. There
 were also concerns about politically motivated prosecutions,
 selective enforcement of the laws, and unfair political
 practices, including restrictions on access to the mass media.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Human rights activists claim there were nine instances of
 death in police custody through October. Several KMT and
 opposition candidates in local elections held in January were
 targets of violence. Tsai Chin-hsing, the DPP candidate for
 mayor in Taitao, was fatally shot by an unknown assailant.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment.
 Although Taiwan law expressly prohibits the use of torture,
 there continued to be credible reports of persons subjected to
 physical abuse while in police custody. Ministry of Justice
 officials claim that all interrogations conducted by the
 Ministry's investigation bureau are tape recorded and that all
 allegations of mistreatment are investigated. They also say
 that the right of persons to have an attorney present during
 interrogation is another check on torture. However, criminal
 lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur
 in local police stations where interrogations are not recorded
 and that most persons do not have attorneys present at the
 interrogation stage.
 
 
 869
 TAIWAN
 Abuse- of'military conscripts Is a continuing problem.  In
 October five military policemen were arrested for allegedly
 beating a staff sergeant to death in a military prison in July
 after torturing him with an elebtric prod.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Police may legally arrest without a warrant anyone they
 suspect of committing a'crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison, and may call in persons for
 questioning without a formal summons. Critics in the leqal
 establishment, the press, and the legislature point out that
 these procedures sometimes lead to abuses.
 Taiwan law requires that, within 24 hours after an. arrest, the
 arresting authorities must give nQtice in writing to the
 arrested person, or his designated relative or friend, stating
 the reason for the arrest or detention. The code of criminal
 procedure specifies that the authorities may detain an accused
 person for up to 2 months during the investigation phase prior
 to filing a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months during
 the trial. Furthermore, during the ihvestigativd phase, the
 prosecuting officer may apply to the court'for one extension
 of 2 months. The period of detention during trial may be
 extended twice. The-authorities generally have followed these
 procedures and extended the periods of detention, although
 trial usually takes place withili 3 months of indictment.
 Persons indicted for relatively minor criminal offenses can be
 released on bail at the judge's discretion. The right to have
 a lawyer present during the investigation phase is generally
 respected, but defense lawyers complain that persons often are
 not advised of their right to have legal representation during
 police interrogation, and there is no legal requirement that
 indigent persons be provided with counsel during police
 interrogation.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan passed the  antihoodlum"
 law, which accords'police authorities broad powers,-includinq
 the power to determine whether a person should be designated
 as a "hoodlum." -The courts approve or deny police requests
 for reformatory education of alleged hoodlums. Human rights
 organizations and defense attorneys criticize the law as an
 extreme departure from appropriate, standards 6f due process.
 Attorneys f6r persons charged under the liw have no right to
 examine documents or to cross-examine witnesses. While a
 decision to commit an alleged hoodlum to reformatory education
 can, in principle, be appealed to the High Court, critics say.
 that courts simply put a rubber stamp on police decisions.
 Prior to the lifting of- martial law, reformatory education for
 "hoodlums" was under the exclusive jurisdiction of the
 military. The process of transferring all nonmilitary
 prisoner to civilian control has been completed. The law
 does not authorize the courts to determine the length of
 reformatory education; police and prison authorities decide.
 The usual term is 3 to 6 months for a first offense. Repeat
 offenders are detained for longer periods and detention may be
 extended up to 3 years, depending on behavior in custody.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under the police
 offenses law, which authorizes police to punish an offender
 with incarceration of up to 14 days, a fine of no more than
 approximately $11.50, or forced labor of no more than 16
 hours. Despite the 1980 opinion of the Council of Grand
 Justices (theoretically empowered to decide constitutional
 issues) that the statute is unconstitutional, it continues to
 
 
 870
 TAIWAN
 be used pending the enactment of a law for the maintenance of
 social order which the legislature has under consideration.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide for trial by jury. All judges are
 appointed by, and responsible to, the Judicial Yuan. The
 judiciary is not fully independent and is susceptible to
 political and personal pressure. Since the lifting of martial
 law on July 15, 1987, civilians may no longer be tried in
 military courts. Trials are public, but attendance at trials
 involving juveniles or politically sensitive issues may
 require permission from the court. Defendants have a right to
 an attorney, but an attorney will be assigned by the court
 only in serious cases. If the defendant is suspected of
 committing a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years'
 imprisonment, or if the defendant is handicapped or elderly,
 the judge may assign an attorney.
 In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not directly by a defense
 attorney or prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear
 witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to submit.
 Criminal law specifically provides the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases generally are heard in several brief court
 sessions, often separated by weeks or months. Persons
 convicted in cases in which the sentence exceeds 3 years have
 a right to appeal to the High Court and the Supreme Court.
 The Supreme Court limits its review to the legal aspects of
 the case and to specific procedural aspects. The National
 Security Law stipulates, contrary to provisions in the
 original martial law decrees, that convictions under martial
 law cannot be appealed in the postmartial law period.
 All judicial decisions must be reviewed by senior judges to
 correct errors of law and terminology. Only the decisions of
 junior judges are subject to substantive review. Some
 observers say, however, that the practice of reviewing
 decisions increases the possibility of outside interference
 with the judicial process. In 1987 a review of judicial
 procedures initiated by the authorities resulted in a proposal
 to abolish this practice. Changes have been made in the
 review procedure, but the practice continues.
 Security forces continue to monitor political expression, both
 in Taiwan and overseas, and the authorities continued to try
 political opponents on charges ranging from "sedition" to
 "harming public order." "Sedition" is defined to include
 expressing sympathy with communism, espousing views contrary
 to the authorities' claim to represent all of China, and
 supporting an independent legal status for Taiwan. The charge
 of "harming public order" can be extended to include
 demonstrations led by the opposition.
 DPP activist Huang Hua was convicted of "preparation for
 sedition" in connection with his call for "a new country and a
 new constitution"--a euphemism for Taiwan independence, and
 was sentenced on December 8 to 10. years imprisonment. Huang
 was also indicted in June under the Demonstration Law (see
 Section 2.b.).
 
 
 TAIWAN
 In celebration of the May 20 presidential inauguration, Taiwan
 authorities announced a limited amnesty covering 27 current or
 former political prisoners. Among those released were the
 last "Kaohsiung Incident" defendants still incarcerated: Shih
 Ming-te, in custody since 1980; and Hsu Hsin-liang, the former
 Taoyuan County Magistrate convicted of sedition and apprehended
 while surreptitiously entering Taiwan in October 1989. These
 two and seven other Kaohsiung Incident figures all received
 full pardons, including restoration of full civil and working
 rights.
 Seven persons were-granted pardons and restoration of civil
 but not working rights. Included in this group were Taiwan
 independence activists Tsai Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-te. Hsu had
 been released on parole in April after serving half his
 sentence.
 One prisoner, Chuang Kuo-ming, was paroled on a sedition
 charge, but continued to serve his jail term for a separate
 conviction for murder. The amnesty, which was limited to past
 sedition convictions, did not affect the case of Chen
 Kuang-fu, a DPP Kaohsiung city councilor who on March 30-began
 serving a 10-month sentence for forgery for having printed a
 false obituary in a pamphlet he produced satirizing the
 Control Yuan. Also not included in the amnesty were persons
 convicted of crimes that were not explicitly political or
 those whose cases still are in the courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Warrantless searches, common before the lifting of martial
 law, are unusual now. A warrant must be obtained before a
 search, except when the search is incidental to arrest. The
 exception is car searches, which are routinely conducted at
 roadblocks.
 Although the right to privacy is generally respected, members
 of opposition political parties and other political dissidents
 do experience invasion of privacy, such as having their
 correspondence and telephone calls routinely intercepted and
 being subject to surveillance.
 During the presidential election, allegations were made that
 the Taiwan National Security Bureau-the principal foreign
 intelligence-gathering organization--had politicians-under
 surveillance. The Bureau reportedly withdrew its agents from
 the National Assembly--the electoral college-where they had
 been posing at employees.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. *Freedom of Speech and Press
 While the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and
 press, these rights continue to be restricted in practice.
 Nevertheless, the authorities have demonstrated increasing
 tolerance for open debate, even on sensitive issues.
 Those who question the legitimacy of Taiwan authorities by
 supporting independence for Taiwan, however, risk being
 charged with sedition. While many public-speeches and
 articles favoring independence go unpunished, the threat of
 punishment remains. Three prosecutions for sedition were
 initiated in 1990. Chen Chao-nan, in Austrian citizen, was
 
 
 872
 TAIWAN
 indicted in June on charges of participating in a seditious
 organization in 1974 (while living in the United States) and
 preparation for sedition. The High Court subsequently
 sentenced Chen to 42 months' imprisonment and deprivation of
 his civil rights for 2 years. Chen has appealed the case to
 the Supreme Court. DPP activist Huang Hua was convicted of
 preparation for sedition as noted in Section 2.e. above.
 Canadian citizen Columbus Leo was acquitted in October of
 sedition charges for advocating Taiwan independence, but the
 prosecutor has appealed the case to the Supreme Court. Leo
 remained in jail, however, on a 10-month sentence for entering
 Taiwan illegally (see Section 2.d.), and the Taiwan High Court
 judge who acquitted Leo on sedition referred his case to the
 Taoyuan District Court on charges of inciting unrest.
 Charges of sedition are brought even in cases other than
 alleged promotion of communism or advocacy of independence.
 Among those pardoned during the May 20 presidential amnesty,
 but still deprived of working and civil rights, was Chen
 Wei-tu, former editor of the Democratic Progressive Weekly.
 Chen was convicted of sedition in 1989 for accusing then Chief
 of the General Staff Hau Pei-tsun of planning a coup d'etat.
 The authorities can censor publications through provisions of
 the Publications Law which empower the police to seize or ban
 printed material that commits or instigates others to commit
 sedition, treason, sacrilege, offenses of interference with
 the lawful exercise of public functions, or offenses against
 public order or morals. The threat of legal action by the
 authorities continues to be a source of indirect control over
 the press.
 The authorities have loosened restrictions on publications
 from the Chinese mainland, and the works of many mainland
 authors have been reprinted. However, even nonpolitical works
 by persons in the People's Republic of China (PRC) Government
 may be deemed unsuitable for publication. Before the lifting
 of martial law, officials routinely censored other foreign
 publications. They continue, sporadically, to restrict
 articles or periodicals they deem offensive, but, overall,
 there is very little official interference with the free flow
 of international news.
 In contrast with the relatively unrestrained and highly
 competitive environment in which the print media now operate,
 television and radio remain tightly controlled. The
 authorities partially or wholly own all three television
 stations. Television coverage of sensitive political
 subjects, such as opposition demonstrations, is restricted and
 slanted. The military and civil authorities control or own 82
 percent of the radio stations. Requests to open new radio and
 television stations have been turned down by the authorities.
 The authorities' continuing efforts to jam PRC radio
 broadcasts have been ineffectual.
 Restrictions on academic freedom remain. Campus publications
 are censored by school administrators; the severity of
 censorship varies widely from campus to campus. Student
 demonstrations occur and are tolerated, at least within
 university campuses, but dissident students risk being
 disciplined if they express their opinions too vigorously.
 Male students risk being harassed after graduation when they
 report for military service if their records show dissident
 activity in college. Colleges and universities have
 "education officers," who are military officers seconded to
 
 
 873
 TAIWAN
 the Ministry of-Education for the purpose of teaching the
 thought of-Sun.Yat-sen, but who also monitor student attitudes
 and behavior.
 Teachers are pressured to discourage students from taking part
 in demonstrations, and risk being disciplined and harming
 their careers if they express unorthodox views themselves.
 There is no system of tenure to protect teachers who express
 such views. A visiting associate professor at the law college
 of National Chonghsing University had her employment
 terminated in July, allegedly because of her participation in
 the student sit-in at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in
 March. (The university maintains the termination was not
 related to her participation.) Changes, however, are-taking
 place on campus, and the trend is to remove political loyalty
 from'professional'consideration. In early 1989, the faculty
 of National Taiwan University, the most-prestigious university
 in Taiwan, voted to prohibit faculty members from holding-
 concurrent pirty and university positions. The effect has
 been to enhance the independence of the faculty from KMT
 political'control.:
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is provided for in the Const'itution but is
 restricted in practice.. In 1987 the LY passed the Parade and
 Assembly Law which allows peaceful demonstrations. These must
 be approved by the authorities and'must not violate the  :
 Constitution or-advocate communism or Taiwan's separation from-
 China. The DPP-and other opposition groups have organized and
 carried out numerous demonstrations under the law.
 The Parade and Assembly taW provides, however; that
 demonstration organizers may be held responsible for the-
 behavior of participawts. Oppositionistshave-been ,prosecuted
 for alleged,.harm to public order and interference-with public
 functions resulting from demonstrations- they drganized. DPP
 activist-Huang Hua, -who had earlier been charged with sedition,
 was indicted in;Juie'for-violation of the demonstrations law.
 Huang allegedly led an illegal protest despite police warnings
 and instructions to disperse-the crowd. In August DPP
 official Li Tsung-Fan was sentenced to 3 years and-2 months in
 prison plus 1 year's -deprivation of civil rights-on charges of
 violating the Election and Recall-Law. Li's alleged crimes
 included illegal assembly and threatening public officials
 during violent protests following the December 1989 election.
 DPP Taipei city-council member Hsieh Chang-tihg in 1989 was'.
 sentericed to 18 months' imprisonment in connection with'a
 demdnstr-ation outside-the LY on June 12, 1987. DPP National
 Asfemblk--member Hong Chi-chang was sentenced in October 1989
 to 15 months in-the same case and to 18 months in connection
 with another demonstration on May 20, 1988. BothtHsieh's and
 Hong's sentences were suspended,'and these cases remain under
 appeal.-Also in October, DPP National Assembly member Huang
 Chao-hui began serving a 7 month prison sentence.for
 organizing an allegedly illegal demonstration in February 1989.
 Prosecutors deny that politics plays a part in decisions to
 bring charges, but the authorities have not-proved that those
 being prosecuted have personally either advocated or engaged
 in violence.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The constitutional provision for freedom to practice religion
 is generally observed in practice. Most-Taiwan inhabitants
 
 
 TAIWAN
 adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism, or a
 combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel. An exit permit is required for travel
 abroad. Authorities in July began issuing bar-coded entry and
 exit permits to Taiwan passport holders. The permits, taped
 or laminated into the passports, include basic information
 about the bearer, such as military status and occupation, and
 are generally good for the validity of the passport. There
 are now no countries to which civilian residents of Taiwan may
 not travel.
 Exit and entry permits may be refused for a number of reasons,
 including failure to complete compulsory military service.
 Under the National Security Law, however, reasons for refusal
 must be given, and appeals may be made to a special board.
 Between January 1 and August 31, according to Bureau of Entry
 and Exit Statistics, some 5,129 applications for entry into
 Taiwan and 1,217 applications for exit were denied pursuant to
 the National Security Law. Of these, 2,689 applications for
 entry and 890 applications for exit were denied on the basis
 of suspicion of posing "grave security risks to national
 security or social stability."
 The authorities claim to recognize the right of Chinese who
 hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in Taiwan, to
 return from abroad. Nonresident citizens are usually issued
 "overseas Chinese" passports and require visas to travel to
 Taiwan. The authorities will not authorize the entry of
 Chinese between the ages of 16 and 70, even those who have
 long held Taiwan passports, if they have lived in Communist-
 controlled areas within the preceding 5 years. Exceptions
 include persons deemed to be of outstanding merit and mainland
 residents coming because of the serious illness or death of
 close relatives. However, the authorities still require that
 these persons renounce prior membership in subversive
 organizations, including the Chinese Communist Party.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain persons or
 revoke their passports for behavior that harms the interests
 of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order, tradition, or
 Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law state that it
 gives the authorities the power to revoke the passport of any
 Taiwan citizen who makes remarks overseas that are deemed
 inimical to the interests of the Taiwan authorities. They
 argue that this violates the right of all citizens to return
 to their homeland. This law is not used frequently.
 Increasing numbers of Taiwanese dissidents previously denied
 reentry are now being permitted to return; however, a number
 of overseas Taiwanese dissidents still considered "undesirable"
 by the authorities have been denied entry into Taiwan under
 this law.
 Taiwan authorities have indicated that they will reduce the
 number of persons on the so-called blacklist of persons denied
 admission because of their activities abroad. Credible
 estimates put the number of those blacklisted at around 100.
 
 
 875
 TAIWAN
 The annual meeting of the North American Taiwan Professors
 Association held in Taipei July 30-August 3 was the first
 meeting by this group permitted in Taiwan, but the event was
 marred by the authorities' refusal to grant entry to two
 participants. Others refused entry during 1990 included
 overseas Taiwanese dissident Mark Chen and five Taiwanese
 academics invited to an Ilan County forum on environmental
 issues. Non-Chinese critics of the authorities have also been
 denied entry.
 A number of dissidents who have entered Taiwan %Jithout visas
 were subsequently either deported or prosecuted for illegal
 entry. In July the Taiwan High Court upheld the 10-month jail
 sentence of Canadian citizen Columbus Leo for illegal entry.
 Leo's defense attorney charged that the sentence was
 politically motivated. The attorney compared Leo's sentence
 with that meted out recently to a well-known singer-songwriter,
 Hou Teh-chien, who was also charged with illegal entry from
 mainland China. While Hou was not detained prior to
 sentencing, Leo was detained for more then 7 months while
 awaiting his sentence. Hou received a suspended sentence,
 while Leo was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,850 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled on Taiwan, and more than 3,000
 persons who arrived from Indochina by small boats have been
 granted "temporary" refuge. Fifty-nine of the boat-people
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan. The others have been
 resettled'in third countries. Although 168 remain officially
 classified as refugees, they have been practically resettled
 in Taiwan, and the refugee camp has been officially closed
 since late 1988. There have been no reports of refugees from
 non-Communist areas; authorities advise that such instances
 would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. Indochinese
 refugees are not forced tb return to their country of origin.
 Two tragedies involving the repatriation of illegal immigrants
 from the mainland focused-attention on the handling of the
 growing tide of illegal workers from the PRC. On June 22, 25
 mainlanders suffocated in the hold of a fishing boat carrying
 76 deportees to the mainland. An official report stated that
 the captain and crew had nailed shut the cabins which held the
 deportees. A second mishap on August 13 involved a collision
 between a boat carrying mainland deportees and a Taiwan navy
 vessel. Reportedly, 21 mainlanders drowned when their boat
 capsized. Subsequently, the Taiwan authorities announced that
 mainlanders would be deported via an offshore island close to
 the mainland to minimize transit risks.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Taiwan has taken some significant steps away from its
 authoritarian political system to a more pluralistic one, but
 the people do not yet have the ability to change their
 government through democratic means. Political power still
 resides with the KMT. which established itself in Taiwan after
 the defeat of the Japanese in 1945. Reflecting their
 constitutional claim to be the government of all of China, the
 authorities maintain not only a provincial and local government
 system but also an array of central-level political bodies
 identical to those found on the mainland prior to 1949. In
 the past, centers of power on Taiwan have been the Presidency,
 the Executive Yuan, the military and security apparatus, and
 
 
 TAIWAN
 the KMT Central Standing Committee. Today, power is
 increasingly being shared with the Legislative Yuan, which, in
 turn, is increasingly representative.
 Mainlander control of political power, however, has been
 gradually diminishing as more Taiwanese have taken over
 important leadership jobs. Taiwanese Lee Teng-hui's accession
 to the Presidency and the KMT Chairmanship, after President
 Chiang Ching-kuo's death in January 1988, was a particularly
 visible indicator of this trend. Taiwan's top decisionmakers
 are gradually becoming more representative of, and more
 responsive to, their constituents. This trend also reflects
 the impact of political reforms in fostering accountability,
 as well as generational changes in which younger and more
 highly educated leaders of both Taiwan and mainland origin
 have been appointed to positions of authority. The NAC called.
 for the popular election of the President, parliamentary
 reform, and constitutional reform, although no consensus was
 reached on many of the detailed proposals. President Lee
 promised to implement the NAC's recommendations but cautioned
 that reform must not endanger national security.
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the Legislative Yuan and the National Assembly, which convenes
 every 6 years to elect the President and Vice President. There
 have been no general elections to these two bodies since 1948.
 Additional representatives from Taiwan province and the
 offshore islands have been chosen since 1969 in periodic
 "supplementary" elections. Nevertheless, of the 657 National
 Assembly seats filled as of the end of 1990, only 81 are
 supplemental" members. Of the 252 Legislative Yuan seats
 filled as of the end of 1990, 101 were "supplemental"
 legislators elected in Taiwan, with an additional 29 appointed
 overseas representatives. These 130 were the most active
 members in the legislature, due largely to the advanced age
 and incapacity of those elected four decades ago.
 In May the National Assembly elected President Lee to a full
 6-year term. Eleven DPP Legislators were excluded for
 refusing to take an oath of allegiance to the "Republic of
 China." In the face of persistent and growing calls for more
 representative institutions, the KMT has committed itself to
 .rejuvenating the central parliamentary bodies. President
 Lee's stated intention to end the "Period of Mobilization for
 the Suppression of the Communist Rebellion" will lead to his
 relinquishment of the emergency powers now held by the
 President under the "Temporary Provisions" in effect during
 the "Period of Mobilization." The Temporary Provisions also
 provide the legal basis for the current system of lifetime
 tenure of parliamentarians last elected in the mainland four
 decades ago.
 The KMT continues to be the dominant political party in
 Taiwan, as has been the case since 1945. Originally composed
 overwhelmingly of mainlanders, its membership of over 2
 million is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. The KMT's
 structure and control mechanisms are based on Leninist models;
 however, the party's operations are considerably more
 flexible. In 1988 the KMT began to remove formal party organs
 from the military and the school systems and to democratize
 its party structure.
 The passage of the Civic Organizations Law in January 1989
 legalized the organization of political parties. The major
 opposition party, the DPP, was formed in 1986 in defiance of
 
 
 TAIWAN
 martial law; it registered as a political party in April
 1989. The Labor Party was formed in 1987 and the Workers
 Party, an offshoot of the Labor. Party, in March 1989. At
 present, there are 55 registered parties.
 The DPP claims a membership of 25,000. The other opposition
 parties are much smaller. The role of the opposition is
 greater than its small numbers might indicate. Opposition
 members are very vocal in elective bodies and frequently use
 interpellation sessions to raise controversial or sensitive
 issues. Their activities have spurred some KMT legislators to
 criticize the authorities' policies as too lenient toward
 critics.
 The opposition parties still face several disadvantages,
 principally the authorities' virtual monopoly of television
 and, to a lesser extent, radio. The Control Yuan, the highest
 government supervisory organ, continues to be elected
 indirectly under a voting system that guarantees KMT
 domination. With the exception of those whose rights were
 restored in the recent presidential amnesty, persons convicted
 of sedition under martial law are barred from voting, holding
 public office, and practicing certain professions. The
 benefits that the KMT enjoys in terms of access to public and
 private funds and assistance from administrative and security
 agencies also give it unfair advantage.
 Universal suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and
 over. Voting is voluntary and by secret ballot.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Taiwan authorities permit representatives of most
 international human rights organizations, including Amnesty
 International and Asia Watch, to visit Taiwan and meet
 citizens freely. However, the staff of the publication called
 "Taiwan Communique," published by the International Committee
 for Human Rights in Taiwan, is denied entry.
 Taiwan has two principal human rights organizations: the
 Chinese Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the Taiwan
 Association for Human Rights (TAHR). The CAHR, staffed mostly
 by retired officials, is regarded'as the establishment-oriented
 human rights organ. The TAHR is aligned with the opposition.
 The effectiveness of the two associations is limited, however,
 by their unwillingness to coordinate activities. They
 generally have contact only when representatives of
 international human rights organizations visit Taiwan.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group, slightly more than 1
 percent of Taiwan's total population, consists of aboriginal
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already established in
 Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. They face no
 official discrimination but significant cultural and economic
 barriers. Specially designated seats in both central and
 provincial legislatures are reserved for representatives of
 these aboriginal people, and the authorities have instituted a
 number of social programs to ease their transition into the
 dominant Chinese society. The aboriginal people complain that
 they.are prevented from owning ancestral lands in mountain
 
 
 878
 TAIWAN
 areas under the control of the authorities. Furthermore, they
 are not allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on legal
 documents. Some complain of economic exploitation by
 commercial or tourist concerns. The sale of aboriginal
 children into prostitution is a serious social problem.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, but it exists both in
 fact and in law. There are still some laws that discriminate
 against women, relating mostly to divorce and child custody
 issues, but a revised civil code passed by the LY in March
 1985 provides for more equal treatment of women in the areas
 of marriage and divorce. The law, for example, provides for
 joint ownership of property acquired after marriage.
 Previously, property obtained after marriage would go to the
 husband upon-divorce. A January 1989 revision of the welfare
 law now allows a public prosecutor to appeal on behalf of the
 mother or a third party in child custody cases. This revised
 law, however, applies only to children between 12 and la years
 of age, and custody of children under 12 generally is given to
 the father upon divorce. A welfare law revision covering
 younger children still remains under review. Women have
 complained of being forced to quit jobs because of age or
 childbearing restrictions, and restrictive quotas exist within
 certain ministries to control the number of female government
 employees. A women's rights movement is active and growing.
 Although official data on violence against women are not
 available, women active in politics, human rights, and women's
 organizations single out intrafamily violence as a serious
 problem, especially wife beating. Strong social pressure is
 sometimes exerted on abused wives to conceal their treatment
 to avoid "disgracing" their families. The critics of this
 violence believe that greater mobility, education, and job
 opportunities are making women less inclined to tolerate such
 abuse and more willing to complain of mistreatment, but it is
 not known if the number of actual complaints filed increased
 in 1990. A somewhat similar situation exists with regard to
 rape, since the victims are still socially stigmatized. Under
 Taiwan law, the authorities may not undertake a prosecution
 for rape; only the victim may make a complaint. Because rape
 trials are public, women are reluctant to prosecute their
 attackers. Rape counseling services are nascent, and
 available only in the capital, Taipei. However, feminist and
 human rights organizations have assisted rape victims, and
 victims are now more willing to come forward and press charges.
 The problem of child prostitutes continues to receive
 considerable public attention. Police statistics for the
 March 1987-July 1989 period indicate police located 885 child
 prostitutes; of these, 204 were under 14 years old, 681 were
 between the ages of 14 and 16, and 165 were aboriginal
 Taiwanese. Police in recent years have established antichild
 prostitution task forces in response to public pressure.
 Women's rights activists have hailed the January 1989 passage
 of a juvenile welfare law, which enables juvenile welfare
 bodies, prosecutors, and victims to apply to courts for
 termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment of
 qualified guardians in cases where parents have forced their
 children into prostitution. In cases where children are
 engaged in prostitution of their own free will and the parents
 are incapable of taking safe custody, the courts may order
 competent authorities to provide counseling education for not
 less than 6 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal
 loopholes and cultural barriers remain as obstacles to
 prosecution. For example, in cases where both parents have
 
 
 879
 TAIWAN
 sold a child into prostitution, the current law requires the
 victim to lodge a complaint before prosecution is undertaken.
 In many cases, the child is reluctant--or afraid--to do so.
 According to some reports, violence and coercion are used by
 brothel owners to prevent girls from escaping.
 Although the Taiwanese dialect is the mother tongue of most
 inhabitants of Taiwan, the authorities continue to impose
 limits on its use in broadcast media--broadcasting must not be
 less than 55 percent Mandarin dialect Chinese on AM radio and
 70 percent on FM radio and television.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor's right of association is seriously limited by a number
 of laws and regulations. The Civic Organizations Law, revised
 in January 1989, requires all civic organizations, including
 labor unions, to register with the authorities. Labor unions
 may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but these must
 be submitted to the authorities for review. Unions may be
 dissolved by the authorities if they do not meet legal
 requirements for certification, or if their activities disturb
 public-order. According to official sources, no unions have
 been dissolved, although certification has been denied if
 there were competing unions. In the latter cases, the unions
 were asked to reconcile their differences and file as a single
 union. Civil servants, teachers, defense industry workers,
 and administrators acting on behalf of employers are prohibited
 from organizing labor unions.
 Most of Taiwan's 3,600 unions are led by KMT officials, but
 the DPP and Labor Party organizers have made inroads as
 workers have grown increasingly restive over salary issues and
 working conditions. The Labor Union Law requires that union
 leaders be elected regularly by their respective membership by
 secret ballot, and in recent years workers have sometimes
 rejected KMT or management-endorsed union slates.
 The authorities in 1988 moved to strengthen laws regarding
 workers' right to strike. Revisions of the Labor Disputes
 Law, effective June 1988, recognize labor's right to strike
 but place serious restrictions on it. Both labor and
 management are forbidden from disrupting the "working order"
 when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. Before a
 strike can be called, it must be approved by a vote of the
 full membership of the union. The authorities have required
 official approval before such a meeting can be called..
 Applications for arbitration may be made to the local
 government. Stiff penalties may be levied should
 no-strike/no-retaliation clauses be violated, but critics say
 that employers have ignored the law and dismissed or locked
 out workers without any legal action being taken against
 them. Regardless 6f legal limitations on the right to strike,
 however, workers have struck or staged slowdowns with
 increasing frequency.
 Unions may form confederations but no administrative district,
 including cities, counties, and provinces, can have more than
 one labor confederation. The Chinese Federation of Labor, the
 only legal union federation on Taiwan, is closely associated
 with the KMT and is affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Some workers have
 establi.shed independent unions and federations under other
 
 
 880
 TAIWAN
 names, such as "friendship" organizations and "brotherhood"
 alliances. These groups remain illegal under present
 regulations. Taiwan has not been a member of the
 International Labor Organization since 1971, when it lost
 membership in U.N. Charter-designated organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 As of June 1990, 2.6 million workers, or approximately 31.3
 percent of Taiwan's paid employees, belonged to 3,630
 officially registered labor unions. Under the Labor Union
 Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss, .or
 otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union
 members. There have been occasional reports, however, of
 antiunion discrimination in labor disputes.
 In January four labor activists at the Tatung Company, Ltd.
 were fired in connectio� with their efforts to establish an
 industrial union. Subsequently, three labor union leaders at
 Tatung were reportedly fired for their comments at a company
 shareholder meeting, even though the three leaders were Tatung
 shareholders. The Council on Labor Affairs (CLA)--
 Taiwan's labor ministry--has criticized Tatung's actions as
 "inappropriate." Two labor union leaders at the Formosa
 Plastics Corporation were fired in April for unauthorized
 participation in American Federation of Labor and Congress of
 Industrial Organizations sponsored labor training in the United
 States. In May eight labor activists at the Far Eastern
 Textile Company were charged with violation of the Parade and
 Assembly Law for holding an assembly without a proper permit.
 Laws governing union activities apply equally within export
 processing zones.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the Collective
 Agreements Law but is not mandatory. Only about 329 formal
 collective agreements were in force as of June 1990. Since
 such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises, and
 less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this
 category, the proportion of workers covered by them is small.
 Legal restrictions on the right to strike and provisions for
 involuntary mediation or arbitration seriously weaken
 collective bargaining. Most collective actions by workers
 consist of such technically illegal actions as work stoppages
 and mass leave-taking.
 The authorities' efforts to increase workers' awareness of
 their rights through union education and the establishment of
 complaint channels appear to be bearing some fruit. According
 to the CLA, in 1989 a total of 1,943 lawsuits involving
 management and labor were filed. Lawsuits accepted by the
 Supreme Court totaled 267 cases. In 1989 three-quarters of
 all labor-management disputes were resolved in favor of
 management.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under the 1984 Labor Standards Law, forced or compulsory labor
 is prohibited. Violation is punishable by a maximum jail
 sentence of 5 years.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Standards Law stipulates that the minimum age for
 employment is 15, and interaction between this law and a
 
 
 881
 TAIWAN
 compulsory education law effectively keeps child labor to a
 very low level.
 e. Acceptable Conditions bf Work
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law, promulgated in 1984, was
 enacted to provide minimum labor standards. According to the
 Council on Labor Affairs, it currently covers some 3.4 million
 of Taiwan's 5.7 million paid workers. The Law has enjoyed
 only limited success in several areas, and there is a growing
 sentiment that it and other labor laws should be strengthened
 and .extended to cover additional workers.
 By law, the workweek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day,
 6 days per week) with certain provisions for overtime.
 Effective August 1, the minimum wage became $360 per month, a
 10.5 percent increase over 1989. The real earnings of most
 workers are much higher than the minimum wage set by the
 authorities. There is general agreement that the minimum wage
 is less than that needed to assure a decent standard of
 living; however, the average manufacturing wage is over $721
 per month. Most large firms provide their employees with
 allowances for-transportation, meals, housing, and other
 benefits which can amount to another 60 to 80 percent of base
 salary. There are minimum standards for working conditions
 and health and safety precautions. Rising labor consciousness
 and continuing labor shortages have reportedly resulted in
 some improvements in working conditions. However, many
 provisions of current labor legislation are being ignored by
 employers. According to an investigation record released by
 the CLA, out of a total of 2,730 firms employing over 100
 workers, 1,340 firms were in violation of regulations
 concerning working conditions.
 Despite the establishment of the CLA, many provisions of labor
 legislation have not been enforced because of a shortage of
 inspectors. According to most recent figures available, there
 were 288 inspectors for approximately 86,000 enterprises
 covered by the Labor'Standards Law. In.1989, 7.6 percent of
 all enterprises were inspected. Since most enterprises are
 small, family-owned operations employing relatives who will
 not report violations, actual adherence to the hours, wage,
 and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to document
 but is thought to be minimal.
 Given Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there has been a growing
 tide of illegal foreign workers in recent years. Estimates of
 the number of illegal workers on Taiwan range from 40,000 to
 over 200,000. Generally, these workers are given board and
 lodging, but have no medical coverage, accident insurance, or
 other benefits enjoyed by local workers. Conditions in many
 small and medium-sized factories which employ illegal labor
 are poor,; with old and poorly maintained equipment resulting
 in a high rate of industrial accidents. Press reports suggest
 these illegal workers are vulnerable to exploitation,
 including confiscation of passports, imposition of involuntary
 deductions from wages, and extension of working hours without
 overtime pay.
 
 
 882
