 TAIWAN
 Taiwan's polity, long dominated by the Nationalist Party (KMT)
 in an essentially one-party authoritarian system, is in a
 transitional stage to a more pluralistic system. The
 Legislative Yuan (the Parliament) has become more important,
 and legislators of all parties are now more outspoken.
 Nevertheless, Taiwan's central parliamentary bodies remain
 constituted under a representational formula which assures
 continued KMT control. Recognizing that changes are
 necessary, the authorities have initiated a process designed
 eventually to lead to more truly representative elected
 bodies. The KMT, although it has become less authoritarian,
 remains firmly in control of the political process.
 Demographically, native Taiwanese, descendants of Chinese who
 emigrated from the mainland primarily in the 17th and 18th
 centuries, constitute more than 80 percent of the population.
 The recruitment of increasing numbers of these Taiwanese to
 fill important positions has eased criticsm of mainlander
 domination of the Government and the KMT.
 With the lifting of martial law in 1987, the role of Taiwan's
 military in domestic affairs has been appreciably reduced,
 although military police are still called up from time to time
 to help control demonstrations. A small number of
 demonstrations in 1988 led to violent confrontations with the
 police.
 Taiwan's economy continued to perform well. Per capita income
 grew at an average rate of 6 percent between 1982 to 1987, and
 for 1988 it was expected to reach approximately $6,000. While
 fundamentally a free market economy, major sectors such as
 finance, steel, shipbuilding, utilities, transportation, and
 petrochemicals have traditionally been dominated by state-run
 enterprises. The trend, however, is toward greater economic
 liberalization. The authorities are seeking to sell to the
 private sector a number of state concerns--notably banking,
 steel, and petrochemical enterprises--over the next 4 years.
 The human rights situation continued to improve in many areas
 in the wake of extensive reforms begun 2 years ago. Positive
 developments included a lively print media, a more
 representative IT, more freedom for people to assemble
 peacefully, the inception of genuine multiparty politics,
 easing of restrictions on the return of overseas critics, and
 the release of political prisoners. However, despite these
 improvements, important restrictions remain in a number of
 areas, including freedom of speech and press, freedom of
 association, freedom of movement, and the ability of citizens
 to choose their government in a fair electoral system.
 Additionally, there remains widespread concern that police and
 prison personnel utilized brutality in the questioning and
 detention of suspects in connection with a major demonstration
 by farmers. The failure of the authorities to investigate
 charges of police brutality and the perception of the
 selective enforcement of laws continue to raise concern as to
 the impartiality of the legal system.
 
 
 785
 TAIWAN
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of killings for political reasons.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of persons being abducted or secretly
 arrested by the authorities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Taiwan law specifically prohibits the use of torture.
 However, members of the police or security forces have
 resorted at times to physical violence in arresting or
 interrogating suspects. Many of the persons arrested during a
 violent confrontation between demonstrators and police at a
 farmers' demonstration on May 20 claimed to have been beaten
 while being arrested or in custody. Defendants claimed to
 have been coerced by the use or threat of torture into signing
 confessions. Despite numerous charges of police brutality,
 improper arrest procedures, and even bribery of a key witness,
 irregularities which appeared well documented by the defense
 in the subsequent trial, the authorities did not investigate
 these charges. In another major incident, prisoners convicted
 of instigating a November 1987 prison riot at the Green Island
 detention facility testified during their July 1988 trial that
 Taiwan garrison command investigators mistreated suspects by
 beating them, denying them food, and handcuffing them for long
 periods.
 In 1987 and 1988, 12 deaths among prisoners were questioned by
 Taiwan human rights groups. Incidents occurred in prisons and
 detention centers under the jurisdiction of both civil and
 military authorities. In one iistance, eight prison guards
 were convicted in July for torturing to death a Taitung
 detention center prisoner. They received sentences ranging
 from 10 months to 4 years. During a prison riot in a Green
 Island military detention facility in November 1987, eight
 inmates died. Military authorities maintain that the men
 succumbed when their locked cell caught fire. Other inmates,
 however, claimed riot police shot the men and later burned the
 bodies to conceal the real cause of death. Families and
 attorneys of the deceased inmates have also raised questions
 over the circumstances of the deaths, but no autopsies were
 performed, and civil authorities refused requests to
 investigate the incident further.
 Concerned over the mistreatment of suspects during police
 interrogations, the Chinese Association for Human Rights
 initiated an experimental program in which lawyers will be
 present to monitor police questioning at one police station.
 The Association hopes to expand this program to other police
 stations in the future.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Police may legally arrest without a warrant anyone they
 suspect of committing a crime for which the punishment would
 be 5 years or more in prison and may call in suspects or
 
 
 786
 TAIWAN
 witnesses for questioning without a formal summons. Critics
 in the legal establishment, the press, and the legislature
 point out that these procedures sometimes lead to abuses.
 Suspects called in for questioning by the police are sometimes
 arrested without a warrant after questioning.
 Taiwan law requires that, within 24 hours after an arrest, the
 arresting authorities must give notice in writing to the
 arrested person and his designated relative or friend, stating
 the reason for the arrest or detention. The Code of Criminal
 Procedure specifies that the authorities may detain an accused
 person for up to 2 months during the investigative phase prior
 to the filing of a formal indictment, and for up to 3 months
 during the trial. Furthermore, during the investigative
 phase, the prosecuting officer may apply to the court for one
 extension of 2 months. The period of detention may also be
 extended during the trial. In recent cases, the authorities
 generally have followed these procedures and extended the
 periods of detention. Persons indicted for relatively minor
 criminal offenses can be released on bail at the judge's
 discretion.
 Suspects are guaranteed the right to have a lawyer present
 during the investigative phase. The Taipei Bar Association
 has complained, however, that defense lawyers are sometimes
 barred by prosecutors from visiting their clients during this
 phase and that suspects often are not advised of their right
 to have legal representation during police interrogation.
 In July 1985, the Legislative Yuan passed the "antihoodlum"
 law, which accords police authorities bioad powers, including
 the power to determine whether a person should be designated
 as a hoodlum. The civil courts confirm or deny police
 requests to remand alleged hoodlums for reformatory
 education. Reformatory education was under the exclusive
 jurisdiction of the military. However, the military is in the
 process of transferring inmates undergoing reformatory
 education from military to civilian detention facilities.
 Some inmates are still being held in military facilities
 because of overcrowding in civilian institutions. The
 duration of reformatory education may range from 1 to 5
 years. The responsibility for setting the duration of
 reformatory education rests with the military in the case of
 persons still held in military detention facilities and with
 the Ministry of Justice for those held in civilian
 facilities. The law does not authorize the courts to
 determine the length of such education. Alleged hoodlums can
 be held incommunicado without legal representation, and their
 families need not be notified of their arrests.
 Similarly, a 1984 executive decree permits the jailing of
 persons suspected of criminal activity; unlike the 1985 law,
 the 1984 decree did not set time limits on the period of
 incarceration for those arrested. Many prisoners arrested and
 jailed under the provisions of the 1984 decree are still
 imprisoned with no determinate sentence. The Taiwan
 authorities reported that approximately 1,300 prisoners
 remained incarcerated at the end of 1988 under the 1985
 antihoodlum law and the 1984 decree. They were originally
 held in military jails, but after the outbreak of protests and
 rioting in late 1987, the Ministry of Justice transferred
 these inmates to civilian prisons.
 Many minor crimes on Taiwan are handled under a statute which
 empowers the police not only to arrest but also to prosecute,
 
 
 787
 TAIWAN
 convict, and punish offenders. The provisions of the statute
 empower the police to impose and carry out sentences of up to
 2 weeks' imprisonment. Despite the 1980 opinion of the
 Council of Grand Justices (theoretically empowered to decide
 constitutional issues) that the statute is unconstitutional,
 it continues to be widely used. Under these legal provisions,
 the authorities reportedly imprisoned some 4,000 people during
 the anticrime sweep in November, 1984. Press reports indicate
 that 2,000 still remain in custody, and in late 1988 the
 authorities announced plans for a second sweep, using the
 antihoodlum law and executive decree described above.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Taiwan's legal system is based on European and Japanese models
 and does not provide fo-r trial by jury. Informed observers
 characterize the judiciary as not fully independent and
 susceptible to pressure from the authorities, on whom judges
 depend for desirable assignments and career advancement.
 In 1988 the courts tried a number of political activists on
 charges ranging from sedition to interfering with official
 duties. In one prominent case, the Supreme Court remanded a
 lower court conviction for retrial on technical grounds. The
 authorities have taken limited steps to strengthen the
 independence of the judiciary. Nevertheless, both the
 opposition and some independent observers continue to raise
 doubts about the selective application of the law and
 impartiality of the judiciary in cases involving political
 activists.
 Since the lifting of martial law on July 15, 1987, civilians
 may no longer be tried in military courts. Trials are public,
 but attendance at trials involving juveniles or persons
 considered politically sensitive may require permission from
 the court. Defendants have a right to an attorney, at public
 expense if necessary
 In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not by a lawyer or
 prosecutor. The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to
 consider evidence a party wishes to submit. Civil and
 criminal law specifically provide the defendant with
 protection from self-incrimination.
 Court cases generally are heard in several brief court
 sessions, often separated by weeks or months. Persons
 convicted in cases where the sentence exceeds 3 years have a
 right to review by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court
 limits its review to the law of the case and to specific
 procedural aspects. The new National Security Law stipulates,
 contrary to provisions in the original martial law decrees,
 that convictions under martial law cannot be appealed in the
 postmartial law period.
 Prosecutors are allowed to apply for reassignment to positions
 as judges and vice versa, with the approval of a special
 committee composed of Judicial and Executive Yuan
 representatives. They are not allowed to switch roles during
 an ongoing court proceeding. Nevertheless, attorneys complain
 that this practice weakens the independence of the judiciary.
 The authorities now, however, rarely approve such exchanges.
 
 
 788
 TAIWAN
 In addition, judicial decisions must be approved by higher
 court authorities before they are pronounced. Obser vers of
 the court system say this dilutes the authority of judges and
 tempts outside interference with the judicial process. In
 1987 a review of judicial procedures initiated by the
 authorities proposed abolishing this latter practice; however,
 the proposal has not yet been implemented.
 The authorities deny holding political prisoners. Taiwan and
 international human rights groups, however, have estimated
 that there are approximately 20 political prisoners still
 behind bars. This figure is down from some 90 to 100
 political prisoners held in 1986. In 1987 and 1988, the
 authorities granted early releases to most political
 prisoners. Of the 8 persons convicted by military courts of
 sedition in 1980 for their role in the 1979 Kaohsiung Human
 Rights Day Rally, all but one have been released.
 Although civilians can no longer be tried by military courts
 for sedition, it remains a crime subject to normal civilian
 criminal procedures. It has been interpreted to include
 expressing Communist sympathy, espousing views contrary to the
 authorities' claim to represent all of China, and supporting
 an independent legal status for Taiwan. Opponents of the
 regime claim that Taiwan's sedition laws are being selectively
 enforced. They point out that despite the sedition convictions
 of two oppositionists who advocated Taiwan's independence, the
 authorities have not taken legal action against KMT members
 who have publicly advocated economic aid for the People's
 Republic of China (PRC) or supported Tibetan separatism. For
 further discussion of Taiwan's sedition laws, see Section 2.a.
 below.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy,-Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 While the daily life of the average Taiwan resident is subject
 only to minor interference by the authorities, oppositionists
 do experience invasion of privacy. The authorities do not
 interfere with basic family matters such as the right to marry
 or have children as one chooses. Membership in the K14T, the
 dominant political organization, is technically a matter of
 free choice, but party membership is considered an unwritten
 requirement to get ahead in the military, the government, and
 academia.
 Physical invasion of the home without a warrant, while not
 common, does occur. As noted in Section l.d., the Code of
 Criminal Procedure generally requires that searches be
 authorized by warrants, signed by a prosecutor or, during a
 trial, by a judge. However, exceptions to this rule increased
 substantially following the July 1982 revision of the Code to
 provide for warrantless arrests under certain circumstances.
 When making such arrests, police also may search persons or
 property without prior authorization. Other types of
 invasions of privacy, such as the monitoring of telephone
 calls, are believed to occur without legal safeguards. The
 authorities deny monitoring telephone conversations. In July
 1982, the authorities instituted "selective postal checks" to
 intercept parcel bombs and correspondence from the PRC,
 although since the spring of 1988 mail from the PRC has been
 delivered regularly to Taiwan addressees.
 
 
 789
 TAIWAN
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are provided for in the
 Constitution, but statutory restrictions significantly limit
 these rights.
 Security authorities monitor political expression, both in
 Taiwan and overseas. Under Taiwan law, people may not oppose
 the regime's basic political policy of anticommunism or its
 claim to sovereignty over all of China. Those speaking
 favorably of communism or the PRC, or who question the
 legitimacy of Taiwan authorities by suggesting support for
 "Taiwan independence," risk being charge& with sedition.
 While many public speeches and articles favoring independence
 have gone unpunished, the threat of punishment remains real.
 Two leaders of a political prisoners' association, Tsai
 Yu-chuan and Hsu Tsao-teh, for example, were convicted on
 sedition charges in 1988 and sentenced to serve terms of 11
 years and 7 years, respectively; the Supreme Court
 subsequently reduced Tsai's sentence to 7 yeais and 4 months
 and Hsu's sentence to 3 years and 4 months. Their
 imprisonment has been highly controversial. Oppositionists
 and human rights groups in Taiwan and abroad see the case as
 an example of the authorities' continued infringement on the
 right to free speech in Taiwan.
 The previous limitation on newspaper licenses to 31 was lifted
 in January. Newspapers were also allowed to increase the
 number of pages beyond the previous maximum of 12. As a
 result, whereas nearly all newspapers before 1988 were owned
 by the authorities, the KMT, or senior KMT party leaders, last
 year saw an increase in the number of independently owned
 newspapers. Total licenses issued in 1988 topped 90, with
 over 60 newspapers in actual publication--many outside the
 control of the ruling party.
 Censorship of publications may be carried out through
 provisions of the Publications Law, which empowers the police
 to seize or ban printed material that commits or instigates
 others to "commit sedition, treason, offenses of interference
 with the lawful exercise of public functions or against public
 order." In the past, this covered a wide range of topics,
 including articles that discussed possible leadership changes,
 questioned the legitimacy of KMT rule, criticized Taiwan's
 foreign policy, or merely revealed behind-the-scenes news that
 was potentially embarrassing to the leadership. Since the
 lifting of martial law, however, publication bans have fallen
 off dramatically. Whereas virtually every issue of opposition
 magazines was banned and forced underground in 1986, only one
 ban occurred since the lifting of martial law and none during
 1988. While the authorities' monitoring of newstand
 publications continues, in practice outright censorship of
 newspapers and magazines appears to have ended.
 Daily newspapers remain under control, however, and this
 control is often exercised indirectly, through guidance from
 the Government Information Office and the K.T. Nonetheless,
 the sometimes freewheeling print media have substantially
 expanded their coverage of sensitive subjects, such as news
 from the PRC and opposition activities and views. However,
 the authorities have at times threatened strong action when
 coverage of sensitive events displeased them, as in the case
 of two Taiwan reporters who defied the ban on travel to the
 
 
 790
 TAIWAN
 mainland to report openly on the situation there in 1987.
 Upon their return to Taiwan, the authorities moved to
 prosecute one of the reporters and the newspaper's director.
 Although both defendants were acquitted, prosecutors appealed
 the case to a higher court, which in September upheld the
 lower court ruling.
 The authorities have also loosened restrictions on mainland
 publications. On August 27, 1987, the Government Information
 Office announced the formation of screening committees to
 consider applications for reprinting mainland publications in
 Taiwan. The use of the mainland system of simplified Chinese
 characters, however, remains prohibited in Taiwan.
 Television and radio remain tightly controlled by the
 authorities. The authorities partially or wholly own all
 three of the island's television stations. Television
 coverage of sensitive political subjects is restricted and
 slanted. Oppositionists charge that the military and the
 governing authorities control or own 82 of the radio stations
 in Taiwan. Requests by opposition politicians to open their
 own radio station have been turned down by the authorities,
 who claim there are no frequencies available. The authorities
 still attempt to jam PRC radio broadcasts. However, because
 PRC stations broadcast on a wide range of frequencies, it is
 nearly always possible to tune in PRC transmissions.
 Before the lifting of martial law, foreign publications also
 were subject to censorship. Occasionally, pages carrying
 articles offensive to the authorities were removed or altered
 before distribution. There now appears to be less official
 interference with the free flow of international news,
 particularly regarding Taiwan and the PRC.
 University campus publications can be and are censored by
 school administrators under provisions of the University Law.
 Students have protested punishments, ranging from demerit
 points to expulsion, for being too outspoken on certain
 issues. The same restrictions apply to teachers, and there
 have been reports of pressures placed on teachers and even
 dismissals because of extracurricular political activities.
 Since 1986 the security forces have classified facsimile
 transmission (FAX) machines as restricted telecommunication
 equipment. As such, the sale or importation of FAX machines
 has required a license. This restriction was loosened
 somewhat in late 1988. The authorities still control the use
 of computer modems through licensing. The previous ban on
 satellite television receivers was liberalized somewhat in
 November. Receivers may now be purchased freely and
 installed, but only small dish antennas (capable only of
 receiving programming from Japan) may be used.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is provided for in the Constitution.
 However, until martial law ended on July 15, 1987, public
 assembly for political purposes (except during election
 periods) was legally circumscribed. In late 1987, the
 Legislative Yuan passed the Assembly and March Law which
 allows the staging of peaceful demonstrations. Such
 demonstrations must be approved by the authorities and may not
 be held near a number of government and military sites. The
 Law also prohibits any demonstration which violates the
 Constitution or advocates communism or Taiwan's separation
 
 
 791
 TAIWAN
 from China. The Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and other
 opposition groups have organized and carried out numerous
 demonstrations under the new law. (For information about the
 DPP, see Section 3.) Permission to stage these demonstrations
 almost always has been granted routinely. However,
 oppositionists, in view of the recent noticeable rise in
 politically related legal actions against them, have expressed
 concern that the law would be used as a legal pretext to crack
 down on them. Student political activities are sharply
 restricted by current law and are closely monitored by school
 and security authorities, although the authorities tolerated
 two island-wide student political organizations which were
 formed in 1987.
 The 1983 Election and Recall law prohibits holding campaign
 rallies in any form prior to the "authorized period", a period
 of about 2 weeks before balloting. During the first half of
 the authorized campaign period, all candidates are allowed to
 hold individual rallies, although these are closely monitored
 by the authorities. During the second half, campaigning has
 been limited to highly structured, officially sponsored
 rallies in which both KMT and opposition candidates
 participate. The Law also permits joint rallies of two or
 more candidates only at these officially sponsored rallies.
 Opposition politicians have been sharply and openly critical
 of these measures, claiming they hinder their ability to reach
 the electorate. Nevertheless, oppositionists have been able
 to hold numerous rallies, demonstrations, and lectures outside
 of the authorized campaign period without official sanction.
 Nonelection year political rallies have also been held
 frequently in the past. Whereas the authorities had
 previously attempted to discourage open-air rallies, it
 appears that since 1986 this restriction has been eased.
 During 1988 opposition politicians held numerous rallies
 throughout the island without interference from the
 authorities.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom to practice religion.
 This provision is generally observed in practice. Most Taiwan
 inhabitants adhere to Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, animism,
 or a combination of these beliefs. Other religions include
 Christianity and Islam. There is no established or favored
 religion.
 While generally respecting the right to practice religion, the
 authorities have brought pressure to bear against religious
 organizations they consider to be involved in unacceptable
 political activity. The Presbyterian Church in Taiwan, whose
 membership of approximately 210,000 is predominantly native
 Taiwanese, has been a prime target. Many church members are
 actively involved in opposition politics. In early 1987,
 copies of the church's weekly newspaper were confiscated and
 destroyed--though subsequently reprinted- and returned--because
 of an article the authorities considered to be politically
 sensitive. In 1988, however, there were no reports of
 harassment against the church.
 Presbyterian church leaders in self-exile abroad, who had been
 denied entry into Taiwan for many years, were permitted to
 
 
 792
 TAIWAN
 return in 1987. After their return, the authorities allowed
 them to see whomever they wanted and did not interfere in
 their travels. They even met with high-ranking KMT officials
 to voice encouragement and support for the ruling party's
 continued democratization of Taiwan.
 The authorities have been involved since 1980 in a dispute
 with a denomination called the New Testament Church over the
 right of church members to settle on a tract of leased public
 land near Kaohsiung, in southern Taiwan. The conflict had led
 to physical evictions from the tract, with destruction of
 church members' homes and crops. Since 1987 the authorities
 have made several conciliatory moves, including compensation
 for destroyed crops, access to a mountain these church
 followers.consider sacred, and allowing the listing of the
 mountain on their identity papers. Church representatives
 complain, however, that certain members have been denied
 permission to leave the country and that some foreign church
 members are unable to visit Taiwan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the freedom to change residence,
 but registration of one's residence is required. Except for
 military and other restricted areas, there is general freedom
 of internal travel. An exit permit is a requirement for
 travel abroad. Emigration and private travel abroad have
 become freer since 1979. Since 1987 the authorities have
 allowed travel to mainland China to visit relatives. Since
 1980 businessmen have been permitted to travel to-and do
 business directly with certain Eastern European countries. In
 1988 trade and scholarly delegations to Eastern European
 countries, including the Soviet Union, have continued.
 Exit permits may be refused for a number of reasons. For
 example, after the last calendar day of the year in which they
 turn 15 years of age, males may not leave Taiwan until
 completion of compulsory military service. Permission to
 leave Taiwan may be delayed or withheld by police denial of an
 exit permit. Under the implementing regulations of the 1987
 National Security Law, however, reasons for refusal must be
 given, and appeals may be made to a special board. Although
 in the past outspoken critics have been denied exit permits,
 in recent years this has become much less of a problem.
 The authorities claim to recognize the right of those Chinese
 who hold Taiwan passports, and who normally reside in Taiwan,
 to return from abroad. Nonresident citizens are usually
 issued "overseas Chinese" passports and require visas to
 travel to Taiwan. The authorities are suspicious of, and will
 not authorize the entry of, Chinese between the ages of 16 and
 75, even those who have long held Taiwan passports, if they
 have lived in Communist-controlled areas within the preceding
 5 years. A special exception has been decreed for mainland
 residents coming to visit seriously ill close relatives or
 attend their funerals. The authorities have also announced
 plans to allow soldiers from Taiwan who were stranded on the
 mainland during the 1945-49 civil war to return.
 Although the authorities deny maintaining a "blacklist* of
 foreign critics, in 1988 they refused or delayed the
 processing of a number of visa requests for political
 reasons. This included applications from Taiwanese-Americans
 
 
 793
 TAIWAN
 who sought to attend a conference of the World Federation of
 Taiwanese Associations in Taipei.
 A 1984 law authorizes the authorities to detain or revoke the
 Taiwan passport of persons whose behavior violates the
 interests of Taiwan, or endangers security, public order,
 tradition, or Taiwan's economic interests. Critics of the law
 state that it gives the authorities the power to revoke the
 passport of any Taiwan citizen who makes remarks overseas that
 are deemed inimical to Taiwan's interests. They argue that
 this violates the right of all citizens to return to their
 homeland. This law is not used frequently. Increasing
 numbers of Taiwanese dissidents previously denied reentry are
 now being permitted to return; however, a number of overseas
 Taiwanese dissidents still considered "undesirable" by the
 authorities have been denied return to Taiwan under this legal
 provision.
 Under Taiwan's "Orderly Departure Family Reunification
 Program," since 1977 more than 5,850 ethnic Chinese from
 Indochina have been resettled ou Taiwan, and more than 3,000
 persons who arrived from Indochina by small boats have been-
 granted "temporary" refuge. With the exception of 59 who
 found sponsors and resettled on Taiwan, all of those arriving
 by small boats have been resettled in third countries. About
 200 are currently awaiting resettlement. The authorities
 report that there~have been no refugee cases from
 non-Communist areas. They advise that any such instances
 would be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. Indo-Chinese
 refugees are not forced to return to their country of origin.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Effective political power still resides with the KMT
 leadership, which established itself in Taiwan after fleeing
 the mainland in 1949, and citizens do not have the ability to
 change their government. Reflecting their claim to be the
 government of all of China, the authorities maintain riot only
 a provincial and local government system but also an array of
 central-level political bodies identical to those found on the
 mainland prior to 1949. The focus of power on Taiwan is the
 Presidency, the Executive Yuan (Cabinet), the military-and
 security apparatus, and the KMT Central Standing Committee.
 This power is exercised by a small number of top figures in
 these organizations-, including the President.
 Mainlander control of political power, however, has been
 gradually diminishing as more Taiwanese have taken over
 important leadership jobs. After the death of President
 Chiang Ching-kuo in January, Taiwanese Lee Teng-hui's
 accession to the presidency and the KMT chairmanship was
 popularly acclaimed as an important milestone in this
 process. The number of Taiwanese in the Cabinet and the
 Central Standing Committee also has been increasing. For the
 first time, native Taiwanese in 1988 comprised a majority in
 these bodies. Five of the 8 ministers and 16 of the 31 KMT
 Central Standing Committee members are Taiwanese. As a result
 of these changes, Taiwan's top decisionmakers are gradually
 becoming more representative of and more responsive to their
 constituents. Nonetheless, the system still remains largely
 closed to those who do not support and are not selected by the
 KMT.
 
 
 794
 TAIWAN
 The most important elective bodies at the central level are
 the Legislative Yuan (the Parliament) and the National
 Assembly, which convenes every 6 years to elect the President
 and Vice President. There have been no general elections to
 these two bodies since 1948. Surviving mainland
 representatives elected in 1948 continue to hold their seats
 and to form the bulk of these bodies' memberships. Since 1969
 periodic "supplementary elections" have been held to choose
 additional representatives from Taiwan province and the
 offshore islands. Nevertheless, of the 896 seats of the
 National Assembly which are currently filled, only 84 are
 supplemental members. Of the Legislative Yuan's current
 membership of 302, the elected supplemental legislators number
 71 and constitute the most active group, due largely to the
 advanced age and incapacity of those elected four decades ago
 on the mainland.
 In the face of persistent and growing calls by both opposition
 and KMT politicians, academicians, journalists, and legal
 experts for more representative institutions, the KMT has
 committed itself to rejuvenating the central parliamentary
 bodies. The authorities have announced plans to increase
 elected legislative seats to 101 next year and to triple the
 number of elected National Assembly delegates by 1992. They
 have also drafted a retirement plan for aging mainlander
 representatives in an effort to encourage them to step down
 voluntarily. The authorities, however, have refused to adopt
 any wholesale measures to end the mandates of those
 Parliamentarians who were elected on the mainland in the late
 1940's, as they believe that to do so would call into question
 their claim that these bodies represent all of China.
 Suspicious that the KMT is seeking unfairly to prolong its
 majority, the DPP is calling for the complete reelection of
 all central Parliamentarians by the people of Taiwan.
 The central authorities appoint the Taiwan provincial Governor
 and the Mayors of Taipei and Kaohsiung. Elections for the
 Provincial Assembly and county and other municipal level
 offices have been held regularly since 1950. Universal
 suffrage exists for citizens 20 years of age and over. Voting
 is voluntary and by secret ballot; voter turnout runs over 60
 percent.
 The KMT continues to be the dominant political party in
 Taiwan, as has been the case since 1945. Originally composed
 overwhelmingly of mainlanders, its membership of over 2
 million is now more than 70 percent Taiwanese. There are also
 two minuscule, nominally independent parties which came from
 the mainland. The KET's structure and control mechanisms are
 based on Soviet models; however, the party's operations are
 considerably more flexible. Party organs exist at all levels
 of the ruling structure and, up until recently, existed in the
 military and schools as well. In 1988, however, the KMT
 began, at least formally, to remove formal party organs from
 the military and the school systems and to democratize its
 party structure.
 The lifting of martial law removed the ban on new political
 parties; however, full legalization of new parties awaits a
 new law which is currently being considered by the Legislative
 Yuan. In the past, opponents of the KEY ran in elections as
 independents. In 1986, however, in defiance of martial law
 still in effect, the opposition announced the formation of the
 Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and successfully fielded
 candidates in that year's legislative election, winning over
 
 
 795
 TAIWAN
 20 percent of the vote. In 1987 the 1MT initiated a series of
 meetings with DPP legislators to discuss important postmartial
 law legislation, thereby according de facto recognition to the
 new party. In the meantime, other groups have declared or are
 preparing to declare political parties, hoping to represent
 constituencies they believe to be overlooked by both the KMT
 and the DPP. The Labor Party was formed in 1987. By
 mid-1988, at least five other small parties had announced
 their formation.
 The role of the opposition is greater than its small numbers
 might indicate. Opposition members are very vocal in elective
 bodies and frequently use interpellation sessions to raise
 controversial or sensitive issues. Their activities have
 spurred tendencies within the ranks of the KMT, particularly
 among KMT supplemental legislators, to criticize regime
 policies openly.
 Opposition candidates face several disadvantages in the
 election process. Television, under firm state control,
 generally ignores opposition campaign activity. Although
 there is more coverage of opposition elected officials during
 council or legislative sessions than in the past, television
 remains a controlled medium to which the opposition has
 virtually no access. The 1980 Election Law limits the
 campaign period before an election to 15 days for National
 Assembly and Legislative Yuan elections and 10 days for local,
 county, and provincial elections. The law also stipulates who
 may speak at rallies and under what circumstances. The
 revised Election and Recall Law, enacted in June 1983,
 abolished joint rallies and precampaign "get-togethers,"
 campaign tactics favored by the opposition. The Law also
 placed ceilings on campaign expenditures, political
 contributions, and the quantity of campaign paraphernalia.
 The opposition argues that these provisions further reduce its
 ability to compete with well-financed, well-organized KMT
 candidates and hinder contact with the electorate. Opposition
 politicians label as ineffective provisions penalizing
 candidates for vote-buying and bribery. Further amendments to
 the election law are now in the discussion stage.
 The 1983 revisions of the election law also changed the
 method of indirect election of members of the Control Yuan
 (which exercises powers of impeachment, censure, and audit).
 The opposition charges that the changes were aimed at making
 it impossible for the opposition to pool their limited votes
 behind one candidate. One incumbent opposition candidate,
 however, was reelected in the 1987 Control Yuan election,
 despite an attempted boycott of the vote by the DPP.
 In recent years., women have taken an increasingly active role
 in local politics and have been successful votegetters.
 Election regulations ensure that women hold a minimum of 10
 percent of elected offices at both the central and local
 levels. However, very few women occupy positions at the
 senior levels of the Government or the KMT.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation-of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the past several years, the Taiwan authorities have at
 times permitted meetings between representatives of
 international human rights organizations and private persons
 interested in human rights issues with appropriate officials
 
 
 796
 TAIWAN
 and other persons. In 1987 representatives from Amnesty
 International were allowed to visit and meet freely with
 whomever they wished to see in examining Taiwan's human rights
 situation. Similarly, Asia Watch representatives visited
 Taiwan in 1988 and were allowed to meet freely with concerned
 individuals and groups. When approached, the authorities have
 been helpful in arranging calls on officials.
 The nongovernmental Chinese Association for Human Rights is
 devoting more of its efforts to human rights on Taiwan. It
 has sponsored tours for lawmakers and legal experts to examine
 Taiwan's crowded prisons and has established a free legal aid
 service.
 In 1984 a group of opposition professionals established the
 Taiwan Human Rights Association (THRA). Though not formally
 recognized by the authorities, it has been able to carry out
 its activities.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of
 descendants of Malayo-Polynesians who were already established
 in Taiwan when the first Chinese settlers arrived. These
 aboriginal people comprise slightly more than 1 percent of
 Taiwan's total population. There is no official policy of
 discrimination against them, but the barriers created by de
 facto cultural and economic discrimination are frequently
 difficult to surmount; thus aboriginal "mountain people"
 occupy the bottom rungs of Taiwan's socioeconomic ladder.
 Specially designated seats in both central and provincial
 legislative bodies are reserved for representatives, and the
 authorities have instituted a number of social programs to
 ease the aborigines' transition into the dominant Chinese
 society. Aboriginal people nevertheless complain that they
 are prevented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas
 under the control of the authorities. Furthermore, aboriginal
 people are not allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on
 legal documents. Some complain of economic exploitation by
 commercial or tourist concerns. The sale of aboriginal
 children into prostitution is a serious social problem.
 Taiwan's women play an important role in the economy and their
 contribution to the island's economic transformation has been
 significant. However, the majority of women still have poorly
 paying jobs at the low end of the economic scale, generally
 earning 40 to 50 percent less than men.
 Although the law prohibits sex discrimination, the press
 occasionally carries complaints of cases of discrimination.
 For example, women have complained of being forced to quit
 jobs because of age or childbearing restrictions.
 Restrictive quotas exist within certain ministries to control
 the number of women who may be accepted even after passing the
 rigorous civil service examination. The few laws that
 discriminate against women relate mostly to divorce issues and
 inheritance. A revised Civil Code passed by the Legislative
 Yuan in March 1985 provides for more equal treatment of women
 in the areas of marriage and divorce.
 Enrollment of women over 18 years of age in institutions of
 higher learning has increased during the past 30 years from
 1,750 students in 1953 (0.3 percent of the total number of
 
 
 797
 TAIWAN
 students enrolled) to 204,537 students in 1987 (44 percent of
 total enrollment). A women's rights movement is active and
 growing.
 Although the Taiwanese dialect is the mother tongue of most
 inhabitants of Taiwan, the authorities forbid its use in the
 educational system and impose limits on its use in broadcast
 media. In the past year or two, however, broadcast
 restrictions have been loosened to allow some Taiwanese
 programs, including news programs, to be televised.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor's right of association is delimited by laws and
 regulations which require the approval of the authorities to
 establish unions. Labor unions are free to draw up their own
 rules and constitutions. These, however, must be submitted to
 the authorities for review as to whether they are in accord
 with relevant laws and ordinances. A union may not be
 officially certified until the authorities have approved these
 documents. Unions may be dissolved by the authorities if they
 do not meet legal requirements for their certification or if
 their activities disturb public order. Civil servants,
 teachers, defense industry workers, and administrators acting
 on behalf of employers are prohibited from organizing unions.
 Public employees particularly guard their political views for
 fear of jeopardizing job benefits or having promotional
 opportunities curtailed.
 Labor discontent resulted in the KMT's unexpected 1986
 election loss of two labor constituency seats. Furthermore,
 the lifting of martial law in July 1987 allowed workers
 greater latitude for organized labor activities. As a result,
 the number of labor disputes has dramatically risen over the
 last 2 years, causing the authorities to place greater
 emphasis on resolving these conflicts. A cabinet-level
 Council for Labor Affairs was created in 1987 to implement and
 oversee labor laws and policies.
 Since the lifting of martial law, past constraints on union
 organizations appear to be easing to some degree. Whereas
 previously almost all union leaders were members of the ruling
 KMT, the ruling party monopoly over the labor movement no
 longer is assured. DPP and Labor Party organizers have made
 important inroads into organized labor as Taiwan's workers
 have grown increasingly restive over salary issues and working
 conditions. In the last 2 years, company workers have
 sometimes rejected KMT or management-endorsed union slates.
 Others have formed "friendship associations" to serve as
 alternatives to sanctioned KMT-controlled unions.
 Due to the lifting of restrictions formerly imposed on labor
 under martial law and a concern for labor's potential
 political role, the authorities in 1988 moved to clarify laws
 regarding workers' right to strike. Revisions to Taiwan's
 labor disputes law, which became effective in June, recognize
 labor's right to strike but place serious restrictions on it.
 Both labor and management are forbidden from taking actions
 that could disrupt "working order" when either mediation or
 arbitration is in progress. Stiff penalties may be levied
 should no-strike/no-retaliation clauses be violated, although
 the authorities have thus far appeared reluctant to exercise
 these sanctions fully. Regardless of legal limitations placed
 
 
 798
 TAIWAN
 on the right to strike, workers have struck or staged
 slowdowns with increasing frequency. Workers of different
 companies are for the first time banding together to establish
 emergency funds in anticipation of future strikes or lawsuits.
 Article 34 of the Labor Union Law permits unions to affiliate
 with international labor organizations, provided that such
 affiliation is approved by the union membership and by the
 authorities. The Chinese Federation of Labor, the only legal
 union federation on Taiwan, is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 As of June 1988, 2.07 million workers, or approximately 39
 percent of Taiwan's paid employees, belonged to 2,758 unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment
 to, dismiss, or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they
 are union members. However, there have been occasional
 reports of antiunion discrimination in several disputes.
 Laws governing union activities have equal application within
 Taiwan's export processing zones.
 Collective bargaining is provided for under the Collective
 Agreements Law but is not mandatory. Only about 280
 collective agreements, representing 12 percent of the 2,400
 medium and large enterprises in Taiwan, were in effect as of
 June 1988. The other enterprises have no such agreements.
 Legal restrictions on the free exercise of the right to strike
 and provisions for involuntary mediation or arbitration
 seriously weaken the practice of collective bargaining on
 Taiwan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Taiwan does not allow forced or compulsory labor, and there
 have been no reports of the practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for employment is 15, and interaction between
 the law stipulating this and a compulsory education law
 effectively keeps the level of child labor to a very low level.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Taiwan Labor Standards Law, promulgated in 1984, was
 "enacted to provide a minimum standard for labor conditions,
 protect workers' rights and interests, and promote social and
 economic development." About 3.5 million of Taiwan's 5.26
 million paid workers, mostly in blue-collar jobs, public
 utilities, construction, agriculture, transportation, and
 communications fall under its purview. The law has enjoyed
 limited success in several areas, and there is a growing
 sentiment that it should be revised. The authorities plan to
 extend the coverage of this and other labor laws to protect
 the rights and interests of other workers.
 By law, the workweek is limited to 48 hours (8 hours per day,
 6 days per week) with certain provisions for overtime. Taiwan
 has a legislated basic wage which is currently approximately
 $282 per month. There is general agreement that the basic
 minimum wage is less than that needed to assure a decent
 standard of living; however, the average manufacturing wage is
 
 
 799
 TAIWAN
 well over $500 per month. Most large firms provide their
 employees with allowances for transportation, meals, housing,
 and other benefits which can amount to another 60 to 80
 percent of base salary. There are minimum standards for
 working conditions and health and safety precautions.
 Unemployment insurance is being studied and may be offered to
 a small segment of workers in a pilot program.
 Efforts on the part of the authorities to increase workers'
 awareness of their rights through union education programs and
 the establishment of complaint channels appear to be bearing
 fruit, as manifested by an increasing number of legal suits
 filed against employers by workers.
 Despite the establishment of the Council on Labor Affairs,
 many provisions of labor legislation have not been enforced
 because the number of inspectors is far too small to ensure
 regular checks on compliance. There are 190 inspectors for
 over 200,000 enterprises in Taiwan. Thus far, the Council has
 concentrated its limited resources on monitoring working
 conditions and provisions for legally mandated retirement
 funds in state enterprises and larger private companies.
 Inspections of small- and medium-sized businesses are
 infrequent and action is rarely taken unless a worker
 complains formally to the authorities. Further, since many
 companies are small, family-owned operations employing
 relatives who will not report violations, actual adherence to
 the hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is
 hard to document and is thought to be minimal.
 
 
 800
