 TAWAN
 With the popular election of President Lee Teng-hui in March Taiwan completed
 its transition to an open, democratic system. Lee, who is also the chairman of the
 Nationalist Party (KMT), appoints the Premier, who heads the Executive Yuan
 (EY), or cabinet; the Legislative Yuan (LY) must confirm the appointment of the
 Premier. Current LY members were elected in a free and fair election in December
 1995. While the ruling KMT remains the single most powerful political force, it en-
 joys only a two-vote LY majority, and two opposition parties play important roles
 in the LY. The Judicial Yuan (JY) is constitutionally independent of the other
 branches of the political system, but corruption and political influence remain seri-
 ous problems.
 The National Police Administration (NPA) of the Ministry of Interior (MOI), the
 NPA's Criminal Investigation Bureau, and the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Investiga-
 tion Bureau are responsible for law enforcement relating to internal security. The
 National Security Bureau and Ministry of National Defense military police units
 also play limited law enforcement roles. These police and security agencies are
 under effective civilian control. Some members of the defense and security forces
 committed a number of human rights abuses.
 Taiwan has a dynamic, export-oriented, free-market economy. Liberalization of
 the economy has undercut the dominant role that state-owned and party-run enter-
 prises played in such major sectors as finance, transportation, utilities, shipbuilding,
 steel, telecommunications, and petrochemicals. As the economy has evolved services
 and capital- and technology-intensive industries have become the most important
 sectors. Major exports include computers, electronic equipment, machinery, and tex-
 tiles. Citizens generally enjoy a high standard of living.
 The authorities generally respect the human rights of citizens; however, occa-
 sional problems remain in some areas. Principal problems include police abuse of
 detainees; physical abuse of military prsonnel, which appears to be declining;, polit-
 ical and personal pressures on the judiciary; some restrictions on freedom of assem-
 bly, and association; prison overcrowding;, discrimination and violence against
 women; child prostitution and abuse; restrictions on workers' freedom of association
 and on their ability to strike.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. Ten jailers charged with the beating death of a prisoner
 in Chia-i County in September 1995 were convicted and sentenced to prison terms
 ranging from 8 months to 8 / years. The High Court has not yet ruled on the appeal
 of five policemen found guilty of the 1994 murder of a prisoner in Tainan.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution does not directly address the issues of torture and punishment.
 
 
 644
 
 The Code of Criminal Conduct, however, stipulates that no violence threat, induce-
 ment, fraud, or other improper means shall be used against accused persons. There
 were credible reports that police occasionally physically abused persons in their cus-
 tody. The law allows suspects to have attorneys present during interrogations, pri-
 marily to ensure that abuse does not take place (see Section 1.d.). The MOJ says
 that each interrogation is recorded and that any allegation of mistreatment is inves-
 tigated. Lawyers and legal scholars note that abuses most often occur in local police
 stations where interrogations are not recorded and when attorneys are not present.
 Informed observers note that police forces are weak in scientific investigative skills,
 so that when political leaders demand that cases be solved, there is great pressure
 on the police to coerce confessions. International observers have also noted that the
 judicial system seems preoccupied with obtaining confessions, which are sometimes
 accepted by the legal system even when they contradict available physical evidence
 or logic. Detainees who are physically abused have the right to sue the police for
 torture, and confessions shown to have been obtained through torture are inadmis-
 sible in court proceedings. There were no such suits reported during the year.
 The authorities made efforts to investigate, prosecute, and punish officials respon-
 sible for torture and other mistreatment. Although the basic responsibility for inves-
 tigating mistreatment_ lies with prosecutors, te Control Yuan (CY, a coequal
 branch of the political system which investigates official misconduct also inves-
 tigates such cases. Women's and children's rights groups also monitor police and ju-
 dicial performance and periodically mount campaigns to correct abuses.
 Although corporal punishment is forbidden under military law, there continued to
 be reports of phiysical abuse of miitary personnel. Following the beating death of
 a marine recruit in 1995, the CY began unannounced inspections of military facili-
 ties to question young serviemen regarding conditions of service in the military and
 allegations of abuse. The authorities also established a national telephone hot line
 to report alleged abuses within the military. The Ministry of National Defense has
 attributed some of the blame for abuse of recruits to a supposed softening of youth,
 which makes them incapable of accepting the rigors of combat training. However,
 the Ministry also has recognized that some trainers have used inappropriate meth-
 ods to address these deficiencies. In order to standardize, rationalize, and make
 transparent the military basic training program, the Ministry appointed three pro-
 fessional researchers to design practical training and curriculums for all military
 personnel who have contact with new recruits. Recently, physical abuse of recruits
 appears to be diminishing. Pressure from parents of recruits and a program to re-
 tain recruits have also contributed to this apparent reduction.
 Overcrowding at the 45 prisons and detention centers remained a problem despite
 some expansion of existmgffacilities and a 1994 Cri"nal Code amendment allowing
 prisoners to be paroled after serving one-third, rather than one-half, of their sen-
 tences. The 48,942 inmates detained as of July 1 exceeded the facilities' planned ca-
 pacity by 9,886. According to the MOJ, the number of prisoners has grown rapidly
 in recent years because of increased arrests of narcotics law violators. These viola-
 tors now make up more than 50 percent of the overall inmate population. The MOJ
 has set up drug treatment facilities to reduce the number of addicts in the prison
 population. Conditions in illegal immigrant detention centers are poor (see Section
 The authorities permit prison visits by human rights monitors, and the China
 Human Rights Association has made prison visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the authorities generally observe this prohibition. Police may le-
 gally arrest without a warrant anyone they suspect of committing a crime for which
 the punshment would be imprisonment of 5 years or more and may question per-
 sons without a formal summons. However, the authorities must, within 24 hours
 after detention, give written notice to the detainee or a designated relative or friend,
 stating the reason for the arrest or questioning. Indicted persons may be released
 on bail at judicial discretion.
 The Criminal Proedure Code specifies that the authorities mnay detain a suspect
 for up to 2 months during the investigative phase before filing a formal indictment.
 The prosecutor's office may extend the investigative detention for an additional 2-
 month period. A suspect may be held for up to 3 months during trial proceedings,
 and the court may extend the trial detention for two additional 3-month periods.
 The authorities generally have followed these procedures, and trials usually take
 place within 3 months of indictment.
 The authorities generally respect a detainee's request to have a lawyer present
 during the investigation phase, but defense lawyers continue to complain that peo-
 ple often are not advised of their right to have legal representation during police
 interrogation. While there is no legal requirement that the police advise suspects
 
 
 645
 of their right to counsel, arresting officers' checklists do provide for such notifica-
 tion. There is no legal requirement that indigent people be provided counsel during
 police interrogation, although such counsel is provided during trials.
 The "Antihoodlm   Law of 1985 was a departure from international standards of
 due process in that it included a secret witness system that allowed police to con-
 duct "sweeps" of suspected "hoodlums" and to use the testimony of unidentified in-
 formants in detaining the suspects. Lawyers for the alleged hoodlums were not per-
 mitted to cross-examine these informants. While defense lawyers have been given
 the right to examine documentary evidence, critics charge that evidence in these
 cases was often weak or fabricated. In 1995, however, the Council of Grand Justices
 (CGJ) declared unconstitutional the administrative procedures that had been used
 to sentence hoodlums to reformatory education. The authorities have drafted new
 antigang legislation, which was passed by the LY on December 30.
 The authorities do not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary and for equality before the law. In the past, some observers have characterized
 the judiciary as not fully independent and as susceptible to political and personal
 pressure and influence.
 Dissatisfaction exists among judges and others about the slowness of strengthen-
 ing the rule of law. Corruption within the judiciary remains a problem. During the
 year there were a number of indictments of judges for accepting bribes in exchange
 for favorable judgments. A number of judges have called for significant reforms,
 such as an end to the process of automatic review by senior judges of decisions by
 junior judges.
 The Judicial Yuan is one of the five coequal branches of the political system. The
 JY is headed by a president and a vice president and also contains the 16-member
 CGJ, which interprets the Constitution as well as laws and ordinances. Subordinate
 JY organs include the Supreme Court, high courts, district courts, the Administra-
 tive Court, and the Committee on the Discipline of Public Functionaries.
 The law provides for the right of fair public trial, and this is generally respected
 in practice. Judges, rather than juries, decide trials, and all judges are appointed
 by, and responsible to, the JY. In a typical court case, parties and witnesses are
 interrogated by a single judge but not directly by a defense attorney or prosecutor.
 The judge may decline to hear witnesses or to consider evidence a party wishes to
 submit if the judge considers it irrelevant; refusal to hear evidence may be a factor
 in an appeal. Trials are public, but attendance at trials involving juveniles or poten-
 tially sensitive issues that might attract crowds may require court permission. In
 addition, as the result of a CGJ ruling, judges will have the sole authority, once im-
 plementing legislation has been passed by the LY. to order pretrial detention of sus-
 en'ea power now shared by prosecutors. Such implementing legislation had not
 d       as       year's end.
 fendant has the right to an attorney. If the defendant is suspected of commit-
 ting a crime for which the penalty is 3 or more years' imprisonment, or if the de-
 fendant is disabled or elderly, the judge may assign an attorney. Criminal law spe-
 cifically provides the defendant with protection from self-incrimination. Persons con-
 victed in cases in which the sentence exceeds 3 years have the right to appeal to
 a high court and to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court automatically reviews
 life imprisonment and denth sentences. Under the law, prosecutors have the right
 to appeal verdicts of not guilty.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Prvacy Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution and sections of the Criminal and Civil Codes contain provisions pro-
 tecting privacy. A warrant, issued by a prosecutor or a judge, must be obtained be-
 fore a search, except when "incidental to arrest." Critics, however, claim that the
 incidental to arrest provision is not only unconstitutional but often interpreted
 broadly by police to justify searches of locations other than actual arrest sites. More-
 over, police continue to search cars routinely at roadblocks. According to the Na-
 tional Police Administration, warrantless searches are allowed only in special cir-
 cumstances, such as to arrest an escapee or if facts indicate a person is in the proc-
 ess of committing a crime. In any such case, the police must file a report with the
 prosecutor or court within 24 hours. Evidence collected without a warrant is not ex-
 cluded from introduction during a trial; however, a policeman who carries out an
 illegal search may be sued for illegal entry and sentenced to up to 1 year's imprison-
 ment.
 According to Executive Yuan regulations, judicial and security authorities may file
 a written request to a prosecutor's office to monitor telephone calls to collect evi-
 dence against a suspect involved in a major crime.
 
 
 646
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the authorities generally respect these rights in practice. How-
 ever, these rights are formally circumscribed by a statute prohibiting advocacy of
 communism or division of national territory; these provisions are not enforced in
 practice.
 While print media represent the full spectrum of views within Taiwan society, re-
 sidual political influence still exists over the electronic media, particularly televison
 stations, as the KMT, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the military continue
 to be the largest shareholders in the three island-wide broadcast television stations.
 Although considerable progress has been made toward loosening KMT control of the
 broadcast media, some critics still claim that coverage has been biased in favor of
 the KMT and against opposition parties. The planned fourth island-wide broadcast
 television station, to be based in Kaohsiung, is associated with the largest opposi-
 tion party, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). The opening of this station
 would eliminate the KMT's monopoly on broadcast television, and represent a sig-
 nificant move toward more complete media independence. Experts expect, however,
 that due to lack of funds it might take some time for this new network to begin
 operation. In any event, the proliferation of cable television stations, some of which
 carry programming openly hostile to the ruling party, has greatly diminished the
 importance of KMT control over the three established stations. Over 70 percent of
 households receive cable7 television, which includes local, privately financed channels
 as well as many major international networks. Several mainland China and Japa-
 nese channels are also widely carried on cable.
 Controls over radio stations were more limited than those over television stations
 and are being further liberalized. Until recently more than three-fourths of the 33
 authorized radio frequencies were held by the authorities, the KMT, and other non-
 commercial entities. Past refusals to approve new television and radio stations led
 to the establishment of "underground" cable television and radio operations. In 1996
 the authorities continued a multiyear process, started in 1993, to loosen controls
 using a five-stage licensing procedure for new radio stations. From 1993 to April
 1996, the Government Information Office (GIO) received 529 applications. A total
 of 169 frequencies were made available and 107 of these were a pportioned and con-
 struction permits granted. The new radio stations have limited broadcast ranges,
 however, leading critics to charge that the stations do not constitute a genuine coun-
 terweight to the authorities' monopoly on island-wide broadcasting.
 Several underground radio stations associated with opposition parties remain un-
 licensed. Observers have noted that licensing requirements oblige prospective radio
 station owners to have more capital than is required to actually operate a station.
 This in itself inhibits individuals or gups from applying for radio station licenses.
 In 1992 the authorities revised sedition statutes to limit the purview of the Sedi-
 tion Law and the National Security Law (NSL) and to remove prohibitions on "ac-
 tions against the Constitution." However, the NSL and related statutes such as the
 Civic Organizations Law and the Parade and Assembly Law still retain prohibitions
 against advocating communism or espousing the division of national territory, even
 though these provisions are not enforced in practice.
 There is a vigorous and active free press despite the Publications Law, which em-
 powers the police to seize or ban printed material that is seditious, treasonous, sac-
 rilegious, interferes with the" lawfl exercise of public functions, or violates public
 order or morals. There were no reports of censorship of the print media during the
 year nor were there any seizures of materials on political grounds. The police do
 sometimes conduct raids to seize pornographic materials.
 The GIO has demanded that any publications imported from mainland China be
 sent to the GIO publications department for screemng before sale or publication in
 Taiwan. The GIO still seeks to ban the importation of publications that advocate
 communism or the establishment of unite     front organizations, endanger public
 order or good morals, or violate regulations or laws. However, few local publishing
 companies observe this regulation, and substantial People's Republic of China-origin
 material is imported every year. Moreover, cable television systems broadcast un-
 censored television channels from mainland China.
 Among other restrictions regulating the media are those precluding people pre-
 viously convicted of sedition from owning, managng, or working in television and
 radio stations. Major opposition leaders, many of whom were convicted of sedition
 after the December 1979 Kaohsiung incident, are nevertheless not affected because
 their rights were restored through presidential amnesties.
 There are few restrictions on academic freedom. The expression of dissenting po-
 litical views is common.
 
 
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly and association, but the authorities restrict these rights some-
 what in practice. The Parade and Assembly Law permits peaceful demonstrations
 as long as they do not promote communism or advocate Taiwan's separation from
 mainland China and are approved in advance by the authorities. In practice the au-
 thorities do not interfere with demonstrators advocating independence for Taiwan.
 The authorities indicted a telecommunications union leader, Chang Shi-chung,
 under the Parade and Assembly Law as a result of a peaceful demonstration, which
 authorities charged was excessively noisy, held outside the Legislative Yuan in Jan-
 uary (see Section 6.a.). Two Aborigine demonstrators were prosecuted under the law
 for an unauthorized demonstration in 1995, and prosecution continues of four senior
 leaders of the opposition DPP for leading unauthorized demonstrations in 1992.
 The Civic Organization Law requires all civic organizations to register, however,
 the authorities nave refused to a prove rstration of some groups-such as the
 Taiwan Association for Human Rights (TAHR), the Taiwan Association of Univer-
 sity Professors, and the Taiwan Environmental Protection Alliance-which use the
 word 'Taiwan" in their titles (a usage that is regarded by the authorities as promot-
 ing Taiwan independence). The lack of registration entails some inconvenience to
 the operations of these groups. For example, they may not solicit donations from the
 p ublic and contributrs may not take income tax deductions for their contributions.
 Nonetheless, they operate actively, freely, and effectively.
 A 1992 revision of the Civic Organization Law removed from the Executive Yuan
 the power to dissolve political parties. This power now resides in the Constitutional
 Court. Grounds for dissolution include objectives or actions that are deemed to jeop-
 ardize the existene of the "Repubic of China." The Constitutional Court heard no
 cases under this law in 1996.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 authorities respect this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The authorities do not restrict freedom of internal travel. Foreign travel
 by Taiwan passport holders is common.
 Nonresident Taiwan passport holders are usually issued "overseas Chinese" pass-
 ports and require entry permits to travel to Taiwan. According to 1992 revisions to
 the National Security Law, entry permits may be refused only if there are facts suf-
 ficient to create a strong suspicion that a person is engaged in terrorism or violence.
 Reasons for entry and exit refusals must be given, and appeals may be made to a
 special board. No exit or entry permit refusals were reported during 1996.
 Since 1988 Taiwan has substantially relaxed strictures against travel by Taiwan
 residents to the Chinese mainland, and such travel is common. In 1993 new meas-
 ures provided that holders of Taiwan passports who normally reside abroad may re-
 turn and regain their household registration, a document required to vote or partici-
 pate as a candidate in an election. Relatively tight restrictions on the entry of Chi-
 nese from the mainland remain in force.
 There is no law under which noncitizens may ask for asylum, and there were no
 applications for refugee status in 1996. While the authorities have been reluctant
 to return to the mainland those who might suffer political persecution there, they
 regularly deport to the mainland, under provisions of the Mainland Relations Act,
 those mainlanders who illegally enter the island for economic reasons. There were
 no reports of forced return of persons to a country where they feared persecution.
 Conditions at detention camps for illegal immigrants (most from mainland China)
 continued to be criticized by local media. The Entry and Exit Bureau admitted that
 the three detention camps are overcrowded but blamed mainland Chinese authori-
 ties, who insist on extensive background checks, for delays in accepting the timely
 repatriation of illegal immigrants.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 During the year, Taiwan for the first time carried out the direct, popular election
 of its president, thus completing its transition to a democratic, multiparty political
 system. The transition began with the lifting of martial law in 1987. After generally
 free and fair popular elections for the LY in 1992, the second direct election of all
 LY members took place in December 1995. Previously, the President and Vice Presi-
 dent had been indirectly elected by the National Assembly (NA), which now stands
 for popular election every 4 years and is charged mainly with amending the Con-
 stitution.
 The KMT remains the largest political party, with 2 million members, although
 voters gave it only a slim majority in the December 1995 elections for the LY. The
 KMT has 85 seats in the 164-member LY. The Democratic Progressive Party, which
 
 
 648
 advocates independence for Taiwan, holds 54 seats. The DPP also holds 7 of 23
 mayor and county magistrate posts, including mayor of Taipei and the magistrate
 of Taipei County, and has an estimated 70,000 members. The New Party was estab-
 lished in 1993 by younger KMT members who opposed the party's domination by
 "mainstream" ethnic Taiwanese supporters of President and party chairman Lee
 Teng-hui. The New Party holds 21 seats in the LY and claims a membership of
 86,000.
 The KMT benefits from its ownership of the major television channels and of en-
 terprises and business holdings estimated to be worth in excess of $6 billion, and
 from the fact that its members still hold most key positions in the political system,
 sometimes concurrently with important party positions. In recent years, opposition
 parties have grown rapidly, however, and freely contest elections, criticize the au-
 thorities, and influence national policy through the legislative process. In 1994 a
 member of the DPP was elected mayor of Taipei, a position that makes him a mem-
 ber of the Cabinet.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for women, but their role in politics,
 while increasing, remains limited. Nevertheless, a number of women hold senior ad-
 ministrative and KMT positions, including National Health Administration Director
 General Dr. Chang Po-ya, Minister without Portfolio and KMT Central Standing
 Committee (CSC) member Shirley Kuo (a former Finance Minister), CSC member
 Hou Tsai-feng, and one major general in the armed forces. In addition, 23 of 164
 LY members, 61 of 334 National Assembly members, 16 of 79 Provincial Assembly
 members, 2 of 26 Control Yuan members, and 255 of 1,300 judges are women.
 Aborigine representatives participate in most levels of the political system, par-
 tially through 6 reserved seats in the NA and LY and 2 seats in the Provincial As-
 sembly-half of each elected by the plains Aborigines and half by mountain Aborig-
 ines. An Aborigine serves as Chief of the Ministry of Interior's Aborigine Affairs Sec-
 tion. The magistrate of Taitung county is an Aborigine elected in 1993.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The principal human rights organizations are the establishment-oriented Chinese
 Association of Human Rights (CAHR) and the opposition-aligned Taiwan Associa-
 tion for Human Rights (TAHR). Coordination between the two bodies is limited. De-
 spite the authorities' refusal to register it (see Section 2.b.), the TAHR continues to
 operate freely. Both organizations investigate human rights complaints, many of
 which come to public attention through the media and statements by lawmakers
 from all political parties. The authorities permit representatives of international
 human rights organizations to visit and meet with citizens freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality of citizens before the law "irrespective of
 sex, religion, race, class, or party affiliation." Other laws provide for the rights of
 disabled persons. While the authorities are committed to protecting these rights,
 some areas of discrimination continue to exist.
 Women.-Domestic violence, especially wife beating, is a serious problem. Accord-
 ing to a 1994 survey by the Taiwan Provincial Social Affairs Department, 17.8 per-
 cent of married women had been beaten by their husbands. The DPP Women's De-
 velopment Committee said that other statistics showed that 35 percent of married
 women were victims of spousal abuse. According to the law, a prosecutor may not
 investigate domestic violence cases until a spouse files a formal lawsuit. Although
 some cases are prosecuted, strong social pressure discourages abused women from
 reporting incidents to the police in order to avoid disgracing their families. Rape
 also remains a serious problem, and its victims are socially stigmatized. One expert
 believes that only 10 percent of the estimated 7,000 rapes occurring annually are
 reported to the police. Because rape trials are public, women have been reluctant
 to prosecute their attackers. Support from feminist and social welfare organizations,
 however, has made victims more willing to come forward and press charges. Under
 the law, the authorities may not prosecute for rape without the victim's complaint.
 The Criminal Code establishes the punishment or rape as not less than 5 years'
 imprisonment, and those convicted are usually sentenced to from 5 to 10 years in
 prison.
 Prostitution, including coerced prostitution and child prostitution, is also a prob-
 lem although there is little public concern about adult prostitution. When the police
 discover illegal prostitution, the cases are prosecuted according to the Criminal
 Code. However, under the "prostitute management regulations," prostitution is legal
 
 
 649
 
 in registered houses of prostitution in specified urban areas, mainly in Taipei and
 Kaohsiung.
 The law prohibits sex discrimination, and the LY has in recent years begun a sys-
 tematic review and revision of those portions of the Legal Code relating todivorce,
 property, and child custody. As a result, recent legislation has eliminated many dis-
 criminatory sections of the code. In 1994 the CGJ declared unconstitutional a Civil
 Code provision dating back to the 1930's that gave fathers priority in child custody
 disputes. In September the LY pas.sed bills eliminating the assumption that custody
 would go to the father and provdin for equal distribution of assets in divorce cases.
 There is no equal employment rights law, and enforcement of existing sex dis-
 crimination laws remains a problem. Labor laws provide for maternity leave, but
 employers do not always grant it. Women also have complained of being forced to
 quit 'b upon marriage or because of age or pregnancy. Women often complain of
 les frequent promotions and lower salaries than  eir male counterparts. According
 to the Council on Labor Affairs, salaries for women average 85 percent of those of
 men performing roughly equal jobs.
 In the past, many women married to foreigners claimed that their husbands had
 a more difficult time obtaining residency than the foreign wives of Taiwan citizens.
 They also complained that their children were not allowed to enter public schools.
 In 1995 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced a relaxation of the regulations
 governing foreign husbands' residence permits that allows the foreign husbands of
 citizens to remain in Taiwan for 6 months at a time rather than the shorter periods
 granted previously. The LY also passed new legislation permitting the children of
 foreign fathers to attend public schools. However, the Citizenship Law continues to
 stipulate that the transmission of citizenship may occur exclusively through the fa-
 ther. A Taiwan mother with a foreign husband thus cannot apply for a Taiwan pass-
 port for her child.
 Children.-The Constitution has provisions to protect children's rights, and the
 authorities are committed to supporting them. Education for children between 6 and
 15 years of age is compulsory and enforced. The Constitution provides that spendin
 on education shall be no less than 15 percent of the central budget, 25 percent o
 the provincial and special municipality budgets, and 35 percent of the county and
 ci budgts.
 'Ild abuse is a significant problem. The 1993 revision of the Child Welfare Act
 mandates that any persons discovering cases of child abuse or neglect must notify
 the police, social welfare, or child welfare authorities, that child welfare specialists
 must do so within 24 hours, and that the authorities involved must issue an inves-
 tigation report within 24 hours. Both the Ministry of Interior Social Affairs Depart-
 ment and private organization specialists assert that these requirements are fol-
 lowed.
 Child prostitution is a serious problem involving between 40,000 and 60,000 chil-
 dren, an estimated 5 percent of whom are Aborigines, according to reports by police
 and social workers. Most child prostitutes range from 12 through 16 years of age.
 The Juvenile Welfare Law enables juvenile welfare bodies, prosecutors, and victims
 to apply to courts for termination of guardianship of parents and the appointment
 of qualified guardians if parents have forced their children into prostitution. If chil-
 dren are engaged in prostitution of their own free will, and the parents are incapa-
 ble of providing safe custody, the courts may order competent authorities to provide
 counseling for not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years. However, legal
 loopholes and cultural barriers remain obstacles to enforcement. For example, if
 both parents have sold a child into prostitution, a problem associated mostly with
 Aborigine families, the law requires the child to lodge a complaint before prosecu-
 tion is undertaken. In many cases, the child is reluctant or afraid to do so.
 According to some reports, violence, drug addiction, and other forms of coercion
 are used by brothel owners to prevent child prostitutes from escaping. In 1995 the
 LY passed legislation providing for as much as 2 years' incarceration for customers
 of any prostitute who is under the age of 18. The legislation also requires the publi-
 cation of the names of violators in newspapers. At year's end several hundred cases
 were being prosecuted under that law, although only a handful of convictions had
 been obtained.
 People With Disabilities.-The Disabled Welfare Law was revised and strength-
 ened in 1990. It prohibits discrimination against the disabled and sets minimum
 fines at approximately $2,400 for violators. Under these revisions, new public build-
 ings, facilities, and transportation equipment must be accessible to the disabled,
 while existing public buildings were to be brought into conformity by 1995. Although
 new buildings a p pear to meet many accessibility requirements, there does not as yet
 appear to be substantial effort aimed at refitting older buildings to accommodate
 disabled people.
 
 
 650
 A leading expert in the field estimates that the number of disabled is between
 400,000 and 500,000-possibly as high as 700,000. One-third of the total are se-
 verely disabled and receive shelter or nursing care from the authorities. The Dis-
 abledWelfare Law requires large public and private organizations to hire disabled
 persons, 2 and 1 ercent of their work forces respectively. Organizations failing to
 do so must pay, or each disabled person not hired, the basic monthly salary (ap-
 proximately $570) into the Disabled Welfare Fund, which supports institutions in-
 volved in welfare for the disabled. Many organizations complain that it is difficult
 to find qualified disabled workers and a ppear to prefer to Fag the fines involved.
 The authorities have noted the impact of a traditional belief that the disabled lack
 the ability to do real work. During the year, several disabled students received ex-
 traordinarily high scores on the university entrance examinations. This performance
 was well publicized and may serve to lessen the negative impression many residents
 have of disabled people.
 Indigenous People.-Taiwan's only non-Chinese minority group consists of the Ab-
 original descendants of Malayo-Polynesians already establised in Taiwan when the
 fit Chinese settlers arrived. According to MOI statistics, there are 357,000 Aborig-
 ines. More than 70 percent are Christian while the dominant Han Chinese group
 is largely Buddhist or Taoist. The civil and political rightsof A boriines are fully
 protected under law. The National Assembly amended te Cons~itution in 1992 to
 upgrade the status of Aboriginal people, protect their right of political participation,
 and ensure cultural, educational, and business development. In addition, the au-
 thorities have instituted social programs to help the Aborigines assimilate into the
 dominant Chinese society. As part of its efforts topreserve ethnic identities, the
 Ministry of Education now includes some Aborial-langage classes in primary
 schools.
 Although they face no official discrimination, Aborigines have had little impact,
 over the years, on major decisions affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and the
 allocation of their natural resources. In addition, they complain that they are pre-
 vented from owning ancestral lands in mountain areas under the authorities' con-
 trol, some of which have been designated as national parks or conservation areas.
 According to MOI statistics, only aout 50 percent of Ao        children complete
 elementary school. Researchers have found alcohoism to be. a significant problem
 among the Aborigines, with alcohol addiction rates exceeding 40 percent among
 adult members of three of the nine major tribes. In the past, Aborigines were not
 allowed to use non-Chinese personal names on legal documents, but this was
 changed by legislation in 1996.
 The sale of Aboriginal girls into prostitution by their parents is a serious social
 problem (see Children above). However, recent reports have indicated that in the
 period from June 1994 to July 1995, the percentage of all arrested child prostitutes
 who were of Aboriginal origin dropped from 15 percent to 5 percent. This reduction
 may have come about due to intensive efforts on the part of social workers and non-
 government organizations to combat the practice of selling female children into pros-
 titution.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In 1995 the Judicial Yuan decided that the right to
 organize trade unions is protected by the Constitution. But, until new legislation im-
 plementing this decision is passed, teachers, civil servants, and defense industry
 workers are still not permitted to form labor unions. Even with this ruling, there
 are a number of laws and regulations limiting the right of association. Labor unions
 may draw up their own rules and constitutions, but they must submit these to the
 authorities for review. Unions may be dissolved if they do not meet certification re-
 quirements or if their activities disturb public order. However, there were no in-
 stances of the authorities dissolving local labor groups or denying new unions cer-
 tification.
 The Labor Union Law requires that union leaders be elected regularly by secret
 ballot, and, in recent years, workers have sometimes rejected KMT- or management-
 endorsed union slates.
 Unions may form confederations, but no administrative district, including a city,
 county, or provinc, can have competing labor confederations. There is only one Tai-
 wan-wide labor federation, the Chinese Federation of Labor (CFL) which is closely
 associated with the ruling KMT. The Chairman of the Council of Labor Affairs
 (CIA-equivalent to a ministry of labor but not a cabinet department) was formerly
 head of the CFL. Ho Tsai-fong, a standing member of the CFL's board of directors,
 is also a member of the KM's Central Standing Committee.
 The restriction on island-wide unions was challenged in 1994 when 12 unions
 from state-run enterprises announced that they wouldwithdraw from the CFL and
 
 
 651
 establish a new national federation of labor unions of state-ran enterprises. The
 CLA turned down their application, as well as the appeal of that rejection. In the
 meantime, the trade unions have retained their seats in the CFL. In general, the
 drive for independent labor unions has lost momentum in recent years due to the
 extremely low unemployment rates, higher wages, the shift from manufacturing to
 service industries, the small scale and poor organization of most unions, and pros-
 ecution of labor activists by the authorities in the past. Chang Shi-chung, leader of
 an independent group under the Union of the Telecommunications Industry, was
 charged under the Parade and Assembly Law for protesting a revision of the Tele-
 communications Law in January (see Section 2.b.).
 The law governing labor disputes recognizes the right of unions to strike but im-
 poses restrictions that make legal strikes difficult and seriously weaken collective
 bargaining. For example, the authorities require mediation of labor/management
 disputes when they deem the dis putes to be sufficiently serious or to involve "unfair
 practices." The law forbids both labor and management from disrupting the "work-
 ing order" when either mediation or arbitration is in progress. The law mandates
 stiff penalties for violations of no-strike/no-retaliation clauses. Employers in the past
 sometimes ignored the law and dismissed or locked out workers without any legal
 action being taken againt them, although there were no such cases reported in 1996.
 The CIA reported that from 1990 to August 1995, there were 31 strikes, of which
 22 involved workers at bus companies asking for increased pay and reduced hours.
 There were no strikes recorded in 1996.
 Taiwan was expelled from the International Labor Organization in 1971 when the
 People's Republic of China replaced it in the United Nations. The CFL is affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for the categories of
 workers noted in Section 6.a. the Labor Union Law and the Settlement of Labor
 Disputes Law give workers he right to organize and bargain collectively. As of
 March, some 3.1 million workers, approximately 33.5 percent of Taiwan's 9.2-million
 person labor force, belonged to 3,763 registered labor unions.
 Under the Labor Union Law, employers may not refuse employment to, dismiss,
 or otherwise unfairly treat workers because they are union members. In practice,
 however, union leaders have sometimes been dismissed without reasonable cause by
 employers, and observers point out that the law sets no specific penalties for viola-
 tions. According to the illegal National Federation of Independent Trade Unionists,
 a federation of 20 legal unions with a combined total of 4,000 members, about 400
 trade unionists and supporters have been fired since Taiwan's labor movement
 began to expand after the 1987 lifting of martial law.
 The Collective Agreements Law provides for collective bargaining but does not
 make it mandatory. Since such agreements are made only in large-scale enterprises,
 and less than 5 percent of Taiwan's enterprises fall into this category, the propor-
 tion of workers covered remains small. Employers set wages generally in accordance
 with market conditions.
 Firms in export processing zones are subject to the same laws regarding treat-
 ment of labor unions as other firms and follow normal practices including collective
 bargaining agreements with their unions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Standards Law pro-
 hibits forced or compulsory labor. There were no reports of these practices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Standards Law stipu-
 lates age 15, after compulsory education required by law ends, as the minimum age
 for employment. County and city labor bureaus enforce minimum age laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Standards Law (LSL) mandates
 labor standards. According to the CLA, the law covers 3.5 million of Taiwan's 6.3
 million salaried workers. The law is not well enforced in areas such as overtime
 work and pay or retirement payments.
 The Executive Yuan approved a raise in the minimum wage of 3.23 percent to
 about $570 (NT$ 15,360) per month effective September 1. While sufficient in cheap-
 er areas, this is less than what is needed to assure a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family in metropolitan areas such as Taipei. However, the average
 manufacturing wage is more than double the legal minimum wage, and the average
 for service industry employees is even higher. The law limits the workweek to 48
 hours (8 hours per day, 6 days per week) and requires 1 day off in every 7 days.
 The 1991 Revised Occupational Safety and Health Law enlarged coverage to in-
 clude workers in agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries and appeared to
 strengthen penalties for safety violations. It nevertheless still provides only minimal
 standards for working conditions and health and safety precautions. The Occupa-
 tional Safety and Health Law gives workers the right to remove themselves from
 dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment. Some critics,
 
 
 652
 
 however, see the law as a step backward; for example, they note that, under the
 revised law, general contractors are not responsible for the safety of those working
 for subcontractors.
 The 1993 Labor Inspection Law was designed to strengthen the enforcement of
 labor standards and health and safety regulations. It increased the number of enter-
 prises and types of safety issues to be inspected; gave inspectors quasi-judicial pow-
 ers; required preexamination of dangerous working places such as naphtha-cracking
 plants, pesticide factories, and firecracker factories; and raised penalties for viola-
 tions. Critics allege that the CIA does not effectively enforce workplace laws and
 regulations because it employs too few inspectors. There are slightly over 200 in-
 spectors for the approximately 300,000 enterprises covered by the Occupational
 Safety and Health Law. Because the new law expanded coverage to include more
 enterprises, the inspection rate actually declined. Since many enterprises are small,
 family-owned operations employing relatives unlikely to report violations, actual ad-
 herence to the hours, wage, and safety sections of various labor laws is hard to doc-
 ument but is thought to bie minimal in these smaller enterprises.
 Because of Taiwan's acute labor shortage, there has been a legal influx of foreign
 workers in the last several years. The law stipulates that foreign workers who are
 employed legally receive the same protection as local workers. However, authorities
 say that in many cases illegal foreign workers, many from Thailand and the Phil-
 ippines, receive board and lodging from their employers, but no medical coverage,
 accident insurance, or other benefits enjoyed by citizens. In addition, observers say
 that conditions in many small and medium-sized factories that employ illegal for-
 eign labor are dangerous, due to old and poorly maintained equipment. Illegal for-
 eign workers remain vulnerable to exploitation, including confiscation of passports,
 imposition of involuntary deductions from wages, and extension of working hours
 without overtime pay. There are also occasional reports of mistreatment of legal for-
 eign workers. According to available statistics, there are almost 230,000 legal for-
 eign workers in Taiwan, including approximately 143,000 workers from Thailand
 and 72,000 workers from the Philippines. As the unemployment rate began to rise
 in mid-1996, reaching a decade-long high of 3.1 percent in August, the CIA has
 moved to impose stricter limits on the number of foreign workers entering Taiwan.
