 TANZANIA
 .The United Republic of Tanzania, formed in 1964 when mainland
 Tanganyika united-with the newly independent island of
 Zanzibar, is a one-party state. Political direction for the
 party, the Chama Cha-Mapinduzi (CCM), and the Government comes
 -from a party-chosen elite headed by party chairman Julius K.
 Nyerere, who served as Tanganyika/Tanzania's first President
 until 1985, and President Ali Hassan 14winyi, who formerly
 .served both as Zanzibar's President and Tanzania's First Vice
 President. The CCM under Nyerere lays down fundamental
 political and economic policies and monitors their
 implementation. The party attempts to control activity at all
 levels of-society through its system of 10-family cells. The
 offshore islands of Zanzibar and Pemba are integrated into the
 Union'd governmental and party structure, but the Zanzibar
 Government exercises a considerable degree of autonomy.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining
 internal security. They are supported in this role by the
 Tanzanian People's Defense Force (TPDF), with some 30,000
 personnel, and by paramilitary forces and a large citizens'
 militia. The Government has tolerated, and has granted
 quasi-legal status to, vigilante forces in rural areas to
 counter lawlessness, especially cattle rustling. While the
 armed forces traditionally have not been a source of human
 rights Abuses, there have been problems with the police. In
 1989 they were accused of engaging in severe beatings and
 torture in the course of interrogations.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries and has one
 -of the-highest rates of population growth. Its overwhelmingly
 agricultural economy has suffered from unfavorable trends in
 -international trade and inefficient economic policies.
 Reforms'undertaken in 1986, including increased prices paid to
 farmers, rescheduled foreign debt payments, and a sharply
 devalued currency, stimulated growth rates to an estimated 4
 percent in 1989.
 * A bill of rights promulgated in 1988 provides for, inter alia,
 freedom of movement, speech, religion, and association, but
 - there has been criticism that it has never been explained
 fullyto the.populace. In any event, civil rights are still
 severely -restricted by the Government. All political activity
 .-outside the single party is tightly Circumscribed. Direct
 criticism of the party and its chairman is not tolerated. For
 -example, after openly criticizing the party's leadership and
 policies, former4Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad
 was arrested in May 1989 for participating in an illegal
 demonstration and was-held in detention throughout 1989. Six
 policemen were arraigned for alleged brutality and torture in
 a suburban police station; by year's end, the Government had
 _not yet brought formal charges against them, and all remained
 on duty.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 In January 1989, a local newspaper reported that three women
 were killed near Shinyanga in north-central Tanzania on
 suspicion of practicing witchcraft. Such mob justice occurs
 from time to time in both urban and rural areas. The
 
 
 384
 TANZANIA
 Sungusungu and Wasalam, traditional defense groups in
 north-central Tanzania, are encouraged by both government and
 party officials to help eliminate cattle rustling in areas too
 remote for the police. These vigilante groups often execute
 rustlers and also turn on villagers accused of witchcraft.
 The Government and the party regularly send officials to this
 region to try to instill some discipline, but the problem
 continues. Ironically, the January 1989 killings took place
 the same day that the regional CCM secretary decried such
 summary "justice."
 The Government has proposed legislation to Parliament which
 would give formal status to these traditional security/defense
 groups. Known as the "People's Militia Laws (Miscellaneous
 Amendment)", the bill seeks to endow the people's militia with
 powers of arrest and to provide for compensation of militia
 members for injuries sustained while on duty.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture or inhuman or
 degrading treatment, and government officials condemn such
 practices whenever cases are made public. Police, however,
 routinely "soften up" arrested suspected criminals just after
 apprehension in order to obtain quick confessions. Further
 beatings and torture continue if the suspect does not break
 down. In September 1989, the Dar es Salaam press reported
 extensively on the death during torture of a suspect whom
 policemen of the suburban Oyster Bay police station had
 arrested for stealing a tractor part. A suspected accomplice,
 tortured in the same room as the deceased, was so badly maimed
 (by electric cables wrapped around his body like bullwhips
 which pulled off chunks of flesh when the cables were jerked
 off) that he had to be hospitalized. He is a witness to the
 torture killing. Six policemen were charged with assaulting
 the accomplice; there had been no judicial action in this
 alleged torture death, however, at the end of 1989.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Criminal Procedure Code, amended in 1985, requires that a
 person arrested for a crime, other than a security charge
 under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a
 magistrate within 24 hours. The new amendments, however, also
 restricted the right to bail, reduced the number of bailable
 offenses, limited judges' discretion in granting bail, and
 imposed strict conditions on freedom of movement and
 association when bail is granted.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President, upon
 written order, can direct the arrest and indefinite detention
 without bail of any person considered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. The Act was amended in 1985 to
 require the Government to release detainees within 15 days of
 detention or to inform them of the reason for their
 detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the
 grounds for detention at 90-day intervals.
 Zanzibar was the scene of large demQnstrations in May 1988
 during which two persons were shot dead by the police. The
 
 
 385
 TANZANIA
 authorities arrested 23 persons following the demonstrations
 and charged them with participation in an illegal assembly.
 The 23 were tried in July 1988; 15 were found guilty and
 sentenced to 18 months in jail, while the other 8 were
 released.
 The most celebrated current Tanzanian detention case is that
 of former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad, who fell
 from grace with the CCM for criticizing the party chairman and
 CCII policies, was stripped in 1988 of his party membership and
 his -jdb, and was arrested in May 1989, charged with
 partidipating in an illegal demonstration, and held without
 bail. He was later also charged with illegal possession of
 secret government documents. A hearing in magistrate's court
 commenced on September 27. The trial continued through the
 end of the year, with some sessions held in camera at the
 Government's request so that the secret documents allegedly
 found in Hamad's possession could be presented. Most of the
 trial has been public; the defense had yet to present its case
 at the end of 1989.
 In August two student leaders were abducted from the Dar es
 Salaam University campus center in broad daylight, reportedly
 by special security services. The students were hustled off
 to a distant safe house anid detained in humiliating
 circumstances for almost 3 weeks. Under threat of a student
 strike on university graduation day, the students were
 released on August 24 and returned to campus. Never
 officially charged with any offense, it is generally accepted
 that they were abducted and detained because they criticized a
 CCM'Central Committee member's handling of funds of the
 Tanzanian delegation to the 13th World Youth and Students'
 Festival held in Pyongyang, North Korea.
 James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othman Upindo had been sent into
 "internal exile" on remote islands in July 1987, having'been
 detained in October 1986 under the Preventive Detention Act
 (and later redetained under the 1921 Deportation Ordinance)
 for advocating a multiparty system. They were released in
 April 1989. The Deportation Ordinance which permitted the
 President to order the internal exile of these "undesirable"
 persons waS declared unconstitutional by the High Court of
 Tanzania in 1989. The Court ruled that this Ordinance
 restricted freedom of movement and thus violated the Bill of
 Rights. On September 30, the press reported that the
 Government intended to propose amendments to the Ordinance
 which would enable a deportee to challenge the deportation
 order in court in the event requisite procedures were not
 followed.
 Joseph Kasella Bantu, a prominent dissident, was released from
 house arrest and was reported to be living quietly in southern
 Tanzania.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model, with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public and the
 press; courts must give reasons on the record for holding
 proceedings in camera. Criminal defendants have the right of
 appeal. Military courts do not try civilians, and there are
 
 
 386
 TANZANIA
 no security courts. Defendants in criminal and military
 courts may appeal decisions to the High Court.
 While an independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated
 and usually operates independently from the executive branch,
 the Government exerts influence in some cases. Members of the
 legal community, including judicial officers, have complained
 that the legal system is being corrupted through bribery.
 Police and lower court officials are often bribed to delay the
 process of investigation and trials. There are reports that
 the court trying Zanzibar's former Chief Minister Hamad was
 under pressure to render a conviction. Although the 1985
 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code were supposed to
 lessen court congestion, an average case still takes from 2 to
 3 years to come to trial. Effective May 1989, laws were
 amended to impose more severe penalties for offenders of the
 law, including not less than 30 years for armed robbery.
 The Government provides legal counsel to those charged with
 treason and murder. In Dar es Salaam, the Legal Aid Committee
 of the Tanganyika Law Society and the Legal Aid Committee of
 the faculty of law at the University of Dar es Salaam offer
 legal services to indigents, but their resources are limited.
 Under the Detention Act of 1983, political prisoners have the
 right to be represented by a defense attorney.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's
 legal system, but retains Islamic courts to handle Muslim
 family cases such as divorce, child custody, and inheritance.
 Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only
 in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the
 Court of Appeals of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 According to knowledgeable observers, there were no political
 prisoners at the end of 1989.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary (an estimated 2.5
 million Tanzanians are CCM members), the party structure
 permeates the private lives of all citizens. The CCM has
 party cadres at all levels of society. Individual cells vary
 in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings,
 and may contain from 10 to several hundred persons. Unpaid
 "10-cell" leaders are the party officials responsible for
 resolving problems at the grassroots level and reporting any
 suspicious behavior or event within their neighborhoods to
 authorities.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of undesirable or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of
 residence or origin if no work is found for them (See Sections
 2.d. and 6.c.). It is generally recognized that Tanzanian
 security services monitor the telephones of several categories
 of Tanzanian citizens and expatriates and scrutinize
 correspondence.
 The Criminal Procedure Code Act of 1985 authorizes magistrates
 to issue search warrants to police officers, enabling them to
 enter premises for the purpose of search and seizure. In
 practice, however, police and other security services enter
 private homes and business establishments without the
 requisite warrant.
 
 
 387
 TANZANIA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although freedom of speech and press is provided for under the
 .Constitution, in practice it has continued to be restricted,
 given the substantial government and party ownership and
 control of the media. Tanzanian citizens show few inhibitions
 about criticizing the Government and its official's in private
 conversations but are extremely cautious in wlat they say in
 public forums.
 The mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the national press agency, and the mainland radio
 facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a radio station
 and a television station. The Swahili-language newspaper
 Uhuru, which has a daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by
 the party. The Newspaper Act, which allows government seizure
 of any publication without a warrant and withdrawal of the
 license to publish at any time, makes the launching of a
 private newspaper or magazine risky. Despite these
 restrictions, a privately owned-weekly business..newspaper and
 two special interest magazinesstarted publication in 1988.
 The official media present the Government's point of view on
 policy matters. -Journalists are expected to understand and
 support the party's ideological underpinnings of socialism and
 self-reliance in order to publicize and defend party and
 government policies. The news media are periodically exhorted
 to step up their efforts to educate, mobilize, and entertain
 the public. Formal censorship is not exercised, but
 individual journalists employ self-censorship in criticizing
 government and party policy and officials.
 visiting foreign journalists are required to register with the
 Government and obtain a government permit. Permits and visas
 are not easily obtained, however, and application is a
 time-consuming process which often requires intervention from
 a high level official.
 Academic freedom is officially guaranteed, but, in practice,
 academiciabs, most of whom are employed in government-run
 educational institutions, refrain from broaching sensitive
 subjects in their classrooms and publications.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Given the nature of Tanzania's one-party system, the freedoms
 of public assembly and association are limited. Permits must
 be obtained through the Government-for any public meeting,
 political or otherwise, and are normally granted. Student
 organizations are controlled by the party. Under the
 Societies Ordinance, all associations must be registered with
 and approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Candidates for
 office in major sports clubs and cooperatives are screened by
 the appropriate government ministry, which also supervises
 their elections. No organizations which would compete with
 party organizations are approved.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 
 
 388
 TANZANIIA
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to
 go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious purposes. The
 Jehovah's Witnesses, who have been banned in Tanzania for many
 years, have been allowed to return and to register as an
 organization and have been permitted to proselytize since
 1988. The population of the mainland is roughly 30 percent
 Christian, 35 percent Muslim, and 35 percent adherents of
 traditional religions. Zanzibar is overwhelmingly Muslim.
 While there appear to be no social or political advantages or
 disadvantages attached to membership in any given faith on the
 mainland, this is not the case on Zanzibar, where there has
 been some controversy regarding state support of certain
 mosques.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, short-term travel
 generally is not restricted within Tanzania, but citizens must
 follow national employment directives stipulating the nature
 of employment and location of residence. For years city
 dwellers unable to show proof of employment during police
 checks have been forced to return to rural areas in an effort
 by the Government to control increasing pressure on urban
 resources. The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983
 requires local authorities to ensure that every resident
 within their areas of jurisdiction engages in productive or
 other lawful employment. Those not so employed are subject to
 transfer to another area where employment is available. The
 Government remains concerned with the continuing migration of
 young people to the cities from rural areas. However, in
 contrast to earlier years, there were no massive roundups of
 unemployed youths under the Act in 1989.
 Passports are required for foreign travel and can be difficult
 to obtain. Tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank
 are required in order to buy airline tickets, and, in
 practice, those planning to travel or emigrate are subject to
 intense scrutiny by police and tax authorities. Tanzanians
 who leave the country without authorization are subject to
 prosecution on their return. The Extraterritorial
 Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try Tanzanians who
 commit offenses outside the country. Although it is legally
 possible for citizenship to be revoked, there have been no
 reports that this has been done in recent years.
 Parliament passed a bill in 1986 requiring the registration
 and identification of everyone over the age of 10 resident in
 Tanzania, apparently in an effort to control foreign
 businessmen.
 Tanzania generally has a liberal policy towards refugees and
 displaced persons. As of the end of 1989 there were believed
 to be about 266,000 refugees in Tanzania. A more accurate
 count will be available when the results of a recent census
 are published. The largest group of refugees is from
 Burundi. In 1989 the Government jailed 15 Burundian refugees
 whose repatriation was requested by the Burundian Government
 for allegedly plotting against it..  They were served with a
 letter of expulsion and by year's end remained in detention
 
 
 389
 TANZANIA
 while the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) sought an alternative country willing to resettle
 them. It is estimated that Tanzania harbors some 5,000 to
 7,000 refugees from the African National Congress (ANC) of
 South Africa.
 Tanzania accepts refugees from almost all countries, except
 for South Africans who have left their liberation movements
 and Kenyans associated with the opposition in Kenya. However,
 according to the*UNHCR, refugees from Mozambique are subject
 to intense scrutiny at the border. A number of opposition
 groups and alleged political refugees have found Tanzania a
 relatively open haven and maintain contact with the UNHCR,
 even though- chances of finding-permanent third-country refuge
 are temote.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to 'Change Their Government
 Tanzafiian citizens cannot legally remove the party in power or
 change the one-party system. Political activity is forbidden
 except within the one legal party, the CCM. Ex-President
 Julius Nyerere continues to direct the affairs of the CCM
 through its Central Committee. There are no overt opposition
 groups. The persons arrested in 1986, sent into internal
 exile in 1987, and then released in 1989 (see Section l.d.)
 were advocates of a multiparty system. Their offense was
 distributing leaflets calling for a change in the political
 system.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members; any
 Member of Parliament stripped of party membership loses his or
 her seat in Parliament. A 1985 amendment to the Constitution
 allows voters to choose between two CCM-selected candidates
 for 75 percent of the 244 seats in the Union Parliament. The
 remaining 25 percent are appointed by the Government and the
 various mass organizations associated with the party. The
 one-party system does not permit political participation
 through the open nomination of multiple candidates. All CCM
 candidates are vetted and approved by the all-powerful Central
 Committee. Voters can and do register dissatisfaction with
 individual Members of Parliament by voting incumbents out of
 office and choosing the alternate candidate offered by the
 CCM. Elections for both the Presidency and Parliament are
 held every 5 years; the next elections are scheduled for
 1990. Voting is by secret ballot.
 While membership in the party is voluntary, overzealous CCM
 functionaries havebeen known to require proof of membership
 for individual citizens to receive basic government services
 or employment, a practice which has been publicly deplored by
 CC14 Chairman Nyerere.
 Zanzibar's Constitution provides for a Zanzibari House of
 Representatives consisting of 50 elected members, 10 members
 nominat6d by the President of Zanzibar, 5 regional
 commission6rs, 5 seats reserved for women, and 5
 representatives from the party's mass organizations. Those
 members directly elected (for the first time in 1985) were
 chosen from a slate of candidates selected by the CCM.
 
 
 390
 TANZANIA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government traditionally has spoken out in international
 forums against human rights abuses. Tanzania is a party to
 the United Nations covenants on human rights and in 1984
 ratified the Organization of African Unity Charter on Human
 and Peoples' Rights. Nevertheless, the Government resents
 inquiries into alleged human rights abuses. There were no
 outside investigations of human rights violations in Tanzania
 in 1989, but the Amnesty International Secretary General
 discussed with the present Zanzibar Chief Minister, Omar Ali
 Juma, in London in September the question of Zanzibaris in
 detention without trial. Juma responded that no one was in
 detention without trial, adding that the Government, however,
 would not tolerate detractors bent on disrupting the peace. A
 local legal aid committee provides legal services to indigent
 clients and conducts educational workshops around the country
 on Tanzanians' legal rights, but it has conducted no
 investigations and issued no reports critical of the
 Government's human rights practices.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Official government policy is one of promoting equal rights
 for all citizens, but tribalism is a factor in Tanzanian
 politics and, to a lesser extent, social interaction. The
 African population consists of more than 130 ethnic groups, of
 which only the Sukuma has more than 1 million members. All
 ethnic groups have their own language, but the national
 language is Kiswahili. That tribalism is not a destructive,
 destabilizing force is in no small measure because of party
 and government encouragement of ethnic toleration and national
 unity.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past
 decade to about 40,000 (plus 4,000 in Zanzibar). A
 business-oriented minority in a society historically committed
 to Socialist policies and remaining both culturally and
 economically exclusive, the Asians are regarded with
 considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. This
 antipathy is due in part to the Asians' disproportionate
 influence in key sectors of the economy. Despite this, there
 are no laws or official policies discriminating against them.
 As the Government's economic policies evolve and greater
 stress is given to the private sector, Asians are encouraged
 to invest in areas previously reserved for the public sector
 and are a force in the reawakening economy. Accordingly,
 there has been a gradual movement of Asians to Dar es Salaam
 from interior regions, and their presence is more noticeable
 in the country's political and economic capital.
 Although the Government has endeavored to ensure equality for
 women, and both party and government constitutions endorse
 equal opportunity in the workplace, society still clings to
 traditional norms that divide labor along sexual lines with
 strong biases against women, who work primarily in the
 informal agriculture sector. Statistics for 1979 showed that
 over 97 percent of economically active women were engaged in
 agriculture. Only 5 percent of wage-earning agricultural
 employees were women, indicating that most women were working
 on family-level, small-holder farms.
 
 
 391
 TANZANIA
 Progress has been more noticeable in urban areas, where
 traditional values have a weaker hold on the population, but
 even there and in the public sector (which employs nearly 80
 percent of the entire Tanzanian labor force), certain statutes
 exist which either prohibit the hiring of women in certain
 jobs or restrict-them to certain times of the day when they
 are allowed to work. According to a 1986 estimate, women
 constituted less than 14 percent of the wage employment sector
 and in 1989 most were still concentrated in lower salaried
 civil service positions such as clerks, secretaries, and
 telephone operators. A manpower survey showed that 20.1
 percent of high and midlevel positions were occupied by women;
 they have little access to powerful decisionmakingpositions.
 The overall situation-of women is considered even less
 favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzibar.
 Women in many parts of the country continue to suffer from
 discriminatory, restrictions on inheritance and ownership of
 property because of concessions by the Government and the
 courts to customary and Islamic law. The Marriage Act
 provides that women's domestic services are a marital asset to
 be considered in divorce settlements. Women have no rights to
 ownership of land or house and are, therefore, hindered in
 obtaining bank loans for their own business projects, for want
 of collateral. The Government has established in each
 ministry a section to promote women's development, and the
 Union of Tanzanian Women (UTW), a wing of the ruling CCM, has
 as its declared policy the eradication of inequality for women
 in akl spheres,o. society. Nonetheless, women continue to be
 discriminated against in educational opportunities.
 The problem of violence against women is widespread. Legal
 remedies exist but in practice are only available with
 difficulty. This applies to.both rural and urban areas, where
 traditional customs subordinating women remain strong and are
 upheld by local magistrates. The husband has a free hand in
 treating his wife as he wishes, and wife beating occurs at all
 levels of society. There were no egregious cases reported in
 3989, and the Government has no program to inhibit this
 practice or to induce restraint on the part of husbands.
 The practice of female circumcision continued to decline in
 1989, according to health authorities. However,
 nongovernmental sources maintain the practice is on the rise,
 especially in central Tanzania. It was still performed within
 approximately 20 of the country's 130 mainland ethnic groups.
 The health department in the northern region of Tanzania
 requested the party to intervene to suspend female
 circumcision rites until those performing them had received
 medical training on hygiene. This concern apparently stemmed
 from an overall government program to prevent the spread of
 AIDS.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join organizations of
 their own choice. The right of association is limited to one
 labor union organization, Juwata, which is an organ of the
 ruling party and to which all unions must belong. Juwata
 represents about 60 percent of the workers in industry and
 government, but in reality it has limited influence on labor
 policy.
 
 
 392
 TANZANIA
 The right of workers to strike exists in law but only after
 complicated and protracted mediation and conciliation
 procedures have been followed. There is a process of appeals
 in labor disputes which leads ultimately to the Permanent
 Labor Tribunal, which receives its direction from the Ministry
 for Labor and Manpower Development. If the union is not
 satisfied with the Tribunal's decision, it can then conduct a
 legal strike. However, these procedures can prolong a dispute
 for months without resolving it. Pending a resolution,
 frustrated workers go on strikes, but the strikes are
 technically illegal. Small-scale walkouts occur fairly
 frequently, and large ones less often. Several strikes took
 place in 1989. These were settled by worker-management
 discussions, with government and government-controlled union
 officials intervening in stubborn cases. Although most
 strikes are in effect illegal, there have been no reports of
 prosecutions or jailing of strikers.
 Although Juwata is a party organ, a degree of independence and
 choice in leadership has recently evolved. In 1989 the Juwata
 Secretary-General, Joseph Rwegasira, for the first time was
 elected by the party. Juwata limits its international
 affiliations only to regional organizations, such as the
 Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the East African
 National Trade Unions Consultative Council.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is limited to the private sector. Wages
 for employees of the Government and state-owned organizations,
 who comprise the vast bulk of wage-earners, are set by the
 Government; Juwata does not bargain collectively on behalf of
 government employees.
 At the local union level, Juwata promotes employee welfare by
 filing grievances against employers, usually over pay
 disputes. Union rights are incorporated into law,
 specifically the Security of Employment Act. The law is
 enforced, but the line between the Government and the
 government union can be difficult to discern. Grievances
 which cannot be settled in the workplace are taken to the
 Permanent Labor Tribunal. The Committee of Experts of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) has observed that the
 current provisions requiring the Permanent Labor Tribunal to
 approve collective agreements are not in conformity with ILO
 Convention 98. The Government has indicated that a draft
 Labor Code is under study with the technical assistance of an
 ILO expert.
 There are no export processing zones in Tanzania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Employment Ordinance prohibits forced labor. For a number
 of years the ILO Committee of Experts has observed that
 provisions of various Tanzanian laws are incompatible with ILO
 Conventions 29 or 105 on forced labor. The Human Resources
 Deployment Act (1983), for example, requires every local
 government authority to ensure that able-bodied persons over
 15 years of age not in school engage in productive or other
 lawful employment. Previously, there were massive police
 sweeps in Dar es Salaam's streets to round up persons who had
 no evidence of employment. The legislation has been
 interpreted more leniently recently, however, and no such
 roundups of urban unemployed occurred in 1989. The dialog
 
 
 393
 TANZANIA
 between the ILO and the Government on the alleged use of
 forced labor continued in 1989, with the ILO seeking
 modification of particular legislation (such as the 1983 Human
 Resorces Deployment Act)'.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 15 are prohibited from working under
 Section 77 of the Employment Ordinance. This provision
 applies only to the formal wage sector in both urban and rural
 areas, however, and not to children working on family farms or
 herding domestic livestock. A young person between the ages
 of 15 and 18 may be employed provided the work is safe and not
 injurious to health, and young people are not allowed to work
 between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. Enforcement is sporadic at best.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Tanzanian workers work a 40-hour, 6-day week. In general,
 women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Several
 laws regulate safety in the workplace, including the Factories
 Ordinance, the Accidental and Occupational Diseases
 Notification Ordinance, and the Workmen's Compensation
 Ordinance. With.the assistance of the ILO, an occupational
 health and safety factory inspection system is in place
 managed by the Ministry Qf Labor and Manpower Development.
 According to Juwata, this Ministry makes inspections and
 enforces safety regulations.
 The minimum wage for'government workers on the mainland is the
 equivalent of $14.31 a month. Juwata recently negotiated with
 the Association of Tanzania Employers an increase in the
 salaries of employees of the private sector of between 12 and
 28 percent. The agreement signed by the two organizations
 benefits workers whose companies are members of the
 Association. Current salaries, even though increased from
 time to time, are not sufficient for a worker to sustain an
 adequate standard of living. Housing and transport
 allowances, food subsidies, and other benefits help, but
 government and public corporation salaries at all levels are
 very low. Current economic conditions, particularly with the
 devaluations of the.shilling in June and December 1989 (which
 drove up the price of imports), a large and unproductive civil
 service, and a Government with limited, even diminishing
 resources, all militate against a meaningful and adequate rise
 in the minimum wage.
 There is no legal discrimination in wages on the basis of sex,
 but in practice discrimination occurs. Enforcement of labor
 laws and regulations is erratic, impeded by corruption and the
 inefficient functioning of government machinery. The vast
 majority of Tanzanians are subsistence farmers and are not
 affected by current government labor regulations and
 safeguards.
 
 
 394
