 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state. However, pending national elections scheduled for 1995, the ruling
 Chama Cha Mapinduzi Party (CCM) continued to control the Government. Presi-
 dent Ali Hassan Mwinyi was reelected to a final 5-year term as President of the
 Republic in October 1990. The Government sets and implements fundamental politi-
 cal policies, including steps toward the 1995 national multiparty elections. The is-
 lands of Zanzibar are integrated into the United Republic's governmental and party
 structure, but the Zanzibar Government exercises considerable autonomy. The
 structure of the union continued to be the subject of debate.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They are
 supported by a variety of citizens' anticrime patrols known as "Sungusungu" in
 urban areas and "Wasalama" in rural zones. The police regularly mistreat andocca-
 sionally beat suspects during arrests and interrogations. The citizens' anticrime
 groups have also used excessive force at times while carrying out their tasks.
 Agriculture provides 90 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea, and
 gemstones account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is small. Eco-
 nomic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization of agricultural policy,
 the privatization of state-owned enterprises, rescheduling of foreign debt payments,
 and the freeing of the currency exchange rate, have helped stimulate economic
 growth--estimated between 4 and 4.5 percent in 1994-for the eighth straight year.
 There was little change in the human rights situation, and the Government and
 the CCM continued to restrict civil rights as they attempted to control the pace and
 direction of political change. In the process, the Government restricted freedom of
 the press, interfered with the right of peaceful assembly, and continued to infringe
 on citizens' rights of privacy and free movement. In December the Court of Appeal
 upheld an unprecedented High Court ruling nullifying a CCM by-election victory.
 The judicial system does not provide expeditious justice and fair trial for many citi-
 zens. The police continued to detain, abuse, and mistreat suspects arbitrarily, but
 the Government rarely prosecutes offenders. Prison conditions are harsh and life-
 threatening. Mob justice and discrimination and violence against women remained
 severe and widespread, and the Government did not usually prosecute offenders.
 Some abuse of children continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. There was no resolution of an extrajudicial killing from
 the previous year. On January 31, 1993, following a confrontation on the island of
 Pemba over the removal of opposition party flags of the Civic United Front (CUF),
 a local policeman shot and killed one party member and injured another. After a
 lengthy investigation, the policeman who fired the shots was charged with murder
 without intent,but remained free. Opposition leaders complained that there was no
 progress towards an actual trial. The case was still pending at the end of 1994.
 In August, in a 10-day wave of "mob justice" in Dar es Salaam, mobs killed at
 least seven people, including by dousing suspected criminals with gasoline and set-
 ting them on fire. Government officials said that mob justice had killed 433 persons
 nationwide since 1992. The press highlighted those cases in which victims have
 been rescued by the police. Although government officials have condemned the prac-
 tice, there are no reports of individuals being arrested or prosecuted for engaging
 in mob justice.
 The widespread belief in witchcraft has led, in some instances, to killing of alleged
 witches by their "victims," aggrieved relatives, or mobs. For example, in March al-
 leged witches were brutally murdered in Runge district. While government au-
 thorities attempt to discourage such practices, they rarely prosecute participants.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment
 but the police regularly threaten and mistreat and occasionally beat suspected
 criminals during and after their apprehension and interrogation. Although govern-
 ment officials condemn these practices whenever such cases become public, the Gov-
 ernment seldom prosecutes officials for such abuses.
 The People's Militia Laws, as amended by Parliament in 1989, bestow quasi-legal
 status on the traditional "Sungusungu" and "Wasalama" neighborhood and village
 anticrime groups.
 
 
 261
 Government officials acknowledge that prisons are overcrowded and that living
 conditions are poor. Serious diseases such as dyentery, malaria, and cholera are
 common and result in deaths. The Government    as not release statistics regarding
 the number of prisoners or the number of deaths. Convicted prisoners are not a-
 lowed to receive food from the outside and are often moved to different prisons with-
 out notification to their families. Pretrial detainees are held together with those
 serving sentences but are allowed to receive food from the outside. There is no out-
 side monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Procedure Code, amended
 in 1985, requires that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 offense under the Preventive Detention Act be charged before a magistrate within
 24 hours. However, in practice, the police ofen fail to do so. The 1985 amendments
 also restricted the right to bail and imposed strict conditions on freedom of move-
 ment and association when bail is granted. Because of backlogs, an average case
 still takes 2 to 3 years or longer to come to trial, during which pretrial detainees
 remain incarcerated under poor conditions. The Code provides for a right to defense
 counsel. The Chief Justice assigns lawyers to indigent defendants charged with seri-
 ous crimes such as murder, manslaughter, and armed robbery. There are only a few
 hundred practicing lawyers in Tanzania, and most indigent defendants charged with
 lesser crimes d not have legal counsel.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President may order the arrest and in-
 definite detention without bail of any person onsidered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. The Act was also amended in 1985 to require the Govern-
 ment to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the reason
 for their detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the grounds for de-
 tention at 90-day intervals. Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in
 1991 that the Preventive Detention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons
 not considered dangerous to society, the Government has still not introduced-corec-
 tive legislation. The Preventive Detention Act was not used in 1994.
 The Government has additional broad detention powers under the Regions and
 Regional Commissioners Act and the Area Commissioner Act of 1962. These Acts
 permit regional and district commissioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons
 who may 'disturb Public tranquility."
 Police continued to make arbitrary arrests, although less frequently than in the
 past. For example, police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects, holding
 them in custody without charge for as long as several years in efforts to force the
 suspects to turn themselves in. Such relatives who manage to get their case before
 a judge are usually set free, only to be immediately rearrested when they leave the
 courtroom. The Government has not taken any action to correct these abuses.
 In 1993 the police arrested Christopher Mtikila, the leader of the unregistered
 Democratic Party, and charged him with using threatening language against the
 President. The authorities dropped this specific charge on a technicality in March,
 but only after detaining him for 2 days in February to keep him from traveling to
 Kigoma, where a parliamentary by-election was being held (see Section 2.d.).
 Mtikila complained that the police used other continuing legal proceedings against
 him as a pretext to inhibit his travel around Tanzania and to harass him. While
 members of opposition parties have been harassed by government officials, particu-
 larly on Zanzibar, none was detained under the Preventive Detention Act during the
 year.
 Six Angolans who entered Tanzania in July 1993 refused offers of political asy-
 lum. Therefore, they were classified as illegal aliens, arrested in December 1993,
 and held in prison at year's end.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Weaknesses in the judicial system and govern-
 ment interference deny expeditious and fair justice to many citizens.
 The legal system is based on the British model, with modifications to accommo-
 date customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Military courts do not try civilians,
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal
 decisions to the High Court and the Court of Appeal. Criminal trials are open to
 the public and the press; courts must give reasons on the record for holding secret
 proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of appeal
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system but re-
 tains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce, child custody,
 and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in
 Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the Tanzanian Court of Ap-
 peal.
 While the judiciary is constitutionally mandated to operate independently from
 the executive branch, the Government sometimes influences cases. For example,
 judges who render decisions unpopular with senior police or government officials
 
 
 have been pressured or transferred and reassigned. In July a judge with a good
 record of supporting human rights withdrew himself from hearing a suit brought
 by Mtikila after the Government alleged that he lacked impartiality (see Section
 1.d.). Government officials sometimes ignore judicial rulings. However, the judiciary
 asserted a measure of independence when the High Court ruled in favor of an oppo-
 sition candidate, declaring the results of a parliamentary by-election in Kigoma null
 and void. The ourt of Appeal upheld this ruling in December, but the National
 Electoral Commission announced that no new by-election would be held before the
 general elections in October 1995.
 In addition to government interference, the judicial bureaucracy is widely criti-
 cized as inefficient and corrupt, bringing into question a defendant's ability to re-
 ceive a fair and expeditious trial in all cases. There are reports of prisoners waiting
 several years for trial because they could not pay bribes to police and court officials.
 Although the Government initiated efforts as early" as 1991 to highlight judicial cor-
 ruption, it has made little p rgress in correcting this situation.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy. Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, which are generally provided for in
 the Constitution. The CCM has historical y enetrated all levels of society through
 local ells, varying in size from single-faly homes to large apartment buildings
 and containing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials serve as 10-cell lead-
 ers with authority to resolve problems at the grassroots level and to report to au-
 thorities any suspicious behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night
 patrol service in the neighborhood. In 1993 elections were held for new grassroots
 leaders to replace the CCM 10-cell leaders in nonparty business. Because the Gov-
 ernment reversed its position and subsequently held the elections on a party basis,
 most of the opposition parties boycotted the elections. In fact, few voters partici-
 pated in these elections, and the former CCM 10-cell leaders retained nearly all of
 their power and influence.
 CCM membership is voluntary and is estimated at approximately 2 to 3 million
 cardholders. While in the past CCM membership had been necessary for advance-
 ment in political and other areas, the importance of such membership is waning.
 The Criminal Procedure Act of 1985 authorizes plice officials (including the civil-
 ian anticrime units) to issue search warrants; however, the Act also authorizes
 searches of person and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice, warrants are rarely requested, and the police and others
 search private homes and business establishments at will. The security services re-
 portedly monitor telephones and correspondence of some citizens and selected for-
 eign residents.
 Compulsory participation in local anticrime groups known as "Wasalama" and
 "Sungusungu* continued in some areas. Historically, these groups have operated
 only in rural areas to combat cattle rustling and other criminal activity; however,
 government ministers continued to promote them vigorously in urban areas to com-
 bat crime.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Opposition political party members and others openly criticized the
 Government and ruling party in public forums. Generally, the official media-radio,
 television, and press-largely reflect official positions, following guidance from the
 Ministry of Information. Editorials are often written by senior officials. Government-
 controlled Radio Tanzania, broadcasting in Swahili and English, is the medium
 through which most citizens receive their information. Radio has been slower than
 the print media to reflect a diversity of views.
 In the past year, the trend towards press liberalization and openness continued.
 Media competition forced official newspapers to include more stories critical of the
 Government, as private newspapers increased both in numbers and frequency of
 publication. However, while there is no official censorship, public media often prac-
 ticed self-censorship themselves due to fear of government reprisals.
 The Government employed various methods to restrict what it considered objec-
 tionable voices in the independent press. In January the Government closed the
 Swahili paper Baraza for 1 month, nominally on technical grounds related to its li-
 cense, but more likely for an article accusing a senior government official of involve-
 ment in the death of a Muslim cleric. The Government charged publishers and edi-
 tors of the Express with seditious libel in March for an editorial that compared the
 Government to a garbage heap. At year's end, this case had not been decided in
 court, and the Express continued to publish. However, in May the Express and its
 
 
 263
 Swahili affiliate Mwananchi announced that the two newspapers had been denied
 permission to begin printing daily. Opposition political leaders charge that the Zan-
 zibar Government is much more restrictive than the union Government in limiting
 the publication of private newspapers.
 Fair coverage of the political opposition, as well as direct access, are issues of con-
 tinuing concern as Tanzania approaches national multiparty elections in October
 1995. In August the High Court nullified the results of the February parliamentary
 by-election in Kigoma, based in part on allegations that Radio Tanzania improperly
 favored the ruling party in its election reporting. Despite this ruling, opposition par-
 ties continued to receive little official coverage and are limited to one 45-minute
 radio broadcast each week, which is repeated the following day. Two private tele-
 vision stations and two private radio stations began broadcasting in Dar es Salaam
 but featured only nonpolitical pr m    g.
 Academic freedom exists in theory, although most academics are employed in gov-
 ernment institutions and hesitate to promote sensitive subjects in their classrooms.
 On the other hand, in publications and public appearances, they have been out-
 spoken and frank in their views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Associatiom-The Constitution provides for
 the freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and citizens generally enjoyed the
 right to discuss freely political alternatives. However, the Constitution and other
 legal acts limit these rights and stipulate that citizens cannot run for public office
 unless they are members of a political party.
 Until a judicial reversal in October, the Government required permits from dis-
 trict commissioners for any public meeting, except for political party rallies during
 official election campaign periods. At times district commissioners issued permits
 too late for opposition parties to publicize their rallies, or the permits were too re-
 strictive in terms of times or locations. In July the police used tear gas to break
 up an unauthorized march to the National Assembly in Dar es Salaam following a
 legal rally by opposition parties, and they required opposition party members to re-
 port for questioning. In August police issued a permit to the opposition party
 Chadema (Party of Democracy and Development) for a rally in Kigoma but warned
 that they would immediately break up the rally if speakers used "abusive" or "in-
 sulting" language. In Arusha the district commissioner issued a permit for an oppo-
 sition party to hold a rally but then insisted that another permit was needed in
 order for the party to publicize the rally. Rally organizers complained that the ensu-
 ing delay sharply reduced attendance at the rally. The authorities also explicitly de-
 nied some requests for rally permits. For example, in April the district commissioner
 in Zanzibar prohibited the opposition party CUF from holding a rally 2 days before
 a national holiday, while the CCM was allowed to hold a rally on the same day.
 In a major landmark ruling in October, a High Court judge determined that per-
 mits from district officials were no longer needed for public meetings. However, in
 December Parliament diluted this ruling by passing a legal amendent requiring
 registered political parties to obtain police approval for political rallies. Police were
 given the authority to deny permission on public safety or security grounds or if the
 permit seeker belonged to an unregistered party. At the end of 1994, the rally per-
 mit issue was confused, with permits being issued inconsistently and in a few cases
 being denied outright. On Zanzibar, officials announced that the mainland's High
 Court decision did not apply to Zanzibar, and permit requirements did not change.
 In July police arrested 35 Muslims at a mosque in Morogoro after a May presi-
 dential announcement prohibiting rallies that slandered other religions.
 The registrar of political parties has sole authority to approve or deny the reg-
 istration of any political party and is responsible for enforcing strict regulations on
 registered or provisionally registered parties. The electoral law prohibits independ-
 ent candidates, requires all standing Members of Parliament to resign if they join
 another political party, requires all political parties to support the union with Zanzi-
 bar, and forbids parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious affiliation. Parties
 granted provisional registration may hold public meetings and recruit members.
 They have 6 months to submit lists of at least 200 members from 10 of the country's
 25 regions, including 2 regions on the islands, in order to secure full registration
 and to be eligible to field candidates for election. Nonregistered parties are prohib-
 ited from holding meetings, recruiting members, or fielding canddates.
 The most prominent unregistered party was Reverend Christopher Mtlkila's
 Democratic Party which advocates the dissolution of the union and the expulsion
 of minorities from the mainland. Despite his political party's lack of government rec-
 ognition, Mtikila was able to publicize his views through his legally registered
 church and through a lawsuit against the Government challenging the appointment
 of Zanzibaris to the union Government.
 
 
 264
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. Several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) formed in the last
 few years to address the concerns of families the disabled, women and children. A
 number of professional business, legal, and medical associations exist, but they
 have only begun to address political topics. Leaders of a new human rights group,
 called Defenders of Human Rights in Tanzania com laied that the Government
 refused to act on their application to register (see Section 4). Opposition leaders
 complain that the Zanzibar Government is even more restrictive in registering soci-
 eties than the union Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice, subject to measures it claims
 are necessary to ensure public order and safety. Missionaries are allowed to enter
 the country freely to proselytize, and citizens are allowed to go abroad for pilgrim-
 ages and other religious practices.
 Although freedom of worship is not infranged, there continued to be evidence of
 religious tension between Muslims and Christians, including the arrest of 35 Mus-
 lims at a mosque in Morogoro after a May presidential announcement prohibiting
 rallies that slandered other religions (see Sections 2.b. and 5). Some government of-
 ficials have spoken out against religious intolerance, and the Government has
 banned meetings in which religious leaders attack other faiths. Except for the
 Morogoro incident, however, the ban has not been enforced. In December a local
 court sentenced 16 Muslim fundamentalists who had been charged in the rioting
 and destruction of several pork butcheries in Dar es Salaam in April 1993. The
 court acquitted 4 of the defendants and sentenced the remaining 12 to 4 years' im-
 prisonment. One of the Muslim leaders who had been chared with instigating the
 violence and later with sedition, Sheikh Kassim Jumaa Khamis, died in January
 1994.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Short-term domestic travel is not restricted, but citizens must follow
 national employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and the loca-
 tion of residence. The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local gov-
 ernments to ensure that every resident within their areas of jurisdiction engages in
 productive and lawful employment. Those not employed are subject to transfer to
 another area where employment is available. In December the Dar es Salaam City
 Council rounded up 395 beggars and returned them to their home areas at govern-
 ment expense. Some vowed to return. These laws are also used as a pretext for po-
 lice to solicit bribes and intimidate urban residents.
 Leaders of the opposition party CUF complained that the Zanzibar government
 harassed them whenever they attempted to visit their party offices outside of Zanzi-
 bar town. Zanzibar regional government leaders have also interfered with CUF at-
 tempts to visit Pemba island, considered by CUF as its stronghold. In February
 Democratic Party leader Mtikila was briefly detained by the police as he was about
 to begin travel to the site of an impending parliamentary by-election in Kigoma. Al-
 though he was soon released and no charges were filed, the Government move was
 likely intended to prevent Mtikila from speaking in Kigoma against the ruling party
 dnd its candidate, a businessman of Asian origin.
 In August the union Government announced that agreement had been reached
 with the government of Zanzibar to do away with the longstanding requirement that
 mainlanders present passports to travel to Zanzibar and-Pemba. However, at year's
 end Zanzibar immigration officials continued to require mainlanders to present
 passports pending implementing legislation. Mainlanders are able to obtain special
 travel documents valid only for travel to Zanzibar and Pemba at no cost but are
 not allowed to own land or work in the islands.
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain, mostly due to bureaucratic
 inefficiency, and authorities subject those planning to travel or emigrate to intense
 scrutiny. Citizens who leave the country without permission are subject to prosecu-
 tion upon their return.
 Tanzania has a liberal policy toward refugees and admitted some 300,000 refu-
 gees from Burundi in late 1993 and nearly 600,000 refugees from Rwanda in 1994.
 While the majority of Burundian refugees repatriated in early 1994, Tanzania con-
 tinued to host at year's end over 600,000 refugees, at considerable cost to the local
 environment and people. The United Nations and NGO's provide assistance to the
 refugees. Although Tanzania has made efforts with the support of the United Na-
 tions High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), to improve security in the refugee
 camps, security concerns persist due to the nature of the refugee population and in-
 adequate police resources. The Tanzanian police have been unable to ensure the se-
 curity of Rwandan refugees who wish to return to Rwanda, and crime in the camps,
 including rapes and killings of alleged "witches," has increased along with the popu-
 
 
 265
 lation. Leaders associated with the former government of Rwanda have threatened
 or intimidated refugees in the camps. An unknown number of Rwandans and at
 least three Tanzanians have been killed in the Rwandan refugee camps located in-
 side Tanzania. Approximately 30 Tanzanians have been killed-in other violence as-
 sociated with the influx of Rwandan refugees. The Government would like the
 Rwandan refugees to return home and has suggested that a safe haven should be
 created for them inside Rwanda. However the Government kept its borders open
 to new refugees and did not engage in any forced repatriation in 1994.
 In 1994 the Government reversed its policy and granted political asylum to citi-
 zens of Kenya who formerly had been denied refugee status in Tanzania. Refugees
 in Dar es Salaam are sometimes threatened with the loss of refugee status and as-
 sistance unless they agree to move to refugee camps in rural areas, although there
 were no such cases in 1994.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights:- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was officially introduced in 1992 after 28 years of
 one-par  rule. ending national elections in 1995, party elites within the Chama
 Cha Mapinduzi Party (CCM) continued to exercise effective control of the Govern-
 ment. In 1994 the CCM won all four parliamentary by-elections in which most of
 Tanzania's political parties participated. Although the elections were considered
 technically free, the governing party's monopoly of the radio, its use of government
 funds andother resources, and the Government's legal authority to grant rally per-
 mits outside of campaign periods, effectively denied the opposition a fair opportunity
 to present their case to the voters. However, in igoma a judge overruled the re-
 suits of the February by-election because of irregularities in election proceedings.
 The political parties also participated in the mainland's local government polls
 held on October 30. CCM won 97 percent of the local government seats for which
 results were available at the end of-1994. Foloi  the Kigoma by-election decision,
 Radio Tanzania dropped blatant campaigning for CCM candidates, and the Govern-
 ment prohibited CCM candidates and their supporters from using government vehi-
 cles and congregating at government buildings. The opposition largely experienced
 no problems in holding its rallies. However, opposition parties charged that some
 CCM officials threatened voters with denial of services and other retributions if they
 voted for the opposition.
 A group of mainland parliamentarians persisted in challenging their party's long-
 standing policy on the union's framework and criticized Zanzibar's disproportionate
 representation and influence in state institutions by introducing a motion to create
 a three-government system with a separate Tanganyia government for the main-
 land. Ultimately, however, the CCM leadership succeeded in reestablishing party
 discipline and in August declared party debate on the union issue closed. The
 Tanganyika government motion was defeated shortly thereafter.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. However, in practice few women are politically active, largely due to cul-
 tural impediments and traditional societal roles for women (see Section 5). Women
 hold 27 of 248 seats in the National Assembly and 4 of 25 cabinet positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestgation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government has obstructed the formation of local human rights groups. Per-
 sons seeg to register human rights NGO's, like the newly created Defenders of
 Human Rights mn Tanzania, omplained that the Ministry of Home Affairs continued
 to delay act ion on their applications.
 While there were no visits by international human rights organizations, a leading
 cabinet minister said the Government would have no objection to such visits, inclu-r
 ing th)ose for the purpose of visiting prisons.
 lthough the Government announced in 1993 plans to hold tribunals and con-
 ferences throughout the country on human rights abuses, focusing specifically on
 abuses against women and children, it did not hold any such conferences in 1994.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, religion, or lifestyle. Discrimination based on sex, age, or dis-
 ability is not specifically prohibited by law but is publicly discouraged in official
 statements.
 Women.-Although the Government advocates equal rights for women in the
 workplace, it does not ensure these rights in practice. In the public sector, which
 employs 80 percent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict women's ac-
 
 
 266
 cess to some jobs or hours of employment. While progress on women's rights has
 been mere noticeable in urban areas, strong traditional norms still divide labor
 along gender lines and place women in a subordinate position. Discrimination
 against women is most acute in the countryside, where women are relegated to
 farming and raising children, with almost no opportunity for wage employm ent.  L
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there and in many parts of the mainland face discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Gov-
 ernment and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage
 Act provide for certain inheritance and property rights for women, application of
 customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions
 of the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inherit-
 ance claims, primarily in rural areas. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under
 21 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment, although this has
 not been enforced for several years.
 Violence against women is widespread. Legal remedies exist but are not used in
 practice. Traditional customs that subordinate women remain strong, and local mag-
 istrates often uphold -them. The husband has a free hand to treat his wife as he
 wishes, and wife beating occurs at all levels of society. Cultural, family and social
 pressure prevents many women from reporting abuses to authorities. Gvernment
 officials frequently make public statements decrying such abuses but rarely take ac-
 tion against  perato.                                            e   a      -
 Several N   's ro   e ounseling anwomens rights is-
 sues, particularly sexual harassment and molestation.
 Chidren.--Government funding of programs for children's welfare remains m-
 uscule, at only 2.3 percent of government development expenditure. The Govern-
 ment has made some constructive efforts to address childrens welfare, including
 working closely with churches and NGO's to assess the well-being of orphans and
 neglected children.
 .    .Although the Government officially discourages female genital mutilation (FGM),
 it is still performed at an early age m  approximately 20 of the country's 130 mai
 ethnic groups. International health experts state that FGM s damaging to both the
 physical and psychological health of girls. Government officials hae called for
 c~hanges in customs which adversely affect females, but no legislation has been in-
 trduced that would specifically restrict the practice of FGM. Seminars sponsored
 by various governmental and nongovernmental organizations are regularly held to
 attempt to educate the public on the dangers of thnese and other traditional prac-
 tices. Health authorities state the practice of FGM is declining, but other sources
 maintain that it is on the rise, especially in central Tanzania.
 National/Racia/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government has discriminated against
 the Barabaig people of central Tanzania for many years. The Barabaig and their at-
 torneys maintain that the Government has illegally dispssessed them of their tra-
 ditional lands in order to implement a gvernment-run agricultural project. In 1994
 the Barabaig registered an NCO to press for redress of past discrimination and to
 preserve their culture.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about
 44,000 as a result of considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. There
 are, however, no laws or official policies discriminating against them. As the Gov-
 ernment places greater emphasis on market-oriented policies and privatization, pub-
 lic concern regarding the As ian communitys economic role has increased. This has
 led to demands for policies of "indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not
 increase the Asian community's economic predominance at the expense of the coun-
 try's African population.
 Religious Minorities.-The Muslim community claims to be disadvantaged i
 terms of its representation in the civil service and government and in state-owned
 businesses, in part because bth colonial and past pstindependence administrations
 refused to recognize the credentials of the traditional Muslim schools. As a result,
 there is widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived advantages enjoyed by
 Christians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of what they prceive as undue
 favoritism accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scolarships by the
 President, who is a Muslim. Some leaders in both camps appear to play up religious
 tensions (see Sections 2.b. and 2.c.). In fact, there does not atpresent appear to be
 discrimination based on religion in access to employment or educational opportuni-
 ties.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate access to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for people with disabilities. Al-
 though there is no official discrimination against the disabled, in practice the phys-
 ically disabled are effectively restricted in their access to education, employment,
 
 
 and provision of other state services due to physical barriers. The Government pro-
 vides only limited funding for special facilities and programs.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assocation.-Both the Constitution and the 1955 Trade Union Or-
 dinance refer to the right of association of workers. Nevertheless workers do not
 have the right to form or join organizations of their own choice. The Organization
 of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTU) Act of 1991 addresses all labor union issues, and
 the OTTU is effectively the only labor union organization in Tanzania. In November
 1993, the Government registered the Tanzania Teachers' Union (TfU), and the TTU
 elected its own leaders in May. The T.FU, however, remained closely affiliated with
 the OTIU, and member dues deducted from salaries continued to go directly to
 OTTU.
 In 1994, the OTFU continued a 3-year restructuring program which is intended
 to enable union workers to elect new leaders who have not been 'prequalified" by
 the ruli party and to reshape the OTIU as an organization presiding over a fe-
 eration of independent unions. However, the Labor Law still requires all union labor
 to be under the OTTU and permits the President of Tanzania to disband any mem-
 ber union of OTTU at his discretion. OTTU general elections under the restructur-
 in  rogram are expected by July 1995.
 eW     OTTU, like its predecessor, the Association of Workers of Tanzania
 (JUWATA), represents about 60 percent of the workers in industry and government,
 but it has little influence on labor policy. Overall, roughly 25 percent of Tanzania's
 2 million wage earners are organized. All workers, including those classified as 'es-
 sential" service workers, are permitted to join the OTTU, but "essential3 workers
 are not permitted to strike.
 Workers have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted medi-
 ation and conciliation procedures leadn ultimately to the Industrial Court, which
 receives direction from the Minister of Labor and Youth Development. If the OTTU
 is not satisfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it can then conduct a legal
 strike. These procedures can prolong a dispute for months without resolving it.
 Pending a resolution, frustrated workers often stage impromptu, illegal wildcat
 strikes and walkouts, and there were many such strikes in 1994. In March, for ex-
 ample, the OTTU called a 3-day nationwide public-sector strike which the Govern-
 ment declared to be illegal, threatening to discharge any workers who participated.
 Only workers in Mbeya participated to any notable extent. There are no laws pro-
 lifiting retribution against legal strikers.
 The OTTU continued JUWITA's policy of limiting its international affiliations to
 regional and pan-Africanist trade union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limited to the private sector. Wages for employees of the Govern-
 ment and state-owned organizations which account for the bulk of the salaried
 labor force, are administratively set by the Government. However, the Ministry of
 Labor established a board to review and regulate wage rates which included rep-
 resentatives of the Government, trade unions, and employers' organizations.
 Although the OTIU negotiates on behalf of most private sector employees with
 the Association of Tanzania Employers, collective agreements must be submitted to
 the Industrial Court for approval The International Labor Organization (ILO) has
 observed that these provisions are not in conformity with ILO Convention 98 on Col-
 lective Ba    g and he Right to Organize. Tanzania's Security of Employment
 Act of 1964 prohibits discriminatory activities by an employer against umon mem-
 bers. Employers found guilty of antiunion activities are legally required to reinstate
 workers.
 There are no export processing zones (EPZ's) on the mainland. The OTTU reports
 that two EPZ's opened on Zanzibar in 1994 using nonunion labor.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. However, again in 1994, the ILO observed that provisions of various Tanza-
 nian laws are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on Forced Labor. Spe-
 cifically, the Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires every local govern-
 ment authority to ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school
 engage in productive or other lawful employment. In some rural areas, ordinary vil-
 lagers are still obligated to work in the village communal garden or on small con-
 struction projects, such as repairing roads.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-By law, children under the age of
 12 are prohibited from working, but this provision applies only to the formal wage
 sector in both urban and rurar areas and not to children working on family farms
 or herding domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may be em-
 
 
 ployed on a daily wage and on a day-to-day basis but must have parental permission
 and return to their residences at night.
 The minimum age for entry into work of a contractual nature in approved occupa-
 tions is set at 15. The law prhilbits a young person from emploentin any occupa-
 tion that is dangerous or injurious to health. Those between the ages of 12 and 15
 may be employed in industrial work but only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6
 p.m., with some exceptions allowed. The Ministry of Labor and Youth Development
 is responsible for enforcement. The effectiveness of government enforcement has re-
 portedly declined with increased privatization. According to a 1992 ILO report, ap-
 proximately 12 percent of 10- to 14-year-old children who work outside the family
 are in the wage sector. Large numbers of children work 11-hour days in cotton
 ginneries and on sisal plantations. On one sisal plantation, children composed 30
 percent of the work force; only half of the children had completed primary school.
 Sha ahi  incidence of skin and respiratory problems, were not provided with
 protective clotrig, and lacked adeqate nourishment and lodging.
 e. Aceptable Conditions of Wor.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ-
 ment in the formal sector. The O 1 U often negotiates higher minimum wages with
 individual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. A worker
 earning the minimum wage, even when supplemented with various benefits such as
 housing, transportation allowances, and food subsidies, may not always be able to
 provide an adequate living for his family and must depend on the extended family
 or a second or third job. The official minimum wage was increased to about $19
 (10,000 Tanzanian shillings) per month, but many workers, especially those in the
 informal sector, are paid less.
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44- or 48-
 hour workweek. In general, women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6
 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safe-
 ty inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is now managed by the
 Ministry of Labor and Youth Development. Its effectiveness, however, is minimal.
 OTTU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is effective in the
 formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. Workers can take an
 employer to court through their OTTU branch if their working conditions do not
 comply with the Ministry of Labor's health and environmental standards. Workers
 making such complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. Enforcement of labor
 standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
