 TANZANIA
 Tanzania was formed in 1964 when mainland Tanganyika united
 with the newly independent island of Zanzibar. Julius K.
 Nyerere served as President and chairman of the country's
 single political party almost continuously from the
 independence of Tanganyika in 1961 until 1985. In 1985
 Nyerere voluntarily retired and sanctioned the election of Ali
 Hassan Mwinyi, the former President of Zanzibar and First Vice
 President of Tanzania. Nyerere, however, retains the
 chairmanship of the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), the sole legal
 political party. The party attempts to control activity at
 all levels of society through its system of 10-family cells.
 Zanzibar is ruled by the same party as the mainland but
 exercises a considerable degree of autonomy.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries. Its
 population of 22 million, growing at 3.3 percent per year, has
 an annual per capita gross domestic product of approximately
 $240. In 1983 the Government accelerated the process of
 economic reform which stimulated a 2.5 percent growth rate in
 1984 and 1985. In 1986 the Government strengthened the reform
 program, concluded a new agreement with the International
 Monetary Fund, increased prices paid to farmers for their
 crops, rescheduled Tanzania's foreign debt payments, and
 secured increased donor support, particularly from the World
 Bank.
 The 1984 Zanzibar Constitution includes a bill of rights which
 guarantees freedom of movement, speech, religion, and
 association. The addition of a similar bill of rights in 1985
 to the national Tanzanian Constitution and amendments to the
 Criminal Procedure Code and Preventive Detention Act increased
 public awareness of legal rights in 1986, especially in regard
 to proper procedures for arrest and trial. However,
 Parliament then suspended the bill of rights for 3 years. All
 laws which would now be unconstitutional under the bill of
 rights must be revised by March 1988. The revisions will be
 made by Parliament on the basis of recommendations of the Law
 Reform Commission.
 Despite the progress toward implementing a bill of rights, the
 Government still severely restricts freedom of speech, of the
 press, and of association, including the right to strike. In
 July 1986, a police field force unit opened fire on a group of
 500 workers protesting wage deductions at a sugar factory in
 Kilombero. Three people were killed and 20 injured by police
 gunfire. The incident was the first of its kind in Tanzania
 since independence and is being investigated by a government
 commission. The 14 remaining suspects of the original 30
 persons placed in preventive detention in 1983 during the
 government inquiry into an alleged plot to overthrow the
 Government were released in April 1986. Two persons who were
 detained at the end of October remained in custody without
 being informed of the charges against them at the end of 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 
 
 327
 TANZANIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Tanzanian Government opposes torture as a matter of
 policy, but it is occasionally used on an unauthorized basis
 by police and prison authorities, mainly in the form of
 beatings. This occurs typically either at the time of
 apprehension, when a suspect is first taken to a police
 station, or during the subsequent criminal investigation.
 Police have shot and killed fleeing suspects. The use of such
 force has been severely criticized by the government press.
 Police officials have been sentenced to lengthy terms of
 imprisonment for abuses of suspects and prisoners.
 Tanzania's prisons are generally unsanitary and overcrowded.
 Prison conditions are poor, largely as a result of Tanzania's
 economic difficulties and not because of a deliberate
 government effort to subject prisoners to inhumane
 conditions. In 1986 the Government promoted prison training
 programs and announced that it was considering initiating a
 system of parole.
 Mob justice also sometimes occurs in both cities and rural
 areas, and in 1986 vigilantes killed several suspected bandits
 and disfigured others. Traditional defense groups in central
 Tanzania, the Sungu Sungu and Wasalama, which in the past were
 encouraged by both government and party officials to help
 eliminate cattle rustling, often use such extreme tactics
 against rustlers and elderly people suspected of practicing
 witchcraft.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Preventive Detention Act allows, upon a written order from
 the President, the arrest and indefinite detention without
 bail of any person considered dangerous to the public order or
 national security. In 1985 the Act was amended to require
 that detainees be released within 15 days of their detention
 or informed of the reason for their detention. In April 1986,
 the Government released the 14 remaining suspects of the
 original 30 persons, including a senior Tanzanian diplomat,
 placed in preventive detention in 1983 during the inquiry into
 an alleged plot to overthrow the Government. At the end of
 1986, two persons who had been detained in October remained
 without charges and without seeing their families. These were
 the first reported long-term detentions under President
 Mwinyi. Although the Act was extended to Zanzibar in 1985, no
 one was known to have been detained there under its provisions
 in 1986. The Court of Appeals, the highest court in Tanzania,
 ruled in 1986 that time spent in prison under the Preventive
 Detention Act cannot be considered to be time served if the
 accused is subsequently convicted and sentenced.
 The 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code, requiring
 that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national
 security charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged
 before a magistrate within 24 hours, has raised public
 consciousness concerning legal rights at time of arrest and
 made the police more cautious about making arrests without
 good cause. However, the new criminal procedure amendments
 
 
 328
 TANZANIA
 also restricted the right to bail, .reducing the number of
 bailable offenses, limiting judges' discretion in granting
 bail, and imposing strict conditions on freedom of movement
 and association when bail is granted. In 1986 judges usually
 followed the recommendations of prosecutors in granting or
 denying bail. The legal community in Zanzibar believes that
 the new amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code do not apply
 to Zanzibar, and that the isles retain the less restrictive
 old system of the right to bail in all cases except murder and
 treason. Under the new amendments, an accused has the right
 to challenge the order for arrest, and his case must be
 referred to a board of review within 3 months, or he must be
 released.
 The Economic and Organized Crime Act of 1984, which replaced
 the Economic Sabotage Act of 1983, placed persons newly
 accused of economic crimes within the procedural safeguards of
 normal judicial process, giving defendants the right to
 attorneys and, under certain conditions, bail. Because these
 cases are heard in special sessions within the court system,
 it is difficult to determine the number of arrests for
 economic crimes in 1986. They appear to be scattered
 incidents rather than a throwback to the large numbers
 arrested in 1983 and 1984. Some cases are still pending in
 the special tribunal established by the Economic Sabotage Act
 of 1983. These tribunals bypass normal legal procedures by
 suspending rules of evidence, the right of representation, and
 the right to appeal.
 With regard to forced labor, the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) continues to express concern over laws
 requiring unemployed persons to work in communal agriculture
 and development projects.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public, and the
 more controversial trials are open to the press. Criminal
 defendants have the right of appeal. Military courts do not
 try civilians, and there are no security courts. Defendants
 in civil and military courts may appeal decisions to the High
 Court. Judges are appointed by the Chief Justice except for
 those of the High Court and the Court of Appeals, who are
 appointed by the President. While an independent judiciary is
 constitutionally mandated, some members of the legal
 community, including judicial officers, have complained that
 the legal system is being corrupted through bribery. No
 evidence has been presented of corruption in the Court of
 Appeals, however, but police and court officials are often
 bribed to delay the process of investigation and trials.
 Although the 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code
 were supposed to lessen court congestion, in 1986 it was
 taking from 3 to 4 years for an average case to come to
 trial. The Government provides legal counsel to those charged
 with treason and murder. In Dar Es Salaam, the Tanzania Bar
 Association and the Legal Aid Society offer legal service to
 indigents, but their resources are severely strained, and most
 indigents do not in fact receive legal representation.
 Under the 1984 Zanzibar Constitution, the people's courts,
 which did not provide defendants the right of legal
 representation, were abolished. The island's court system now
 
 
 329
 TANZANIA
 parallels the legal system of the United Republic of Tanzania
 but retains Islamic courts to handle Moslem family cases such
 as divorce, child custody, and inheritance. Cases concerning
 Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in Zanzibar's
 courts. Beginning in 1985, all other cases may be appealed to
 the Court of Appeals of the United Republic of Tanzania. One
 or two such appeals were heard in 1986.
 In 1986 the nine defendants sentenced to life imprisonment in
 a 1985 treason trial were waiting for their appeal to be
 heard. At the end of 1986, five persons arrested for
 assisting in the escape of two of the original defendants were
 awaiting trial.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary, the Government uses
 the party structure to intervene in the private lives of its
 citizens. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi has party cadres covering
 the smallest units of society. Individual cells vary in size
 from single family homes to large apartment buildings, and may
 contain from 10 to several hundred individuals. Unpaid
 "10-cell" leaders are the party officials responsible for
 resolving problems at the grassroots level and reporting any
 suspicious behavior or event within their neighborhoods to
 authorities.
 In 1986 police were criticized for forced entry into private
 homes while engaged in searches for tax evaders and
 contraband. Various ordinances allow the removal of
 "undesirable" or destitute persons from one area to their
 prior place of residence or origin if no work is found for
 them. Groups of unemployed persons were rounded up on the
 streets of Dar es Salaam under these ordinances. The city of
 Dar es Salaam started a Human Resources Department to assist
 the urban unemployed in finding productive work rather than
 return them to the rural areas at government expense.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is guaranteed under the
 Constitution but is limited in practice. Tanzanian citizens
 show few inhibitions about criticizing the system in private
 conversations but are cautious in public statements. The
 mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the National Press Agency, and the mainland radio
 facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a radio and
 television station. The Swahili-language paper, which has a
 daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by the party. The
 Newspaper Act, which allows government search and seizure of
 any publication and withdrawal of the license to publish at
 any time, makes the launching of a private newspaper or
 magazine extremely difficult. There is a monthly Catholic
 newspaper with a circulation of 120,000 which covers largely
 religious news. The official media, as organs of the State,
 usually present a unified point of view on important policy
 matters and do not criticize the premises of government
 domestic or foreign policies. The Government encourages the
 media to publish articles and letters to the editor
 criticizing corruption, mismanagement, and "economic sabotage"
 in the government ministries and state-owned corporations.
 
 
 330
 TANZANIA
 However, a weekly newspaper column, "Society and the Law," was
 removed when it became too critical of the Government.
 Visiting foreign reporters are required to register with the
 Government and obtain a government permit. They are then
 allowed considerable freedom, including access to government
 and party leaders. Photographers, however, can fall victim to
 the widespread fear of South African espionage. In August
 1986, two photographers were arrested in separate, unrelated
 incidents. Each photographer had all the required permits,
 and each was released after several hours. Also in 1986, a
 freelance journalist was banned from reporting on Zanzibar
 because he was said to be reporting negative news "which
 destroyed the image of the isles."
 Academic freedom is officially guaranteed, but in practice
 most academicians, relying on the government-run educational
 system for their livelihood, limit their exploration of
 sensitive subjects. Under the Films and Stage Plays Act,
 films may be censored, and plays must be approved. The
 importation of foreign publications is not prohibited, but it
 is limited by the acute shortage of foreign exchange.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Given the nature of Tanzania's one-party system, the freedoms
 of public assembly and association are limited. Permits must
 be obtained through the party for any public meeting,
 political or otherwise. Student organizations are party
 controlled, and students are inhibited from public criticism
 by concern that their future employment prospects may be
 jeopardized. A number of professional business, legal, and
 medical associations exist, but they are careful to
 concentrate on nonpolitical topics. Under the Societies
 Ordinance, all associations must be registered with and
 approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and their elections
 are subject to government supervision, including the screening
 of candidates. No organizations which would compete with
 party organizations are approved, including labor unions.
 There is only one labor union, Juwata, an organ of the party.
 Membership in Juwata is required of all workers. No other
 unions may operate. All business and government offices with
 more than a few employees are required to have a Juwata
 chapter. Juwata represents about 60 percent of the workers in
 the industrial and government sectors. Juwata, however, has
 little influence on labor policy. wages are set by the
 Government, and Juwata does not bargain collectively on behalf
 of the workers'. At the local level, it promotes employee
 welfare by filing grievances against employers, usually
 involving pay disputes. Grievances which cannot be settled in
 the workplace are taken to the permanent Labor Tribunal, whose
 decisions are final.
 Strikes are not prohibited by law, but they have not taken
 place in the past because disputes must be taken to the Labor
 Tribunal which makes binding decisions. In July 1986, a labor
 disturbance occurred when approximately 500 workers gathered
 at a sugar factory entrance in Kilombero to protest wage
 dedbctions. A police field force unit opened fire, killing 3
 and wounding 20. The management and local officials blamed
 the workers for their failure to use proper channels to voice
 their grievances. The Legal Aid Committee issued a strong
 statement deploring violence against unarmed citizens. The
 
 
 331
 TANZANIA
 Government-established commission of enquiry, with
 representatives from the party, Government, police, and
 Juwata, discovered shortcomings in factory management,
 organization of the workers, and party and government
 leadership. On December 1, President Mwinyi announced that he
 had taken action on recommendations made by the Commission.
 However, the recommendations and the report have not been made
 public. Juwata maintains relations with the ILO, and the
 Government has ratified most ILO conventions. The ILO
 believes that the appointment of the leader of Juwata by the
 President of Tanzania violates its Conventions no. 87 and 98
 on freedom of association.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to
 go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious purposes,
 limited, of course, by the scarcity of foreign exchange. The
 population of the mainland is roughly 30 percent Christian, 35
 percent Muslim, and 35 percent adherents of traditional
 religions. There appear to be no social or political
 advantages or disadvantages attached to membership in any
 given faith on the mainland. While there has been some
 controversy in overwhelmingly Muslim Zanzibar regarding state
 support of certain mosques, Zanzibaris are generally free to
 practice without interference any faith they choose.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign,
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, travel generally is
 not restricted within Tanzania. Citizens must follow national
 employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and
 location of residence. For years city dwellers unable to show
 proof of employment during police checks have been forced to
 return to rural areas in an effort to control increasing
 pressure on urban resources and reverse declining levels of
 agricultural production. The Human Resources Deployment Act
 of 1983 requires local governments to ensure that every
 resident within their areas of jurisdiction engages in
 productive or other lawful employment. Those not so employed
 are subject to transfer to another area where employment is
 available. Although the Act was not enforced in 1986, the
 Government strongly encouraged 1,000 unemployed residents in
 the over-populated Kilimanjaro area to resettle on arable land
 in Morogoro under a 5-year human resources development
 program. The Government also expressed concern over the
 increasing numbers of young people migrating to urban areas to
 seek work rather than remaining in the countryside to engage
 in agriculture and raise livestock. In 1986 a number of
 persons were rounded up at random in Dar es Salaam and
 imprisoned for 3 to 4 months to discourage young migrants.
 Passports are required for foreign travel and can be difficult
 to obtain. Tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank
 are required in order to buy airline tickets. The Economic
 and Organized Crime Control Act of 1984 prohibits taking
 foreign currency out of the country (although allowed on
 Zanzibar for business purposes), and those accused under the
 Act must surrender their passports. In practice, those
 planning to travel or emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny
 
 
 332
 TANZANIA
 by police and tax authorities. Tanzanians who leave the
 country without authorization are subject to prosecution on
 return. In 1986 Tanzanian immigration authorities increased
 border post surveillance and began requiring all people
 crossing borders out of the country to present travel
 documents detailing the purpose of their journey. This
 requirement was aimed at the large number of unemployed youths
 who leave the country. In the spring of 1986, over 40 such
 youths were repatriated from Mozambique. Their travel
 documents were confiscated on return, and they were held in
 prison until their families paid the cost of their return
 tickets. The Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the
 courts to try Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the
 country. Although it is legally possible for citizenship to
 be revoked, there have been no reports during the last several
 years that this has been done.
 Tanzania generally has a liberal policy toward refugees and
 displaced persons. As of January 1986, there were about
 207,000 refugees and displaced persons in Tanzania of whom 82
 percent were from Burundi, with most of the rest from Rwanda
 and Zaire. Tanzania accepts refugees from contiguous
 countries and requires those from other countries to find
 resettlement elsewhere. In general, the same services and
 rights available to citizens are offered to refugees and
 displaced persons insofar as local resources permit. Upon
 becoming self-supporting, such persons are offered Tanzanian
 citizenship. South Africans who enter Tanzania as members of
 liberation groups are allowed to remain in the country in a
 special category. However, those who leave the liberation
 groups are refused work and residence permits. The United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is actively
 engaged in resettling over 70 former members of such groups.
 In 1986 Tanzania began settling a small group of
 asylum-seekers who fled Uganda in the wake of two changes of
 government there in 1985. Seven Kenyan dissidents, even
 though they arrived from a contiguous country, were turned
 over to the UNHCR for resettlement in Scandinavia because of
 the Government's desire to continue good relations with
 Kenya. The UNHCR is presently attempting to resettle 10 more
 such arrivals from Kenya.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the party.
 Although ex-President Julius Nyerere continues to direct the
 party structure and bureaucracy, he has indicated plans to
 step down in the near future and appears to be slowly
 relinquishing power to President Mwinyi, who also serves as
 party vice chairman. There are no overt opposition groups.
 However, informal advocacy of a multiparty system is allowed,
 and leaflets on the subject have been distributed by
 multiparty advocates.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members. In 1985,
 under the amended Constitution, voters were allowed to choose
 between two party-selected candidates for 75 percent, or 169,
 of the 244 seats in Parliament. The remaining 25 percent is
 composed of members appointed by the Government and the
 various "mass organizations" associated with the party. The
 one-party system does not permit political participation
 through the open nomination of multiple candidates. Voters
 
 
 333
 TANZANIA
 register dissatisfaction by voting incumbent members of
 Parliament out of office. In 1985 some 23 petitions were
 filed alleging election fixing and intimidation of village
 leaders and challenging the results of the elections both on
 Zanzibar and the mainland. In 1986 most of the petitions were
 dismissed by the courts, although a few were still pending.
 While membership in the party is voluntary, overzealous party
 functionaries have been known to require proof of membership
 for receipt of basic government services or employment. This
 practice has been publicly deplored by Nyerere.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives, and the
 majority of the members were directly elected from a
 party-selected slate for the first time in 1985. Under the
 new Constitution, the House of Representatives consists of 50
 elected members, 10 members nominated by the President of
 Zanzibar, 5 regional commissioners, 5 seats reserved for
 women, and 5 representatives from the party's mass
 organizations.
 Women are encouraged to take an active role in politics. The
 Government has appointed women to 20 percent of the membership
 of village councils. There are two women Cabinet Ministers
 and there is one woman on the 18-member central committee of
 the party. The 1985 national Constitution reserves 15 seats
 in Parliament for women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Tanzania is a party to the United Nations' covenants on human
 rights and in 1984 ratified the Organization of African Unity
 Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights. Largely due to the
 efforts of ex-President Nyerere, Tanzania has developed a
 tradition of opposing abuses of human rights, and there were
 no outside investigations of human rights violations in
 Tanzania in 1986. There are no active local human rights
 groups in Tanzania. There was no published government
 reaction to Amnesty International's concern about the
 continuing detention of the suspected coup plotters. These
 detainees were released in April 1986.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In practice, the participation of women in education beyond
 the primary school level is seriously limited by tradition and
 social attitudes. For most of Tanzania's ethnic groups,
 women's traditional role has been that of mother and field
 laborer, and women are still underrepresented in government,
 the professions, and in skilled occupations. Social
 limitations on the roles women play are generally more
 pervasive on Zanzibar than on the mainland. Women in many
 parts of the country continue to suffer from discriminatory
 restrictions on inheritance and ownership of property because
 of concessions to custom and Islamic law. Although the
 practice is declining, female circumcision is still
 occasionally performed within approximately 20 of the
 country's 120 mainland ethnic groups. Despite obstacles, the
 Government has made progress in its efforts to ensure equality
 for women, especially in urban areas where traditional values
 have a weaker hold on the population. The Court of Appeals
 has held that womens' domestic services are a marital asset to
 
 
 334
 TANZANIA
 be considered in divorce settlements. The Union of Tanzanian
 Women, a wing of the party, is dedicated to the eradication of
 inequality for women in all spheres of society. The ILO has
 assisted groups of women in starting small-scale business
 ventures and achieving economic independence.
 In 1986 attention was drawn to the plight of the indigenous
 Hadzabe people who live in the north of the country around
 Lake Eyasi. These hunters and gatherers were among the
 earliest settlers in Tanzania. Lack of food, water, and
 shelter has reduced their population from 2,000 to 250 in the
 last few years. Although the Government is researching the
 problem, it has no immediate plans to reverse the impending
 extinction of the Hadzabe, known as "the forgotten people of
 Lake Eyasi."
 The Asian community, estimated at about 40,000, is both
 culturally and economically exclusive, a business-oriented
 minority in a society committed to socialist policies.
 Official government policy is one of equal rights for all
 citizens, and Asian entrepreneurs are being encouraged to
 invest in areas previously reserved for the public sector,
 including large-scale agriculture.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Workers in Tanzania work a 40-hour, 6-day workweek. Section
 77 of the employment ordinance prohibits children under the
 age of 15 from working. This provision applies only to the
 formal wage sector in both urban and rural areas and not to
 children working on family farms or herding domestic
 livestock. A young person between the ages of 15 and 18 may
 be employed provided the work is "safe and not injurious to
 health." There is no legal discrimination in wages on the
 basis of sex, but in practice discrimination occurs. In
 general, women cannot be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.,
 and young people are not allowed to work between 6 p.m. and 6
 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the workplace, including
 the Factories Ordinance, the Accidental and Occupational
 Diseases Notification Ordinance, and the Workman's
 Compensation Ordinance. In 1986 the ILO and the Ministry of
 Labor completed a project establishing an occupational health
 and safety factory inspection system. Employers in Tanzania
 are required to have insurance, but enforcement is limited by
 Government resources for checking on it.
 
 
 335
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY. TANZANIA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON, ASSIST.-TOTAL            6.4      9.4      1.7
 LOANS ...........    ....   00       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     6.4      9.4      1.7
 A.AID ........ .............    1.2      0.0      0.2
 LOANS ..............        .0.0     D,0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      1.2      0.0      0.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)..          0.0     0.0      0.0
 a.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        3.9      7.5      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     3.9      7.5      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ?EPAY. IN $-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I1-TOTAL .........       3.9      7.5     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV  I  WFP,       2.0      1.4     0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       1.9      6.1      0.0
 C.OTHER  ECON.  ASSIST,.        1.3      1.9      1.5
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      1.3      1.9      1.5
 PEACE  CORPS......        1.3      1.9     1.5
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ............. r.    O       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      3.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 :.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL,...        6.4      9.4      1.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    6.4      9.4      1.7
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS ......         0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       O,      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL .........   39.5     46.7     90.0   1425.7
 IBR               0.0      0.0      0.0    318.2
 If.                3.9      0.0      0.0     11.0
 IDA               35.0     45.0     90.0    934.9
 I03                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0     97.9
 UNOP               0.6      1.7      0.0     17.7
 OT4ER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     41.0
 EE:                0.0      0.0      0.0      5.0
 
 
 336
