 TANZANIA
 Tanzania is ruled by Julius K. Nyerere, who has been President
 and Chairman of the single political party almost continuously
 since independence in 1961. He has run unopposed in four elec-
 tions, since opposition parties and candidates are prohibited.
 within this one-party system voters have some choice of contend-
 ing political candidates for parliament and local government, and
 parliamentary members have frequently been voted out of office.
 Tanzania's military, the Tanzania People's Defense Force, has
 played a regional role outside Tanzania: it was instrumental
 in overthrowing the Amin regime in Uganda and has an advisory
 presence in both the Seychelles and Mozambique.
 Tanzania is a single-party, "socialist" state, although its legal
 and parliamentary systems were originally patterned on the
 British model. Zanzibar, although ruled by the same party as the
 mainland, exercises a considerable degree of autonomy; its legal
 and parliamentary systems differ substantially from those of the
 mainland. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi, the sole legal political
 party in Tanzania, controls activity in all levels of society.
 Through its system of keeping track of every 10 families, it
 monitors even the most remote areas of the country.
 In 1983, the economy continued to deteriorate despite government
 efforts to check the decline. Although Tanzania ranks very high
 among per capita aid recipients, it remains one of the world's
 poorest countries. However, the Government has had some success
 in educating its citizenry and bringing social services to the
 rural population.
 Although Tanzania's national and party Constitutions provide for
 equal rights to all citizens regardless of sex, race, ethnic
 group, or status, and Zanzibar's Constitution recognizes freedom
 of movement, speech, religion, and association, in practice, such
 legal rights are frequently not observed. Custom and rigid tradi-
 tion, especially in rural areas, often militate against the
 exercise of these rights, and in regard to the treatment and
 independence of women. Torture is not supported at the highest
 level of the Government. However, it does occur, and police
 officials have, on a number of occasions, been successfully
 prosecuted and sentenced to stiff terms of imprisonment for
 torture, abuse, and death of prisoners. Convicts are required to
 work without pay either in construction or on prison farms.
 Tanzania's human rights record was marred by three major events
 in 1983. In early 1983, 30 persons were arrested for allegedly
 plotting to overthrow the Government. After many delays in
 setting a trial date, reports of abuse of prisoners, and finally
 the escape of two of them, major charges were dropped and the
 remaining 28 defendants were kept in custody without trial under
 the 1962 Preventive Detention Act. The Act, under which
 detainees can be held indefinitely, greatly restricts visitation
 and representation rights. In late March, the Government
 launched a campaign against "economic saboteurs.* Some 1,400-
 2,000 persons were detained under the Preventive Detention Act
 while Parliament and the Government promulgated a law, finally
 approved on May 4, 1983, which legitimized the action taken
 earlier. The law, as enacted, was a major departure from
 Tanzania's legal norms. Finally, in May 1983, Parliament passed
 the Human Resources Deployment Act, which inter alia permits the
 Government to relocate unemployed anj underemployed persons where
 it chooses. Under this Act, the police have the right to enter
 dwellings and arrest people whom they suspect of being unemployed
 (30)
 
 
 370
 or employed in non-sanctioned activities. Starting in October
 1983, Tanzania police and militia began enforcing the Human
 Resources Deployment Act by sporadically combing the streets of
 Dar es Salaam, checking identity cards for proof of employment.
 Individuals who were unable to establish that they were employed
 were detained pending relocation to rural areas. Two detention
 centers to temporarily house those to be repatriated were estab-
 lished in Dar es Salaam in October. While the number of people
 detained is uncertain, it would appear that at least several
 thousand were held, at least temporarily. After an initial burst
 of activity in mid-October, the Government paused to reassess its
 effort. Indications are that widespread sweeps will not recur,
 at least until more provisions have been made in the rural areas
 to which the unemployed are to be relocated.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 The Tanzanian Government does not sanction unlawful or arbitrary
 deprivation of life. However, 12 government officials were
 convicted in 1980 and 1981 for killing or sanctioning the killing
 of two detained persons during interrogation. The officials were
 sentenced to long prison terms. Four other high-ranking govern-
 ment officers resigned as a result of their complicity in the
 case. In 1983, two police officers were convicted for man-
 slaughter in the killing of a prisoner; one defendant was sen-
 tenced to one and a half years in jail, the other received two
 and a half years in jail. In 1983, the Government unsuccess-
 fully prosecuted 11 police officers for the murder of a prisoner.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence of any cases of disappearance of individuals
 in Tanzania because of either governmental or non-governmental
 actions.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While the very highest level of the Tanzanian Government opposes
 torture, it apparently does take place. In the past, police
 and regional officers found guilty of torture have been sentenced
 to stiff jail terms. Nonetheless, there have been indications
 during the year, as in the past, that torture has been inflicted
 by police and prison authorities. There is widespread belief in
 Dar es Salaam that many of the 30 individuals arrested in early
 1983 for their participation in an attempted coup d'etat were
 tortured. There were also reports that some individuals detained
 during the government campaign against "economic saboteurs" were
 beaten. Beating of criminals by the police is commonplace.
 Beatings almost invariably take place at the time of apprehension
 or when the arrested person is first taken to the police
 station. Tanzania's prisons are generally unhealthful,
 unsanitary, and overcrowded. The overcrowding was severely
 exacerbated when some 1,400-2,000 persons were detained,
 beginning in March, during the Government's *economic saboteur"
 roundup. Deplorable prison conditions are largely a result of
 Tanzania's economic difficulties rather than a deliberate govern-
 ment effort to subject prisoners to inhuman conditions.
 
 
 371
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Tanzania's most serious human rights violations are a result of
 arbitrary arrest and detention. Under the 1962 Preventive Deten-
 tion Act, police and security officers can, with a written order
 from the President, arrest and detain indefinitely any person
 considered dangerous to public order or national security. Such
 detainees have no recourse to the judicial system once the
 authorities present a valid detention order to a magistrate.
 There have been cases, however, where the detainees have been
 freed when the authorities could not produce the order. Under
 this Act, a committee was established to oversee the treatment of
 detainees; the committee reportedly meets only sporadically. The
 Act further requires that the detainee be informed of the reasons
 for detention within 15 days. This is rarely done. During the
 1983 campaign against "economic saboteurs" starting March 24,
 1,400 to 2,000 individuals were detained under Presidential
 decree. The Economic Sabotage (Special Provisions) Act was not
 approved until May 4. Thus, many individuals had been held for
 over one month prior to the passage of the law which they were
 said to have violated and before any charges were formally
 lodged. In early 1983, 30 persons were arrested for allegedly
 participating in a plot to overthrow the Government. After two
 of the defendants escaped custody, charges against the remaining
 28 were dropped. They were then immediately detained under the
 Preventive Detention Act. Persons held under this Act can be
 held indefinitely, and do not have the right to be visited
 by lawyers and family as is permitted regular prisoners.
 Reliable figures on the number of detained persons are unavail-
 able. Estimates vary from 1,500 to 2,500. A majority are being
 held for "economic sabotage," game poaching, and stealing cattle.
 Detainees are held for varying periods of time prior to trial;
 two to three years has not been unusual. It appears that the
 Government has chosen to use the Preventive Detention Act rather
 than press criminal charges because of frustration with the
 working of the court system. The new tribunals established to
 prosecute crimes involving "economic sabotage" are held subject
 to special rules of procedure which limit appeal directly to the
 President and then only concerning the length of the sentence.
 The accused does not have access to legal representation and may
 not employ an attorney to represent him. Rules of evidence,
 which apply in other Tanzanian courts, do not apply to the
 tribunals. Tanzania does not exile citizens from the country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law requires that a person arrested for criminal violations
 appear before a magistrate within 24 hours to be charged. The
 prosecution may ask that the accused be remanded for 14 days
 without bail and may request extensions of the remand. In prac-
 tice, when authorities have not followed proper criminal proce-
 dures, defendants have successfully overturned convictions on
 appeal.
 The mainland legal system is based on the British colonial model
 with modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public, and the
 more sensational are covered by the press. While an independent
 judiciary is constitutionally mandated, some members of the legal
 community, including judicial officers, have complained that the
 legal system is being corrupted through bribery. Although
 
 
 372
 the allegations remain largely undocumented, there is at least
 one confirmed report of a magistrate demanding a bribe to issue a
 court order. There has been no suggestion that the Court of
 Appeals and the High Court are corrupt. Judges are appointed by
 the Executive with the advice of the Chief Justice.
 The court system on Zanzibar (which has considerable autonomy) is
 entirely different. Defendants in Zanzibar may not be repre-
 sented by attorneys. They may, however, request a relative or
 neighbor to represent them; but no fee may be paid. With the
 exception of High Court judges, no other members of the Zanzibar
 judiciary are required to have any training in the law. The
 Supreme Council, which can review decisions made by the High
 Court, is attached to the Revolutionary Council and accountable
 to its President. There is, therefore, considerable possibility
 of political interference in the judiciary in Zanzibar.
 Within the normal court system on the mainland, public counsel is
 available to defendants in serious cases (e.g., treason, murder,
 and manslaughter). The Tanganyika Law Society offers free
 assistance subject to a means test.
 The passage of the Economic Sabotage Act in 1983 was seen by many
 as an effort by the Government to circumvent what it perceived as
 an inability to obtain convictions within the regular court
 system. The special tribunals bypass normal legal procedures.
 Normal rules of evidence, the right to representation, and the
 normal appeal process were abandoned. The Act also covers crimes
 retroactively. Despite this retreat from previous judicial
 guarantees, the operation of the tribunals themselves, largely
 because of the quality of the judges, is perceived as impartial.
 While there is no evidence of political pressure being brought
 on the judiciary, the creation of special tribunals to try crimes
 related to the Economic Sabotage Act clearly has diminished the
 rights of individuals under the law. There have been reports of
 government harassment of attorneys in controversial cases, such
 as the coup trial; and individual government employees, on
 occasion, are accused of using their office to attempt to
 influence decisions. The High Court has asked magistrates to
 report any such attempts. Military courts do not try civilians,
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and
 military courts, but not in the special tribunals, may appeal
 decisions to the High Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There are elements of the totalitarian state in the government's
 intervention into the private lives of the people. The party,
 through its "ten-cell' leaders who are charged with being
 familiar with each of the residents of their area, monitors
 activities within the neighborhoods.
 The Chama Cha Mapinduzi has party cadres covering the smallest
 units of society. The "ten-cell* leader is the party official
 responsible for monitoring events and resolving problems at
 the grass-roots level. "Ten-cell* leaders are chosen from among
 the most prominent members of a community. As party members,
 they receive an introductory session of evening classes on
 political indoctrination. Individual cells vary in size from
 single-family homes to large apartment buildings. Hence,
 
 
 373
 individual "ten-cell* areas may have anywhere from twenty to
 several hundred individuals.
 "Ten-cell* leaders are unpaid and, therefore, are not normally
 required to abide by party leadership guidelines which would
 prohibit them from owning their own businesses. The leaders are
 required to monitor all aspects of community and individual
 behavior within their area. They act as intermediaries between
 individuals and the Government and must attempt to resolve any
 problems which the people in their area may have. They monitor
 store rationing to ensure equitable distribution. Finally, they
 report to government or party authorities any suspicious behavior
 or events within their neighborhoods. In general, 'ten-cell'
 leaders are far more intimately involved in the day-to-day
 affairs of rural people than urban dwellers largely because in
 rural areas they are responsible for fewer people and are more
 familiar with them than in the case of urban areas.
 Party control is similar in Zanzibar and on the mainland.
 Exceptions to the theoretical need for a warrant to enter private
 residences are made for police to search for unemployed persons
 or under other special circumstances. There also have been
 numerous instances of forced entry, search, and harassment of
 persons suspected of economic crimes. In one case in 1983,
 police entered a house of worship and arrested persons suspected
 of *econmic sabotage." The President later ordered their
 releage and admonished police not to arrest suspects in religious
 sanctuaries. (Money taken in the raid, however, was not
 recovered.) There is evidence that mail is sometimes opened
 and read by authorities, although the opening of mail is not the
 general rule. Those who are not considered productively employed
 are not allowed to remain in urban areas. Some have returned
 voluntarily to their home regions; others have been or are
 scheduled to be returned under escort or sent to other rural
 areas selected by the Government and forced to work.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are limited in practice. The mainland Government
 owns the only English-language daily newspaper, The National
 Press Agency, and the mainland radio facility. The Zanzibar
 Government operates a radio and television station. The Swahili-
 language paper, which has a daily circulation of 100,000, is
 owned by the party. There is one private fortnightly paper which
 covers largely religious news in reduced format because of news-
 print shortages. Urusi Leo, a Soviet publication, has a weekly
 circulation of 25,000. The official media, as organs of the
 state, usually present a unified point of view on important
 policy matters and do not criticize the premises of overall
 government domestic or foreign policies. The Government has
 encouraged criticism by the media of corruption, mismanagement,
 and "economic sabotage.' There has been extensive coverage of
 the arrest of government officials accused of economic crimes.
 Both papers publish frank letters to the editor from the public
 which are often highly critical of abuses of the system. Some of
 the letters to the editor and other fora, including radio discus-
 sion programs and symposia, have also suggested wide-ranging
 changes in the Tanzanian form of government within the context of
 officially sanctioned debate on the new Constitutional proposals.
 Editorial policy is set by the Government or party and is clearly
 understood. Although the press exercises autonomy within these
 
 
 374
 limits, there are occasional editorials provided by the Presi-
 dent's office or various ministries. Tanzanian citizens show few
 inhibitions about expressing criticisms of the system in private
 conversations, and there is little apparent attempt at control of
 such criticism. Although there are few resident representatives
 of the foreign press, press visits are frequent and visiting
 reporters have considerable freedom of action, access to govern-
 ment and party leaders, and freedom from interference. Academic
 freedom of enquiry is officially guaranteed; however, in practice,
 most academicians, relying on the government-run educational
 system for their livelihood, limit their exploration and treat-
 ment of sensitive subjects. Commercial import of foreign books
 and periodicals is severely limited by the acute shortage of
 foreign exchange; most Tanzanians, libraries and governmental
 institutions cannot afford to buy subscriptions or those few
 copies that are sometimes available on the market. Material
 written by civil servants must have government approval before
 publication.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The fact that Tanzania is a one-party state limits the freedom of
 public assembly and association. Legal political gatherings may
 be organized only by the party or its sub-groups. In 1978, a
 large number of students at the University of Dar es Salaam was
 expelled for participation in a peaceful demonstration against
 government policies; most were later reinstated. There have been
 no demonstrations at the university since that time. In late
 1981, a number of students at the Institute of Development
 Management was suspended for taking part in a demonstration.
 The student union leaders were expelled. The only remaining
 student organizations are party controlled. Students are now
 afraid to jeopardize their futures by public criticism of
 policy.
 There is one labor union, which is run by the party; no other
 unions may operate. Strikes are prohibited by law. All busi-
 nesses and government offices with more than a few employees are
 required to have a union chapter; at the local level, the union
 is charged with promoting employee welfare. It has little
 influence on labor policy. Few professional associations exist
 and those that do are carefully non-political.
 The International Labor Organization remains concerned about
 convict labor in prisons and several ordinances requiring work by
 adults in communal agriculture and development projects. It is
 especially concerned about the Human Resources Deployment Act
 which requires all members of the society to engage in "product-
 ive employment" as defined by the Government. Those not so
 employed will be required to return to the countryside and
 engaged in government-defined 'productive employment.'
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Tanzania is an essentially secular society which permits freedom
 of religion. The population of the mainland is roughly one-third
 Christian, one-third Muslim, and one-third animist. There appear
 to be no political or social advantages or disadvantages attached
 to membership in any given faith on the mainland. While there
 has been a degree of controversy in Zanzibar, which is overwhelm-
 ingly Muslim, regarding state support of certain mosques, Zanzi-
 baris are generally free to practice any faith without interfer-
 
 
 375
 ence. Some non-Muslims or minority-sect Muslim Zanzibaris
 perceive an element of discrimination in favor of majority-sect
 Muslims with respect to advancement within the Zanzibar Govern-
 ment.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for travel documentation
 between Zanzibar and the mainland, the Government generally does
 not restrict travel within the country. However, there are
 important limitations on freedom of residence for those who are
 not "productively employed."
 Tanzania continues to require its citizens to follow national
 employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and
 where they reside. For years, city dwellers have been the sub-
 jects of police checks for proof of employment. Those without
 proper documentation have, in some cases, been forced to return
 to the countryside in an effort to control increasing pressure on
 urban resources and to reverse declining levels of agricul-
 tural production. The recently implemented Human Resources
 Deployment Act requires local governments to ensure that every
 resident within their area of jurisdiction engages in productive
 or other lawful employment. Those persons who do not are subject
 to transfer to another area and will be required to engage in
 lawful and gainful employment (as defined by the Government).
 While this act has not yet been fully implemented, regional
 authorities expect that the most affected group will be the young
 school-leavers who have migrated from the countryside to the
 urban areas in search of work. These people will have to leave
 the cities and return to their homes where they will be required
 to produce food and cash crops. In early October, it was
 announced that nearly 22,000 jobless people in Dar es Salaam
 would be repatriated to their regions of origin. The Dar es
 Salaam Regional Commissioner declared that the unemployed who did
 not voluntarily return to their home regions would be subject to
 forced repatriation. Those who were not prepared to go back home
 would be sent to national coffee, tea, cashew nut, sugar cane, or
 sisal plantations where they would engage in forced labor.
 During the height of the campaign against "economic saboteurs,"
 roadblocks were ubiquitous. Many vehicles were stopped and
 searched to prevent the illegal movement of goods within the
 country. Now that the campaign has subsided, the only roadblocks
 remaining are in border areas and occasionally on major arteries.
 There are no restrictions on repatriation. The Extra-Territorial
 Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try Tanzanians who commit
 offenses outside the country. There are no indications as to
 what sort of cases the act will apply. Passports are required
 for foreign travel and can be difficult to obtain. Travelers
 must obtain tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank to
 buy tickets. Approval for payment in local currency is made only
 for official or emergency travel. Although the Government claims
 that restrictions are aimed solely at conserving limited foreign
 exchange, the requirements for information on sponsors abroad in
 cases where tickets are prepaid indicates an intent to monitor
 the continued transfer of assets out of the country and an effort
 to identify individuals involved in illicit currency transactions.
 Emigration is theoretically free. In practice, those planning to
 emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny by police and tax author-
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 25
 
 
 376
 ities. Although it is legally possible for citizenship to be
 revoked, there have been no reports recently that this has been
 done.
 Tanzania has a very good record in regard to receiving refugees.
 In 1983, President Nyerere was awarded the Hansen Prize of the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for his outstanding
 assistance to refugees. There is a refugee population of about
 140,000 of whom approximately 75 percent are from Burundi, the
 rest mainly from Rwanda and Zaire. Some 30,000 Rwandans were
 offered naturalization in 1980, although only a few have so far
 acquired Tanzanian citizenship. The same offer of citizenship is
 expected to be made to the Burundians when they become self-
 sufficient. In general, the same services and rights avilable to
 citizens are offered to refugees insofar as local resources
 permit. Tanzania's refugee acceptance is largely limited to
 persons from contiguous countries. Refugees from other countries
 are required to find resettlement elsewhere. Sotith Africans who
 entered Tanzania as members of "liberation" groups are in a
 different category. Those who resign or are expelled from their
 organizations are refused work and residence permits and several
 have been imprisoned. The United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees is actively engaged in resettling over 100 former
 members of "liberation" groups.
 In October 1983, Tanzania and Kenya returned to their countries
 -of origin some two dozen political refugees in conjunction with
 the reopening of their common border and the resolution of the
 longstanding dispute over assets of the defunct East African
 Community. Many of the refugees had been recognized as such by
 both governments and the United Nations High Commission for
 Refugees. As a result, the exchange was viewed by some foreign
 governments and by the United Nations High Commission for Refu-
 gees as a violation of refugee rights and agreements, particu-
 larly in view of the recent awarding of the Hansen Prize to
 President Nyerere, and led to representations by U.N. officials
 to the Tanzanian and Kenyan Governments.
 Section 3  Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the party. Presi-
 dent Nyerere directs the party structure and bureaucracy, which
 is the dominant force in the country. There are no overt opposi-
 tion groups, although the coup plot discovered in January 1983
 indicated internal opposition to the regime. Some Tanzanian
 nationals living abroad who consider themselves political exiles
 advocate a change of government. It is an offense under the
 penal code to "incite disaffection against the Government."
 One-half of the national Parliament is chosen in elections, with
 only limited choice of contending candidates approved by the
 party. The rest is composed of members appointed by the Govern-
 ent and the various "mass organizations" associated with the
 party. Any citizen is free to enter the first-stage selection
 process. The National Executive Committee of the party chooses
 two candidates from a list provided by each constituency to
 compete in the general election. Following recent changes in the
 party Constitution, candidates will be rank ordered on the ballot
 according to their party record. Party membership and, hence,
 active participation in the political process is not open to
 anyone engaged in private business or associated with "the
 practices of capitalism or feudalism." This includes landlords
 
 
 377
 and directors and shareholders of private companies. The
 restriction is not uniformly applied but serves as a mechanism of
 control over party members. The business community consists
 largely of Asians and is generally not part of the party
 structure.
 Voters can and do register dissatisfaction by sending incumbent
 members of Parliament down to defeat. Mainland Tanzanian voters,
 in response to worsening economic conditions and seeming govern-
 ment inability to effectuate change, voted out of office over
 half of the 84 members of Parliament who stood for election in
 1980. Previous parliaments have usually approved routine legis-
 lation prepared by the ministries. Over the past several years,
 however, Parliament has redrafted several major pieces of legis-
 lation, including sections of the Economic Sabotage Act.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives, established in the
 1979 Zanzibar Constitution. Its powers are severely limited, and
 only 10 of its 97 members (full house complement is 107 members)
 are directly elected. There is a broad-based public demand,
 manifested most recently in public comments on the proposals for
 constitutional revision, calling for a more popularly representa-
 tive, directly elected legislature in Zanzibar.
 Julius Nyerere has run unopposed in the four presidential elec-
 tions since independence. While voters have the option of voting
 *no" by secret ballot or staying home, local party officials do
 bring pressure to bear in elections to ensure a high turnout.
 There have been reports of election fixing and intimidation of
 village leaders both on the mainland and on Zanzibar. In an
 effort to break down ethnic and linguistic distinctions, the
 election code requires that campaigns be conducted only in Swa-
 hili and prohibits references to ethnic and regional origin. An
 appeal process is available to candidates who feel that the code
 has been violated, and a number of appeals have been successful.
 The results of one election were overturned by the High Court
 because the victor had conducted a campaign of sexist and ethnic
 slurs against his opponent, and there were clear indications in
 the case that the ballot box had been stuffed.
 Women have been encouraged to take an active role in politics and
 government. Using its powers of direct appointment, the Govern-
 ment has ensured that about 20 percent of the membership of vil-
 lage councils is female. In mid-1983, there were three women
 cabinet ministers, one woman on the 18-member Central Committee
 of the party, and 13 women on the National Executive Committee.
 For most of Tanzania's ethnic groups, women's traditional role
 has been that of mother and field laborer. Tanzania remains
 largely rural and traditional attitudes toward women have not
 changed as much as the Government would like. Women still are
 proportionately underrepresented in government, the professions,
 and in skilled occupations. Despite the existence of free
 education at all levels, females (largely because of parental
 influence) are not enrolled in schools in proportions commensur-
 ate with their numbers. Poor education continues to hamper
 women's attainment of non-traditional aspirations throughout
 their lives.
 The party's proposal to change the country's Constitution in 1983
 has attracted widespread public debate within Tanzania. Criti-
 cism ranges from the basic form of government to the question of
 union between the mainland and Zanzibar. The party and the
 
 
 378
 Government are not required to heed the public's desire, but the
 Constitution which will eventually be promulgated could be
 different from that which was originally proposed.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Tanzania is a party to the U.N. Covenants on Human Rights and has
 signed, but not yet ratified, the Organization of African Unity
 Convention on Human Rights. The International Labor Organization
 has raised the issue of forced labor a number of times with the
 Tanzanian Government. In its 1983 report, Amnesty International
 expressed concern about Tanzanian laws which permit indefinite
 detention without charge or trial. Some of the detainees about
 whom Amnesty has in the past inquired have been set free. None-
 theless, in 1983 Tanzania used this Act with unprecedented
 frequency. The Government's concern for international opinion
 was evident in its decision to release foreigners detained in
 the economic sabotage campaign provided they left Tanzania.
 Counsel for defendants in controversial cases, such as the coup
 attempt early in 1983, are said to have experienced minor harass-
 ment on occasion. Individuals can appeal to the Permanent
 Commission of Enquiry, established in 1965 as a balance to the
 possibility of abuse of power in a one-party state, for investi-
 gation of violations.
 While President Nyerere is concerned that Tanzania be regarded as
 a respector of human rights, efforts to direct the population
 into what the Government and the party see as the proper course
 sometimes result in human rights violations. In 1983, the
 incidence of human rights violations in Tanzania increased
 following the government's introduction of the "Economic Sabo-
 teur" campaign and the Human Resources Deployment Act. Freedom
 House rates Tanzania "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Tanzania is among the poorest countries of the world, with a 1981
 per capita gross national product of $299.30. More than 90 per-
 cent of the population of 20.5 million are peasant farmers living
 in rural areas. The official population growth rate was 3.2 per-
 cent in 1983; however, current government estimates appear to be
 lower than the actual rate. Urban areas and Zanzibar have birth
 rates considerably higher than the national average. Unemploy-
 ment and underemployment have traditionally caused serious
 social problems in the cities. These problems have become more
 acute as the country's economic situation has worsened.
 There are no reliable figures available for the percentage of the
 population living below the absolute poverty level. Two-year-old
 figures (10 percent of the urban population and 60 percent of the
 rural population) appear very low for the city dwellers who are
 much more dependent or: earned wages than the rural population.
 Estimates of the minimum needed to support a family of four vary
 from 50 percent to 150 percent above the statutory minimum wage.
 About $437 million is budgeted for development programs in 1983/
 84, some 27.7 percent of the total budget. In 1982, Tanzania
 received about $450 million in foreign assistance.
 
 
 379
 Social services, while limited, are available to all. Although
 secondary and higher eduction are theoretically open to all citi-
 zens on the basis of merit, in practice, tradition and social
 attitudes have seriously limited the participation of women
 beyond the primary school level. Secondary school facilities
 are, in any case, very limited. Social limitations on the role
 of women are particularly pervasive on Zanzibar. The Government
 actively encourages and recruits those women who advance through
 the system and continues to make genuine efforts to increase
 female enrollment in secondary schools and institutions of higher
 learning. Concessions to custom and Islamic law have perpetuated
 discriminatory restrictions on inheritance and ownership of
 property by women in many parts of the country. Although the
 practice is declining, female circumcision is still performed by
 some 20 of the country's 120 mainland ethnic groups. There has
 been no attempt by the Government to abolish'the practice. The
 Asian community, estimated at 40,000, is both culturally exclu-
 sive and a business-oriented minority in a society committed to
 'socialist" policies. Although official government policy is one
 of equal rights for all citizens, reports of harassment and
 discrimination against Tanzanian Asians by individual government
 officials are widespread. Many observers saw the economic
 sabotage campaign as a thinly veiled attempt to blame Tanzania's
 economic difficulties on the Asian community. Most observers
 were surprised, however, at the high percentage of Tanzanians of
 African descent rounded up in the campaign. Earlier, the Asian
 community bore the brunt of the 1971 nationalization of private
 property, in many cases with inadequate or no compensation.
 The economy, overall, has suffered considerably from a sharp
 reduction in agricultural output. Government pricing policies,
 traditionally designed to keep consumer prices low for urban
 dwellers, and a consistent pattern of late payments to producers
 and-shortages of necessary inputs have contributed to a decrease
 in the growth of export crops by producers. Many of these
 farmers have increasingly reverted to food crop agriculture.
 Recent producer price increases, consumer price hikes, and more
 systematic payment to producers by state-owned enterprises
 represent government efforts to reverse this trend.
 There has been a parallel decrease in the output of manufactured
 goods, primarily due to poor management in state-owned enter-
 prises and an inability to finance imports of raw materials and
 spare parts. The economy has suffered further from worldwide
 inflation, high energy costs, and continued low prices for export
 crops. Shortages of goods and some food products have become
 universal both in urban and rural areas. Severe food shortages
 in urban centers have been averted through assistance from
 abroad, including food aid from the European Economic Community,
 Japan, and the United States. Despite the present economic
 difficulties, the Government has continued ambitious programs in
 maternal child health care and public education in nutrition.
 The Government also continued efforts to expand education and
 health facilities. Since the institution of free and compulsory
 education for all in 1977, virtually all children of primary
 school age have been enrolled. There is growing criticism that
 the children are spending too much time on learning to farm,
 recreational activities, and other non-academic pursuits rather
 than on basic education. The severely restricted number of
 places in secondary schools and universities has also been the
 object of public criticism. Adult education is available and
 
 
 380
 encouraged. According to World Bank figures for 1978, 73.5 per-
 cent of the adult population is literate. United Nations Educa-
 tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization statistics for 1980
 indicate that 79 percent of the adult population is literate,
 the highest literacy rate in Africa. This represents an increase
 of more than 69 percent in the literacy rate since 1960.
 The Government places a high priority on medical care; dispen-
 saries, clinics and hospitals have been opened throughout the
 country. There are serious shortages of trained medical per-
 sonnel and acute shortages of supplies and drugs. Although a
 genuine effort is being made to improve standards, health care is
 still inadequate for the needs of the population. Community
 health programs designed to provide safe drinking water, adequate
 sanitation, and the eradication of disease-bearing pests have
 been established, although malaria, bilharzia, cholera, and
 various enteric diseases are still prevalent. Infant deaths from
 measles are common. Since independence in 1961, life expectancy
 has risen from 42 to 51.6 years. Infant mortality remains high,
 largely as a result of malnutrition and the resulting lack of
 resistance to disease. As of 1975, 39 percent of the population
 had access to clean water. More than 42 percent of the popula-
 tion had access to clean water in 1982, and the Government
 continues to make strides in its goal to provide clean drinking
 water to the entire nation.
 The Government has made significant progress in its efforts to
 ensure equality for women. Its efforts have been most successful
 in the urban areas where traditional values have a weaker hold on
 the population. The Union of Tanzanian Women, a wing of the
 party, is dedicated to the eradication of inequality of women in
 all spheres of society. Its impact, however, has been con-
 strained by tradition and ingrained socio-cultural patterns. In
 the countryside where the vast majority of Tanzania's population
 lives, many women have little control over their lives.
 
 
 381
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: TANZANIA
 1981     1982
 . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . ..  - - - - - - - - -. -. . -. . - - -. -
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A.AID  .................
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........
 REPAY. IN 3-LOANS..;..
 PAY.  IN  FOR. CURR .....
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER ............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS  ..............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT  FINANCING ....
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS .............
 
 37.2
 19.3
 17.9
 21.7
 11.8
 9.9
 0.0
 14.8
 7.5
 7.3
 7 s
 7.5
 0.0
 7.3
 4.6
 2.7
 0.7
 0.0
 0.7
 0.7
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 37.2
 19.3
 17.9
 
 1983
 ..o�..... ....
 7.9
 5.0
 2.9
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 6.5
 5.0
 1.5
 �,o
 b.6
 0.0
 1.5
 0.1
 1.4
 1.4
 0.0
 1.4
 1.4
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 7.9
 5.0
 2.9
 
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       1.7      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         1.7      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 ------.-----.-.-.---.--.-.--.-------.-----.------...-.-..
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 107.2  111 .7
 0.0     0.0
 0.0    0.0
 92.8    75.0
 0.0     0.0
 0.0     0.0
 13.8    8.6
 0.6    14.7
 0.0    13.4
 0.0     0.0
 
 69.2
 0.0
 0.0
 46.8
 0.0
 0.0
 22.4
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1304.6
 318.2
 712
 764.9
 0.0
 0.0
 97.9
 70.4
 41 .0
 5.0
 
 
