 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania is a one-party state.
 Political direction for the party, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 (CCM), and the Government is provided by a party-chosen elite
 headed by Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who became President in 1985 and
 party chairman in August 1990 following the retirement of
 former party chairman and president Julius K. Nyerere. The
 CCM, under Mwinyi, who was reelected to a second 5-year term as
 President of the Republic in October 1990, lays down
 fundamental political and economic policies and monitors their
 implementation. The party attempts to control activity at all
 levels of society through its system of 10-family cells. The
 islands of Zanzibar and Pemba are integrated into the Union's
 governmental and party structure, but the Zanzibar Government
 exercises a considerable degree of autonomy.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining internal
 security. They are supported by the Tanzanian People's Defense
 Force (TDPF), with some 30,000 personnel, and by paramilitary
 forces and a large citizens' militia. The Government has
 granted quasi-legal status to citizens' patrols to counter
 lawlessness, especially crime in the urban areas and cattle
 rustling in the rural areas. While the armed forces
 traditionally have not been a source of human rights abuses,
 evidence indicates that police routinely beat suspects during
 interrogations.
 One of the world's poorest countries, Tanzania also has one of
 the highest rates of population growth. Its overwhelmingly
 agricultural economy has suffered from inefficient economic
 policies and unfavorable trends in international trade.
 Reforms undertaken since 1986 included higher prices paid to
 farmers for their products, rescheduled foreign debt payments,
 and sharp devaluations of the currency. These stimulated
 growth rates, which remained at an estimated 4 to 5 percent in
 1991. Zanzibar's high rate of unemployment has been a factor
 in its growing separatist sentiment.
 Human rights in Tanzania remain severely restricted, despite
 the incorporation of a bill of rights in the Constitution in
 the mid-1980's providing, inter alia, for freedom of movement,
 speech, religion, and association. Of particular concern were
 reports of torture, extrajudicial killings, and corruption of
 the legal system. In addition, political activity outside the
 single party was tightly circumscribed. Nevertheless, 1991 saw
 a markedly increased level of political criticism and debate
 following President Mwinyi's appointment of a commission to
 review Tanzania's political system and Constitution. The
 Government permitted open criticism in independent newspapers
 and public meetings on official corruption and political
 mismanagement. In Zanzibar and Pemba, opposition campaigns
 continued throughout the year against union with the mainland.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Reports of such killings continued in 1991. Musa Membar, a
 Tanzanian dissident who hijacked an Air Tanzania airliner 9
 years ago and forced it to fly to London, died in Muhimbili
 Hospital in Dar es Salaam on May Z5. Membar, leader of the
 exiled Tanzania Youth Democratic Movement, had served an 8-year
 
 
 403
 TANZANIA
 prison sentence in the-United Kingdom for the highjacking. In
 attempting.to return to Tanzania in September 1990, he was
 arrested at the border and detained without charge under the
 Preventive Detention Act. According to government officials,
 Membar fell seriously ill while in-detention and was admitted
 to Muhimbili Hospital around May 18. -Officials claim that-
 Membar died of complications from AIDS; however, Membar's
 brother, Yassin, and other dissidents maintain that his death
 was the result either of torture or of an intentional injection
 of the AIDS virus. Accordingto British doctors, Membar tested
 HIV negative prior to his release from prison in 1990. -As
 Membar' was buried without public notice and without an autopsy
 having been performed, no conclusive evidence concerning the
 cause, of:his death-is available.
 The Government's possible complicity in the death in custody of
 a prominent Burundi exile political dissident, Remy Gahutf,
 also remained unresolved at the end of 1991. Clinical
 information-released after an autopsy indicated the presence of
 insecticide in Gahutu's body; government officials attributed
 this to Gahutu's years as a farmer, although traces of the
 poison in stomach washings indicated recent ingestion. Prior
 to his death,-Gahutu ,had been in official custody for 17 months.
 Nonpolitical extrajudicial killings occur in the form of Mob
 justice and vigilantism, in both-urban and rural areas. In the
 cities, mobs on occasion chase down a suspected thief in
 response to a victim's call for help and beat the suspect to
 death. Beginning in late 1990, the Minister for Home Affairs,
 Augustine Mrema, established compulsory service of urban men in
 traditional defense groups known as Sungusungu and Wasalama;
 previously, these groups operated only in rural areas as
 associations of local villagers:formed to combat cattle
 rustlers and other criminals- The people's militia laws, as
 amended by Parliament in 1989, bestow quasi-legal status,
 including powers of arrest, on the traditional Sungusungu and
 Wasalama groups. However, the press in 1991 reported numerous
 cases of beatings and theft by Sungusungu patrols.  Prosecution
 of such cases is rare and is contemplated only if beatings
 cause death. In September a theft suspect was hacked to death
 by the victim's neighbors'in Dar es Salaam; no one was arrested
 or prosecuted for the death.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or
 degrading treatment, and government officials condemn these
 practices whenever cases are made public. Police, however,
 routinely threaten and beat suspected criminals just after
 their apprehension in order to.obtain quick confessions.
 Further beatings and torture continueif the suspect does not
 break down. Officials are seldom if ever tried and punished
 for such abuses. Tanzanian prisons are overcrowded and
 unsanitary. Local observers report that conditions are
 substantially worse than Tanzania's depressed economic
 conditions warrant, with prisoners forced to do hard labor with
 little food and no medical care.
 Numerous, credible reports of torture and mistreatment by
 African National Congress (ANC) security personnel of
 
 
 404
 TANZANIA
 ANC-defector detainees and alleged South African government
 spies at ANC refugee camps in Tanzania continued in 1991, even
 after the ANC's announcement in May that all detainees had been
 released. Since national liberation movements in Tanzania
 enjoy a kind of extraterritorial status, Tanzanian officials
 refuse to intervene when cases are brought to their attention.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Criminal Procedure Code, amended in 1985, requires that a
 person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a
 magistrate within 24 hours and be permitted the right to
 defense counsel (see Section i.e.). These amendments, however,
 also restrict the right to bail, reduce the number of bailable
 offenses, limit judges' discretion in granting bail, and impose
 strict conditions on freedom of movement and association when
 bail is granted. In a landmark case in 1991, the Court of
 Appeal ruled that Section 148(5)(e) of the Act--which could be
 used to deny bail to persons not considered dangerous to
 society--was unconstitutional.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act. the President of Tanzania,
 upon written order, may order the arrest and indefinite
 detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to
 the public order or national security. The Act was amended in
 1985 to require the Government to release detainees within 15
 days of detention or inform them of the reason for their
 detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the
 grounds for detention at 90-day intervals.
 Former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Sharif Hamad, who fell from
 grace in 1988 for criticizing the party chairman and CCM
 policies, was detained in May 1989 for unlawful assembly.
 Following a search of his residence, he was officially charged
 with illegal possession of secret government documents. The
 Government of Zanzibar released Hamad on bail on November 20,
 1991.
 On September 5, supporters of civil rights activist James
 Mapalala demonstrated against the Government's refusal to
 register his civil and legal rights movement. Twenty-seven
 persons were arrested, detained, and initially denied bail.
 They were granted bail on September 18. On November 22,
 Mapalala and two of his supporters, along with opposition
 leader Chief Abdullah Fundikira and several of his supporters,
 were arrested and charged with forming political parties
 contrary to the Societies Ordinance. All were released later
 the same day on their own recognizance.
 There were no publicized or known cases of political detainees
 or prisoners held at year's end. However, according to
 numerous reports, police officials in the countryside
 frequently lock up persons who have had disagreements with
 local government or party officials. The individuals are not
 charged and are usually released within a few days.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Justice in Tanzania is widely criticized as both corrupt and
 inefficient, thus bringing into question the defendant's
 ability to receive a fair public trial. The legal system is
 based on the British model, with modifications to accommodate
 customary and Islamic law in civil-cases. Criminal trials are
 open to the public and the press; courts must give reasons on
 
 
 405
 TANZANIA
 the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants
 have the right of appeal. Military courts do not try
 civilians, and there are no security courts. Defendants in
 civil and 'military courts may appeal decisions to the High
 Court-and the Court of Appeal. While the judiciary is
 constitutionally mandated.to operate independently from the
 executive branch, the Government exerts influence in many
 cases. In addition, judges who render decisions unpopular with
 senior police or government officials may find themselves
 subject to pressure or may be transferred and reassigned.
 Government officials also routinely ignore judicial rulings.
 Members of the legal community, including judicial officers,
 have complained-that the legal system is corrupted through
 bribery. In 1991 Supreme Court Justice Moses Mwakibete became
 the first Tanzanian judge ever to be tried for corruption, the
 maximum penalty for which is removal from office. No decision
 about the case had been rendered by the end of 1991. Police
 and lower court officials are often bribed to delay the process
 of investigation and trials. There are reports of prisoners
 waiting 10 years because they could not bribe their way through
 the system. Although the 1985 amendments to the Criminal
 Procedure Code were supposed to lessen court congestion, an
 average case still takes 2 to 3 years to come to trial. Cases
 may be delayed even longer, during which time the defendant
 often remains incarcerated under abysmal conditions.
 A Ugandan citizen, Moses Oguti, claimed that he had-been
 imprisoned without charge for over 1 year and that his
 detention had been ordered by his former employer, a charitable
 nongovernmentalorganization known as the Mission to the Needy,
 because of his threats to publicize financial mismanagement and
 theft of donations. In October Minister of Home Affairs
 Augustine Mrema ordered Oguti's release and an immediate
 investigation of his claims against the organization.
 In 1991 the most celebrated case remained that of former
 Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Sharif Hamad. After numerous
 postponements and rescheduling, and repeated harassment of
 Hamad's Kenyan lawyers by security officials, his trial began
 in September. After 2 months of legal maneuvering, the
 Government of Zanzibar released Hamad on bail on November 20,
 1991. Court proceedings on the charges against him continue,
 and he has been forbidden to hold or attend meetings or to
 leave Zanzibar without permission. He is able, however, to
 receive visitors and give interviews.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's
 legal system, but retains Islamic courts to handle Muslim
 family cases such as divorce, child custody, and inheritance.
 Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only
 in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the
 Court of Appeal of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 f. .Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary (an estimated 2.1
 million Tanzanians are CCM members), the party structure
 permeates the private lives of all citizens. The CCM has party
 cadres at all levels of-society. Individual cells vary in size
 from single-family homes to large apartment buildings, and may
 contain from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid "10-cell" leaders are
 the party officials responsible for resolving problems at the
 grassroots level and reporting to authorities any suspicious
 
 
 406
 TANZANIA
 behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night patrol
 ,service within their neighborhoods.
 The Criminal Procedure Act of 1985 authorizes police officials
 (including members of the people's militia) to issue search
 warrants; however, the Act also authorizes searches of persons
 and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if
 circumstances are serious and urgent. In practice, warrants
 are rarely requested, and police and other security services
 search private homes and business establishments at will.
 Tanzanian security services monitor the telephones of many
 Tanzanian citizens, such as journalists and academics, and
 scrutinize correspondence. The security services also closely
 monitor the activities of foreign residents.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of "undesirable" or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of
 residence or origin if no work is found for them (see Sections
 2.d. and 6.c.).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for under the
 Constitution. However, these rights have been restricted in
 practice, although somewhat less so in 1991, and the Government
 and the party maintain powerful levers to control the press.
 There is substantial government and party ownership and control
 of the media.
 Former party chairman Nyerere initiated a wide-ranging public
 debate over the merits of Tanzania's one-party political system
 in February 1990, which continued throughout 1991. Much of
 this debate was covered in the government-owned media but was
 discussed more extensively in the several privately owned
 newspapers. These newspapers contained political articles
 severely critical of the Government and party and provided
 coverage of statements by Tanzania's few outspoken dissidents.
 Government and party newspapers also printed critical articles
 and letters, and reported critics' press conferences and
 statements.
 The mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the national press agency (Shihata), and the
 mainland radio facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a
 radio station and a television station. The Swahili-language
 newspaper Uhuru, which has a daily circulation of 100,000, is
 owned by the party. The Newspaper Act allows government
 seizure without a warrant of any publication and withdrawal of
 the license to publish at any time. Despite these
 restrictions, a privately owned weekly business newspaper and
 three tabloid-format newspapers'that cover political topics are
 now being published.
 The official media, representating the CCM's ideological
 stance, publicize and defend the party's and the Government's
 programs based upon extensive guidance from the Ministry of
 Information. Editorials are often written by senior government
 officials. There is no formal censorship, but journalists,
 even in the new, more liberal atmosphere, still exercise
 considerable self-censorship in criticizing government policies
 or officials. In August the Government announced plans to form
 
 
 407
 TANZANIA
 a press council, ostensibly to handle complaints against the
 press and to uphold standards of professionalism in
 journalism. However, many journalists expressed concern that
 the council will institutionalizb the Gove;nment's latent
 censorship.
 Visiting'foreign journalists must register with, and obtain a
 permit from, the Government which can be. a time-consuming
 process, sometimes-requiring intervention from a high-level
 official. The. importation of foreign publications is permitted.
 Academic freedom is officially assured, but restricted in
 practice. Most academics are employed in gQvernment-run
 institutions and have hesitatedto broach sensitive subjects in
 their classrooms and publications. -On May 12, 1990, the
 University.of Dar-Es Salaam was closed by the Government
 following student-boycotts over questionsof corruption, poor
 facilities, and representation. After the expulsion of 13
 student leaders, the university reopened in January 1991. In
 April the popular Vice Chancellor of the University of Dar es
 Salaam was removed over the protests of faculty and students
 and given an alternateassignment by President Mwinyi, who al.so
 serves as Chancellor of the University. In July three.
 outspoken professors-at the University were-transferred to
 positions.at other institutions; after. another public outcry,
 one transfer was rescinded and a second changed to an
 atttactive'diplomatic assignment. Students, formerly forced to
 join party-controlled organizations, began to form their own
 associations in 1990-1991.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although Tanzanians enjoyed an unprecedented opportunity in
 1991 to freely discuss political alternatives, the Government
 continued to restrict freedom of assembly, and association.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, any new association must be
 approved by the Ministry of HomeAffairs. In the countryside,
 peasant farmers are required to join agricultural cooperative
 societies, controlled by the ruling party, which have forced
 farmers to sell their crops at below-inarket prices, to buy
 products from-government monopolies, and to accept lengthy -
 delays-=up to 2 years--in payments. No competing organizat, ons
 have been approved.
 Permits must be obtained front the Government for any public
 meeting, political or otherwise, and are normally granted if
 the meeting is for a nonpolitical purpose. However, requests
 from multiparty advocates to hold seminars in several regions
 of the country were rejected in late 1991. Multiparty
 advocates called off- a planned mid-November demonstration in
 support-of President Chiluba's election in Zambia after senior
 government officials announced the police would forcibly
 prevent the assembly. In March, the Administrator General of
 Trustees revoked the registration of the Tanzania Legal
 Education Trust (Tanlet) after multiparty advocates proposed to
 hold a seminar under its sponsorship. Tanlet filed suit in the
 High Court to block the deregistration; at the end of 1991, the
 case was still pending.
 After repeated unsuccessful attempts to register his civil and
 legal rights organization, a leading dissident, James Mapalala,
 called for a public demonstration to protest the Ministry of
 Home Affairs' refusals; 27 of the demonstrators were arrested
 (see Section l.d.). Mapalala official-ly declared the
 establishment of a new political party, called the Civic
 
 
 408
 TANZANIA
 Movement, on November 6; on November 22, he and two of his
 supporters were arrested and charged with forming a political
 party contrary to the Societies Ordinance. Another opposition
 figure, Chief Abdullah Fundikira, and several of his supporters
 were arrested the same day. Fundikira had previously announced
 his intention to form a political party in early 1992. All six
 were released on their own recognizance the same day. In late
 December, the Minister of Home Affairs formally rejected
 Fundikira's application to register the UMD as a legal
 association and threatened further legal action against UMD
 organizers.
 A number of professional, business, legal, and medical
 associations exist, but have only begun to address political
 topics. Candidates for office in major sports clubs and
 cooperatives are screened by the appropriate government
 ministry, which also supervises their elections.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to go
 abroad for pilgrimages and other religious purposes. The
 Jehovah's Witnesses, who were banned in Tanzania for many
 years, have been allowed to return and to register-as an
 organization and have been permitted to- proselytize since 1988.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, short-term travel
 generally is not restricted within Tanzania, but citizens must
 follow national employment directives stipulating the nature of
 employment and location of residence. For years city dwellers
 unable to show proof of employment during police checks have
 been forced to return to rural areas as the Government has
 sought to control- increasing pressure on urban resources.
 Despite official policy (and constitutional guarantees) of
 freedom of movement and settlement, in some areas party
 officials still force peasants to live and work in collective
 (Ujamaa) villages. The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983
 requires local governments to ensure that every resident within
 their areas of jurisdiction engages in productive and lawful
 employment. Those not so employed are subject to transfer to
 another area where employment is available.
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain. Tax
 clearances and approval from the central bank are required in
 order to buy airline tickets, and those planning to travel or
 emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny by police and tax
 authorities. Tanzanians who leave the country without
 authorization are subject to prosecution on their return. The
 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try
 Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. Although
 it is legally possible for citizenship to be revoked, there
 have been no reports that this has been done in recent years.
 Parliament passed a bill in 1986 requiring the registration and
 identification of everyone over the age of 10 who resides in
 Tanzania, apparently in an effort to control foreign
 businessmen.
 With some exceptions, Tanzania generally has a liberal policy
 towards refugees and displaced persons. At the end of 1991,
 
 
 409
 TANZANIA
 there were an estimated 265,000 refugees and displaced persons
 in Tanzania. with the largest group (200,000) from Burundi. In
 1989,'15 Burundian refugees, whose repatriation was requested
 by the Burundi Government for aliegedly plotting against it,
 were jailed by a Tanzanian ministry order. One of the 15, the
 leader of the Burundi opposition group Palipehutu, died in
 detention in August 1990 (see Section l.a.). In July 1991, the
 others were released from jail and sent to a refugee settlement
 in southern Tanzania. Since the settlement is otherwise
 composed of Mozambican refugees, the transfer was seen as an
 attempt to keep the group isolated fom the rest of the Burundi
 refugee community which is located in the far western part of
 the country. All Somali refugees who had been detained in 1990
 awaiting a decision on their status were released from prison
 in early 1991 as-new waves of refugees from Somalia entered the
 country. Kenyans are denied access to asylum procedures in
 Tanzania. Toward the end of the year, South African exiles who
 have extraterritorial status in Tanzania began to be
 repatriated to South Africa.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Tanzanian people cannot legally remove the party in power
 or change'the one-party system. However, in 1991 there were
 growing'pressures, including within the party, for a multiparty
 political system. Multiparty advocates were led by the
 National Committee for Constitutional Reform (NCCR). In late
 1991, opposition leader James Mapalala announced the formation
 of a new political party called the Civic Movement.- The former
 Chairman of the NCCR, Chief Abdullah Fundikira, also announced
 his intention to form a political party in early 1992, to be
 called the Union for Multiparty Democracy. Both Mapalala and
 Fundikira were arrested on November 22 and charged with
 violation of the Societies Ordinance, then released on the same
 day (see Section 2.b.) While the Government exercised
 restraint in responding to these challenges, official
 pronouncements made it clear.that one-party rule would continue
 to be enforced, at least until the recommendations of the
 presidential commission are released -in March 1992 (see
 belbw). 'In this context, on the mainland wide-ranging debate
 and discussion have-been officially encouraged.' In Zanzibar
 and Pemba, however, attempts to organize political activity
 against union with the mainland continued to be suppressed.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members; any member
 of Parliament stripped of party membership loses his or her
 seat in Pdrliament. A 1985 amendment to the Constitution
 allows voters to choose between two CCM-selected candidates for
 75 percent of the 255 seats in the union Parliament. The
 remaining 25 percent are appointed by the Government and
 party-related organizations. Candidates are vetted and
 approved by the CCMCentral Committee, which often ignores the
 preferences expressed by local party caucuses. Elections for
 both the-Presidency and Parliament are held every 5 years, most
 recently in 1990.
 While voting is by secret ballot, reliable observers report
 that CCM officials ensure that the correct candidates are
 elected by appropriate majorities. Many Zanzibaris, for
 example, believe that the 1985 and 1990 elections in the
 islands were fraudulent. During the elections on Zanzibar,
 reliable observers noted that public sector employees were told
 to register to vote or face dismissal, and some 400 civil
 servants in Pemba who refused to register to vote were sent
 
 
 410
 TANZANIA
 home on compulsory leave without pay. Most were reinstated in
 1991; however, many were rehired at lower level positions than
 those they had held previously. Zanzibar election procedures
 are similar to those for the mainland, with the final selection
 being made by the Central Committee of the CCM, thus allowing
 the mainland CCM leadership to decide who will hold office.
 In February President Mwinyi appointed a commission, led by the
 Chief Justice of the High Court, to gather public opinion on
 the appropriate political system for Tanzania and to report to
 him by March 1992 on recommendations for changes, if any, in
 the system and Constitution. Repeated, reliable reports
 indicated that local party officials often seek to harass and
 intimidate persons who make antiparty statements to the
 commission. However, by the end of the year, statements by a
 variety of government and CCM officials indicated the
 acceptance of an expected recommendation to open the political
 system to competing parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Because of government opposition (see Section l.d.), there are
 no local groups devoted solely to monitoring human rights
 abuses in Tanzania. The Government resents outside inquiries
 into alleged violations of human rights. Representatives of
 international human rights groups have visited Tanzania, but
 persons they interviewed were subsequently questioned by the
 police. The New York-based Lawyers Committee For Human Rights
 issued a 7-page circular on the continued imprisonment of
 former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Sharif Hamad, which was
 distributed widely.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution does not permit discrimination based on
 nationality, tribe, origin, political affiliation, color,
 religion, or lifestyle. However,'the Barabaig people of
 central Tanzania have been subject for many years to government
 discrimination. The Barabaig and their attorneys maintain that
 the Government has illegally dispossessed them of their
 traditional lands in order to implement a government-run
 agricultural project. They have also accused project employees
 of beating them, killing their cattle, and despoiling tribal
 graves and religious sites. The Government has suppressed
 attempts by the local independent press to cover the story; it
 has also resisted Barabaig efforts to seek legal redress.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past
 decade to about 40,000 (plus 4,000 in Zanzibar). A
 business-oriented minority in a society historically committed
 to socialist policies and remaining both culturally and
 economically exclusive, the Asians are regarded with
 considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians, in part
 because of the Asian community's disproportionate influence in
 key sectors of the economy. Despite this, there are no laws or
 official policies discriminating against them. As the
 Government's economic policies evolve and greater stress is
 given to the private sector, Asians are encouraged to invest in
 areas previously reserved for the public sector and are a force
 in the reawakening economy.
 Both party and government constitutions endorse equality in the
 workplace. Nevertheless, strong traditional norms still divide
 
 
 411
 TANZANIA
 labor along-sexual lines and place women in a subordinate
 position. Women face widespread discrimination in access to
 educational opportunities, for example, and in the countryside
 are largely relegated to farming and raising children. '
 Statistics.for 1979, the latest available, showed 97 percent of
 economically active women were engaged in agriculture, the vast
 majority on small family farms.
 Progress on women's rights has been more noticeable in urban
 areas, where traditional values are weaker, but even there and
 in the public sector, which employs 80 percent of the salaried
 labor force, certain statutes restrict their access to some
 jobs or their hours of employment. According to a 1986
 estimate, women constituted less than 14 percent of the wage
 employment sector, and in 1991 most women were still
 concentrated in lower salaried civil'service positions such as
 clerks, secretaries, and telephone operators. A manpower
 survey showed that women occupied 20.1 percent of high and
 midlevel positions, but they have little access to
 decisionmaking positions.
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in
 heavily Muslim Zanzibar. Women there and in many parts of the
 country face discriminatory'restrictions on inheritance and
 ownership of property because of concessions by the Government
 and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of
 the Marriage Act provide for certain inheritance and property
 rights for women, application of customary, Islamic, or
 statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions of
 the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld
 discriminatory inheritance claims, primarily in rural areas
 where individuals practice a traditional lifestyle.
 Violence against women is widespread. Legal remedies exist but
 in practice are difficult to obtain. Traditional customs
 subordinating women'remain strong in both urban and rural areas
 and are often upheld by local magistrates. The husband has a
 free hand to treat his wife as he wishes, and wife beating
 occurs at all levels of society. The Government has no
 programs to inhibit this abuse.
 Although officially discouraged by the Government, female
 circumcision is still performed in approximately 20 of the
 country's 130 mainland ethnic groups. Government officials
 .have called for changes in customs which adversely affect
 women' but no legislation has been introduced which would
 specifically restrict the practice of female circumcision; In
 1991 a woman, accused of murder after a girl on whom she had
 performed a circumcision died, was discharged by a High Court
 justice. Seminars sponsored by various governmental and
 nongovernmental organizatidns are regularly held in an attempt
 to educate the public on the dangers of these and other
 traditional practices. Health authorities state the practice
 is declining, but nongdvernmental sources maintain it is on the
 rise, especially in central Tanzania.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join organizations of
 their own choice. The right of association is still limited to
 one labor union organization, formerly named JUWATA and now
 named the Organization of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU), to
 which all unionized workers belong. In August at an
 
 
 412
 TANZANIA
 extraordinary congress representatives of JUWATA declared the
 federation's independence and the end of its former role as a
 mass organization of the country's sole political party, the
 CCM, while at the same time pledging continued affiliation to
 the party. Legislation institutionalizing the restructuring of
 the trade union federation under the new name of OTTU was
 introduced in Parliament in late October. The bill drew wide
 criticism from the legal community, some Members of Parliament,
 and others for denying the right of workers to form their own
 trade union or unions. JUWATA has since been officially
 renamed OTTU, though its organization and policies remain
 unchanged.
 OTTU, like its predecessor JUWATA, represents approximately 60
 percent of the workers in industry and government but in
 reality has little influence on labor policy. Most business
 and labor leaders doubt that OTTU will actively protect worker
 rights during the projected 3-year transitional, restructuring
 period, culminating in union qeneral elections in 1994.
 Workers have the legal right to strike only after complicated
 and protracted mediation and conciliation procedures leading
 ultimately to the- Industrial Court. The Industrial Court
 receives direction from the Minister of Labor and Youth
 Development (who was also the Secretary-General of JUWATA until
 July). If OTTU is not satisfied with the decision of the
 Industrial Court, it can then conduct a legal strike. These
 procedures can prolong a dispute for months without resolving
 it. Pending a resolution, frustrated workers often stage
 impromptu wildcat strikes and walkouts.
 Although most strikes are in effect illegal (there were no
 legal strikes in 1991), there were no reports of government
 prosecutions against workers involved in walkouts and
 disputes. However, in April two representatives of
 approximately 60 primary teachers in Kigoma rural district were
 detained by the police and forced to give statements after an
 alleged illegal meeting over salary grievances. Work stoppages
 by doctors at Muhimbili medical center in July, teachers at the
 college of business education in August, nurses and other
 workers at Aga Khan Hospital in Dar es Salaam in September, and
 workers at the Kwimba district hospital in Mwanza in September
 did not result in arrests or prosecutions.
 OTTU has not changedJUWATA's policy of limiting its
 international affiliations to regional and pan-African trade
 union organizations, including the Organization of African
 Trade Union Unity and a newly created East African National
 Trade Unions Consultative Council.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is protected by law but limited to the
 private sector. Wages for employees of the Government and
 state-owned organizations, which account for the vast bulk of
 the salaried labor force, are set by the Government; OTTU does
 not bargain collectively on behalf of government employees.
 Although OTTU may negotiate on behalf of most private sector
 employees with the Association of Tanzania Employers,
 collective agreements must be submitted to the Industrial Court
 for approval. The Committee of Experts (COE) of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) observed again in 1991
 that these provisions are not in conformity with ILO Convention
 98 on Collective Bargaining and the Right to Organize. There
 are no export processing zones in Tanzania.
 
 
 413
 TANZANIA
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Employment Ordinance prohibits forced labor. However,.for
 a number of years the COE has observed that provisions of
 various Tanzanian laws are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29
 and 105 on forced labor-. Again in 1991, the ILO's June
 conference criticized the Government's failure to amend the
 offending laws despite the fact that a drafting effort has been
 under way for several years. Specifically, the Human Resources
 Deployment Act (1983) requires every local government authority
 to ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in
 school engage in productive or other lawful employment. In the
 past, massive police raids were used to round up persons who
 had kio evidence of'employment. The law has recently been
 interpreted more leniently, but concern over the high crime
 rate and the increase in the number of street beggars
 encouraged the Government to again conduct police raids against
 the urban unemployed,.including a May roundup of beggars in Dar
 es Salaam. Many regional and district authorities pass laws
 requiring farmers to plant specified cash and food crops and to
 keep minimum acreages under cultivation. Penalties for
 violating these requirements include fines and imprisonment.
 Enforcement of such laws.tends to be haphazard at best, however.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 By law children under the age of 15 are prohibited from
 working-, but this provision applies only to the formal wage
 sector in both urban and rural areas and not to children
 working on family farms or herding domestic livestock. Persons
 between the ages of 15 and 18 may be employed, provided the
 work is safe and not injurious to health, but they are not
 allowed to work between 6 p.m. and 6.a.m. Enforcement by the
 Ministry of Labor- and Youth- Development in the formal wage
 sector is good but sporadic to nonexistent in the rapidly
 growing informal sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There is a legal minimum wage-for employment in the formal
 sector which was increased in July., However, OTTU often
 negotiates higher minimum wages on an employer-by-employer
 basis, depending on the financial status of the business. A
 worker paid at the minimum rate, even when supplemented with
 various benefits such as housing and transport allowances and
 food subsidies, could not provide an adequate standard of
 living for a family.
 In July-President Mwinyi announced a change from a 6-day
 workweek to a 5-day, 40-hour workweek for government
 employees. Most private employers retained a 6-day, 40-hour
 workweek schedule for workers. Working hours in the private
 sector are regulated. In general, women may not be employed
 between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the
 workplace, and an occupational health and safety factory
 inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is in
 place, managed by the Ministry of Labor and Youth Development.
 Its effectiveness, however, is minimal. OTTU officials have
 claimed that enforcement of labor standards is fairly effective
 in the formal sector, but no verification studies have been
 performed. Local observers note that enforcement of labor
 standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
 
 
 414
