 TANZANIA
 
 Tanzania is a one-party parliamentary republic.
 Tanzania's President Julius Nyerere has consistently
 called for majority rule in southern Africa with
 guarantees for minority rights. Nyerere opposes
 apartheid but at the same time has been one of the
 few African leaders to condemn the regime of Uganda's
 Idi Amin, leading several observers to call him "the
 conscience of Africa." An avowed socialist at home
 and abroad, he is in the forefront of the North-
 South dialogue and is one of the leading theoreti-
 cians calling for more resources to be transferred
 from the economically developed countries to the
 less-developed nations.
 In contrast to its stance on violations of human
 rights in other countries, Tanzania tends to ignuore,
 or at best to justify in the interests of state
 security, most domestic violations of human right..
 Detention laws are usually described by government
 leaders as a necessary evil, and ideology subordinates
 the rights of the individual to the needs of the
 state.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture has occurred on occasion but is not condoned
 in Tanzania. In recent years the government has
 sought to restrain officials and punish violators.
 Two ministers and several other officials were
 forced to retire in January, 1977 on the grounds
 that police within their jurisdiction (but without
 their knowledge) had used torture against suspects.
 Torture was also likely in the case of a number of
 prisoners held on Zanzibar in recent years. After
 government review, the forced confessions of many
 of these prisoners have been disallowed as evidence;
 accordingly several of these prisoners have had their
 sentences reduced and some have been released.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 
 (117)
 
 
 118
 .A permanent commission has just been established to
 protect individuals from abuse by authorities.
 Prisons, however, are seriously overcrowded and have
 minimal facilities. The death penalty has rarely
 been implemented.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Under the national security laws the government may
 indefinitely detain without trial or public hearing
 any individuals considered dangerous to the safety,
 good order or interests of the country. Precise figures
 on the number of detainees are unavailable. The. latest
 Amnesty International Report (November 1977) estimates
 the number of detainees to be between 1,000 and 1,500.
 These include several members of southern African
 liberation movements.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The threat of prosecution is used for harassment on some
 occasions, and occasionally cases are kept pending for
 long periods, even though the government realizes there
 may eventually be an acquittal. In cases removed from
 the political context, the right to fair public trial
 is respected.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Invasions of the homehave occurred in the past,
 but have recently been halted as a result of
 criticism by President Nyerere.
 2. Governmental Polices Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care and Education
 Tanzanian socialism is redistributive. It has been
 pursued with the goal of sharing the limited resources
 of the country; there has been a substantial redistri-
 bution of wealth. The government's economic policies
 focus on raising the standard of living of the rural
 poor and providing services to these people.
 Tanzania's experiment has worked for the most part,
 in that the resources are finding their way to the
 
 
 119
 *ural sector and that few individuals or families
 have become wealthy. The salaries of government
 officials are strictly limited, as is access to
 automobiles, quarters and other such job-related
 benefits in which corruption might play a role. The
 majority of the population shares in the nation's
 wealth, and poor economic performance can usually be
 traced to inefficiency or strict adherence to ideology.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of religion is observed in Tanzania, but
 other basic civil rights are subordinated to the
 achievement of Tanzanian socialist objectives.
 Freedom of assembly is subordinated to the wishes of
 the party. Circulation of foreign books and magazines
 is fairly free, but local press, media and educational
 institutions present a single propagandistic point
 of view. Public dissent with basic policies and
 ideology is not permitted, but private intellectual
 inquiry does. not seem to have been directly impaired.
 The labor movement is integrated into the government/
 party structure. The government has the authority to
 veto agreements arrived at through its own collective
 bargaining process.
 b. Freedom of Movement within a Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Movement within Tanzania is unfettered, although
 citizens without jobs are required to move to rural
 villages where they engage in subsistence agriculture.
 Foreign travel is without restraint other than strict
 passport requirements. Emigration is not obstructed
 by government regulation.
 c. Freedom to Pari"pa-te i teg    t1o-cal .
 Process
 Tanzania is a one-party parliamentary republic. Its
 constitution confirms the party in its role as sole
 architect of national policy. Opposition parties are
 not permitted. About half of parliament is directly
 elected by universal suffrage, with two candidates
 
 
 120
 Iboth approved by the party) running against each other
 for a single seat. Incumbents have been challenged and
 defeated. Remaining members are appointed or elected
 without opposition. The island of Zanzibar retains
 internal autonomy. Its first elections since inde-
 pendence in 1963 were held in December 1977, and the
 process went off smoothly.
 4. Governmental Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Amnesty International conducted a campaign against
 the treason trial of a number of people on Zanzibar
 over the past two years but did not have on the spot
 observers. While the Zanzibar Government claimed
 that outside criticism did not affect the course of
 the trial, nearly all of the death sentences were
 commuted in January 1977, except for those tried in
 absentia who are in jail on the mainland and will not
 be returned for execution. A number of Zanzibaris
 involved in this trial were acquitted after having
 served several years in prison.
 Tanzania played host in September 1976 to a seminar
 sponsored by the International Commission of Jurists
 on "Human Rights, Their Protection and the Rule of Law
 in a One-Party State". Although the ICJ conducted no
 investigations during the seminar, Tanzania's willing-
 ness to host a conference of this nature, which could
 call attention to its own domestic shortcomings, is
 significant. No other requests for such investigations
 have come recently.
 
 
