 TANZANIA
 Tanzania is ruled by Julius K. Nyerere, who has been President
 and Chairman of the country's single political party almost
 continuously since independence in 1961. He has run unopposed
 in four elections. Opposition parties and candidates are
 prohibited. Within this one-party system, voters have some
 choice of contending political candidates for Parliament and
 local government, and parliamentary members have frequently
 been voted out of office. Tanzania's military, the Tanzania
 People's Defense Force, has played a regional role outside
 Tanzania: it was instrumental in overthrowing the Amiin regime
 in Uganda and has an advisory role in Mozambique. Until
 recently it maintained a small contingent on the Seychelles.
 Tanzania is a single-party 'socialist' state, although its
 legal and parliamentary systems were originally patterned on
 the British model. Zanzibar is ruled by the same party as is
 the mainland, but exercises a considerable degree of autonomy;
 its legal and parliamentary systems differ substantially from
 those of the mainland. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi, the sole
 legal political party in Tanzania, controls activity at all
 levels of society. Through its system of 10-family cells, it
 monitors even the most remote areas of the country.
 In 1984, the economy continued to deteriorate despite
 government efforts tr, check the decline. Although Tanzania
 ranks very high among per capita aid recipients, it remains
 one of the world's poorest countries. However, the Government
 has had success in educating its citizens and in bringing
 social services to the rural population.
 Tanzania's party and national Constitutions provide for equal
 rights to all citizens regardless of sex, race, ethnic group,
 or status. Zanzibar's new 1984 constitution guarantees
 freedom of movement, speech, religion, and association. In
 practice, however, such legal rights have not always been
 observed, particularly freedom of speech. Both on the
 mainland and in Zanzibar religion, custom, and rigid
 tradition, especially in rural areas, often militate against
 the exercise of these rights, particularly with regard to the
 treatment and equality of women. Government policy does not
 permit the use of torture; however, it occasionally occurs.
 Police officials have been successfully prosecuted and
 sentenced to stiff terms of imprisonment for torture, abuse,
 and death of prisoners. Convicts are required to work without
 pay either in construction or on prison farms.
 During 1984, the Tanzanian Government took steps to address
 several of the problems which had marred its human rights
 record during 1983. In September 1984, the Government started
 a preliminary inquiry into the events surrounding the alleged
 plot by some 30 individuals to overthrow the Government in
 early 1983. While the defendants remained in custody under
 the 1962 Preventive Detention Act, under which detainees can
 be held indefinitely and have greatly restricted visitation
 and representation rights, the preliminary inquiry was the
 first step towards bringing the defendants back into the
 normal legal process. In late December the High Court
 announced that 19 of the detained would be charged with
 treason. The fate of the 11 uncharged individuals remains
 uncertain. On September 24, the Government allowed the
 
 
 342
 TANZANIA
 extraordinary legislation which was used to launch the
 campaign against economic saboteurs to lapse. New legislation
 now affords persons accused of economic sabotage the full
 protection of Tanzania's legal systems. However, those
 persons charged under the previous legislation will still be
 tried by special tribunals, which do not provide full
 procedural safeguards. Finally, the Human Resources
 Deployment Act of May 1983, which requires local governments
 to ensure that all residents are engaged in lawful, productive
 activity, was unofficially suspended in late 1983 while the
 Government formulated plans to institute the Act without
 massive roundups and deportations to the countryside. In an
 effort to revive the Act and to implement it in a systematic
 way, Dar es Salaam city officials conducted a census on
 December 2 and 3, 1984. Nonetheless, there are few signs that
 active implementation of the Act will begin soon.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no reports in 1984 of politically motivated
 killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no evidence of any cases of disappearance of
 individuals because of either governmental or non-governmental
 actions.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Tanzanian Government opposes the use of torture as a
 matter of policy. Nonetheless, there have been indications
 during the past year that torture has at times been inflicted
 by police and prison authorities. There is widespread belief
 in Dar es Salaam that many of the 30 individuals arrested in
 early 1983 for their participation in an attempted coup d'etat
 were tortured. There were also reports that some individuals
 detained during the government campaign against 'economic
 saboteurs" were beaten. Beating of detained individuals by
 the police almost invariably takes place at the time of
 apprehension or when the arrested person is first taken to the
 police station. In 1984, two policemen were held for killing
 people in two separate incidents involving unlawful use of
 force.
 Tanzania's prisons are generally unhealthful, unsanitary, and
 overcrowded. The overcrowding was severely exacerbated by the
 large influx of detainees as a result of the Government's
 arrest of more than 4,000 people in 1983 and 1984 during the
 .economic saboteur' roundups. Prison conditions are largely a
 result of Tanzania's economic difficulties and not a
 deliberate government effort to subject prisoners to inhuman
 conditions.
 
 
 343
 TANZANIA
 Traditional defense groups in Central Tanzania called Sungu
 Sungu or Wasalama, encouraged by both government and party
 officials in 1983 and 1984 to help eliminate theft in some
 areas, often used extreme tactics and occasionally took on the
 appearance of vigilante groups. In late May, armed clashes
 between over 3,000 Sungu Sungu and villagers led to the death
 of 47 Sungu Sungu and the arrest of about 100 villagers. In
 June, 16 members of the Sungu Sungu went on trial for the
 murder of 2 villagers who were suspected of cattle rustling.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under the 1962 Preventive Detention Act, police and security
 officers can, with a written order from the President, arrest
 and detain indefinitely any person considered dangerous to
 public order or national security. Such detainees have no
 recourse to the judicial system once the authorities present a
 valid detention order to a magistrate. There have been cases,
 however, where the detainees have been freed when the
 authorities could not produce the order. Under this Act, a
 committee was established to oversee the treatment of
 detainees; the committee reportedly meets only sporadically.
 The Act further requires that the detainee be informed of the
 reasons for detention within 15 days. This is rarely done.
 Persons held under this Act do not have the right to be
 visited by lawyers or family as is permitted other prisoners.
 While exact figures are unavailable, some 1,000 individuals
 were detained in 1984 under presidential decree for alleged
 violations of the Economic Sabotage Act. Since adoption of
 the new legislation on September 24, 1984, which placed
 persons newly accused of economic crimes within the normal
 judicial processes and cleared the backlog of 'economic
 sabotage" cases, the number of persons held under the
 Preventive Detention Act has dropped considerably to
 approximately 500.
 In January 1984, several people in Zanzibar were arrested in
 connection with the resignation of Aboud Jumbe as President.
 Wolfgang Dourado, who had been the Zanzibar Attorney General,
 was linked to persons seeking a dissolution of the Union of
 Zanzibar and the mainland and was detained under the
 Preventive Detention Act for 15 weeks. Several prominent
 persons who had been held under the Act for several years were
 released without explanation in 1984. This group included
 Abdul Haji, former leader of the Aga Khan Society and a
 prominent member of the Ismali community. In recent months,
 the Government seems to have moved away from the policy of
 holding people under the Preventive Detention Act instead of
 pressing criminal charges. Tanzania does not exile citizens.
 Tanzanian law requires that a person arrested for crimes other
 than the security violations discussed above appear within 24
 hours before a magistrate to be charged. The prosecution may
 ask that the accused be detained for 14 days without bail and
 may request extensions of the period. In practice, when
 authorities have not followed proper criminal procedures,
 defendants have successfully overturned convictions on
 appeal. Despite the legal safeguards, the Deputy Minister of
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 23
 
 
 344
 TANZANIA
 Home Affairs revealed in March that an estimated 4,000 persons
 had been held for periods of up to 6 years because of
 incomplete police investigations. In May, a woman who had
 been held for eight years without trial was released for lack
 ofl\evidence.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The mainland legal system is based on the British model with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public and the
 more sensational are covered by the press. While an
 independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated, some
 members of the legal community, including judicial officers,
 have complained that the legal system is being corrupted
 through bribery. Although the allegations remain largely
 undocumented, there is at least one confirmed report of a
 magistrate demanding a bribe to issue a court order. There
 has been no suggestion that the Court of Appeals and the High
 Court are corrupt. Judges are appointed by the executive with
 the advice of the Chief Justice.
 The court system on Zanzibar, which has considerable autonomy,
 was revised by the Zanzibar Constitution promulgated in late
 1984. Under the system used throughout 1984, defendants could
 not be represented by attorneys, but could request a relative
 or neighbor to represent them as long as no fee was paid.
 With the exception of High Court judges, no members of the
 Zanzibar judiciary were required to have any training in the
 law. The Supreme Council, which could review decisions made
 by the High Court, was attached to the Revolutionary Council
 and accountable to its President. There existed, therefore,
 considerable possibility of political interference in the
 judiciary in Zanzibar.
 Under the new Zanzibar Constitution, which should be
 implemented in 1985, People's Courts, which did not provide
 defendants with normal legal procedures, were abolished. The
 court system will be integrated into the legal system of the
 United Republic of Tanzania for the first time. High Court
 judges will now be required to have both a degree in law and
 several years' practice prior to appointment to the bench.
 Defendants will be allowed the right to legal representation.
 The new Constitution retains Islamic, or Kadhi, courts to deal
 with marriage, divorce, inheritance, and childcare cases
 involving only Muslims. Cases concerning constitutional
 issues and Islamic law will be appealable only within the
 Zanzibar courts; for the first time, all other cases may be
 appealed to the Court of Appeal of the United Republic of
 Tanzania.
 The passage of the new law on economic sabotage in 1984, which
 replaced the Economic Sabotage Act of 1983, appears to have
 ended a period in which many perceived that the Government
 sought to circumvent its inability to obtain convictions
 within the regular court system. However, the special
 tribunals, established under the Economic Sabotage Act of
 1983, which will remain active until cases entered before
 September 24, 1984, are completed, bypass normal legal
 procedures by suspending rules of evidence, the right of
 representation, and the appeal process.
 
 
 345
 TANZAN IA
 Although the situation appears to have improved, there have
 been reports of government harassment of attorneys in
 controversial cases, such as the coup trial which was
 reactivated in late 1984; and individual government employees,
 on occasion, are accused of using their offices to attempt to
 influence decisions. The High Court has asked magistrates to
 report any such attempts. Military courts do not try
 civilians, and there are no security courts. Defendants in
 civil and military courts (but not in the recently abolished
 special tribunals) may appeal decisions to the High Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Through the party structure, the Government intervenes in the
 private lives of people. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi has party
 cadres covering the smallest units of society. The *ten-cello
 leader is the party official responsible for monitoring events
 and resolving problems at the grass-roots level. "Ten-cell"
 leaders receive an introductory session of evening classes on
 political indoctrination. Individual cells vary in size from
 single-family homes to large apartment buildings. Hence,
 individual ten-cells may have anywhere from 20 to several
 hundred individuals. Ten-cell leaders, who are unpaid, act as
 intermediaries between individuals and the Government and are
 required to resolve problems which the people in their area
 may have. They also monitor store rationing to ensure
 .equitable" distribution and report to government or party
 authorities any suspicious behavior or events within their
 neighborhood.
 The party permits exceptions to be made for police to search
 without a warrant for unemployed persons and under other
 special circumstances. There also have been numerous
 instances of forced entry, search, and harassment of persons
 suspected of economic crimes. There is evidence that mail is
 sometimes opened and read by authorities, although the opening
 of mail is exceptional. Those who are not considered
 productively employed are not allowed to remain in urban
 areas. Some have returned voluntarily to their home regions;
 others have been returned under escort or sent to other rural
 areas selected by the Government and forced to work.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are limited in practice. The mainland
 Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the National Press Agency, and the mainland radio
 facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a radio and
 television station. The Swahili-language paper, which has a
 daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by the party. There is
 one monthly Catholic paper with a circulation of 120,000,
 which covers largely religious news. "Urusi Leo,* a Soviet
 publication, has a weekly circulation of 25,000. The official
 media, as organs of the state, usually present a unified point
 of view on important policy matters and do not criticize the
 premises of overall government domestic or foreign policies.
 The Government has encouraged criticism by the media of
 corruption, mismanagement, and "economic sabotage,* and
 permitted publication of frank letters to the editor which are
 
 
 346
 TANZAN IA
 often highly critical of abuses of the system. Radio
 discussions and symposia have proposed wide-ranging changes in
 Tanzania's form of government. This criticism is allowed in
 the context of officially sanctioned debate on the new
 constitutions. Tanzanian citizens show few inhibitions about
 expressing criticisms of the system in private conversations.
 Visiting foreign reporters have considerable freedom,
 including access to government and party leaders. Academic
 freedom of inquiry is officially guaranteed; however, in
 practice, most academicians, relying on the government-run
 educational system for their livelihood, appear to limit their
 exploration of sensitive subjects. The importation of foreign
 books and periodicals is severely limited by the acute
 shortage of foreign exchange.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The fact that Tanzania is a one-party state limits the freedom
 of public assembly and association. Legal political
 gatherings may be organized only by the party or its
 subgroups. The Government has cracked down on student
 demonstrations in recent years and ensured that student
 organizations are party controlled. Students are inhibited
 from public criticism by concern that their future employment
 prospects may be jeopardized.
 There is one labor union which is run by the party; no other
 unions may operate. Strikes are prohibited by law. All
 businesses and government offices with more than a few
 employees are required to have a union chapter. At the local
 level, the union is charged with promoting employee welfare.
 It has little influence on labor policy. Few professional
 associations exist and those that do are carefully
 non-political.
 The International Labor Organization remains concerned about
 convict labor in prisons and several ordinances requiring work
 by adults in communal agriculture and development projects.
 In March 1984, six peasants in Litapuasi village in
 southwestern Tanzania were convicted of refusing to do work on
 a communal farm. The ILO is especially concerned about the
 Human Resources Deployment Act (see d. below).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Tanzania is an essentially secular society which permits
 freedom of religion. The population of the mainland is
 roughly one-third Christian, one-third Muslim, and one-third
 animist. There appear to be no political or social advantages
 or disadvantages attached to membership in any given faith on
 the mainland. While there has been a degree of controversy in
 overwhelmingly Muslim Zanzibar regarding state support of
 certain mosques, Zanzibaris are generally free to practice any
 faith they choose without interference.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibar requirement for travel documentation
 between Zanzibar and the mainland, the Government generally
 does not restrict travel within the country. Tanzania
 continues to require its citizens to follow national
 
 
 347
 TANZANIA
 employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and
 where they reside. For years, city dwellers have been the
 subject of police checks for proof of employment. Those
 without proper documentation have, in some cases, been forced
 to return to the countryside in an effort to control
 increasing pressure on urban resources and to reverse
 declining levels of agricultural production. The Human
 Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local governments to
 ensure that every resident within their area of jurisdiction
 engages in productive or other lawful employment. Those
 persons who do not are subject to transfer to another area and
 will be required to engage in lawful and gainful employment
 (as defined by the Government). While this Act has not yet
 been fully implemented, authorities expect that the most
 affected group will be the young school-leavers who have
 migrated from the countryside to the urban areas in search of
 work. The Government still prosecutes peasants who return to
 their old villages without permission.
 In late 1983, the Dar es Salaam regional authorities launched
 a series of sweeps designed to net the unemployed. Thousands
 were arrested and hundreds were sent out from Dar es Salaam to
 work on national coffee, tea, cashew nut, sugar cane, or sisal
 plantations. In January, 1,623 people were rounded up in
 Dar es Salaam, 225 of whom were detained for further
 questioning as unemployed. While large-scale roundups ceased
 in January, on May 26, 157 people were arrested in
 Dar es Salaam for loitering and being unemployed.
 Implementation of the Human Resources Deployment Act has been
 delayed while municipal authorities search for ways of
 enforcing it without the abuses that marked the October 1983
 sweeps. In an effort to revive the Act, the Dar es Salaam
 City Council conducted a house-by-house survey of all urban
 residents on December 2-3, 1984. Plans call for other city
 governments to conduct similar surveys. After the surveys,
 those who are unemployed or unproductively employed could be
 repatriated to their home villages or sent to
 yet-to-be-established centers where they will be engaged,
 presumably, in agriculture or in small craft workshops.
 During the height of the campaign against "economic saboteurs'
 in 1983, roadblocks were ubiquitous. During 1984 the number
 of roadblocks declined significantly in the country as a
 whole, but in areas where surplus crops were produced,
 roadblocks reappeared to prevent the private movement of food
 within the country. On November 1 the Government instructed
 regional governments to end all roadblocks aimed at stopping
 the free flow of food in Tanzania. The only other roadblocks
 are in border areas and in areas where disease or poaching are
 a problem.
 There are no restrictions on repatriation. The
 Extra-territorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try
 Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. Passports
 are required for foreign travel and can be difficult to
 obtain. Those who are successful in obtaining a passport must
 still obtain tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank
 to buy tickets. In practice, those planning to emigrate are
 subject to intense scrutiny by police and tax authorities.
 Those who do leave the country without authorization are
 subject to prosecution. Although it is legally possible for
 
 
 348
 TANZANIA
 citizenship to be revoked, there have been no reports recently
 that this has been done.
 In 1983, President Nyerere was awarded the Nansen Prize of the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for his
 outstanding assistance to refugees. There is a refugee
 population of about 100,000 of whom approximately 80 percent
 are from Burundi, the rest mainly from Uganda and Zaire. Some
 30,000 Rwandans were offered naturalization in 1980, although
 only a few have so far acquired Tanzanian citizenship. The
 same offer of citizenship is expected to be made to the
 Burundians when they become self-sufficient. In general, the
 same services and rights available to citizens are offered to
 refugees insofar as local resources permit. Tanzania's
 refugee acceptance is largely limited to persons from
 contiguous countries. Refugees from other countries are
 required to find resettlement elsewhere. South Africans who
 entered Tanzania as members of 'liberation' groups are in a
 different category and are allowed to remain in the country.
 However, those who resign or are expelled from their
 "liberation' organizations are refused work and residence
 permits and several have been imprisoned. The United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees remains actively engaged in
 resettling over 100 former members of such groups.
 In October 1983, Tanzania and Kenya exchanged some two dozen
 of their respective nationals who had settled in their two
 countries as political refugees. Because many of the
 individuals had been recognized as refugees by both
 governments and the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR), the exchange was viewed by some foreign
 governments and by the UNHCR as a violation of refugee rights
 and agreements, and led to representations by U.N. officials
 to the Tanzanian and Kenyan Governments.
 In late 1983 and early 1984, over 10,000 Banyarwanda with
 large numbers of cattle were reported to have entered Tanzania
 from Uganda. The Tanzanian Government believed that these
 people were Rwandan refugees who had already been granted
 refuge in Uganda and was therefore reluctant to accept them
 for permanent refuge in Tanzania. Following several rounds of
 discussions with Ugandan authorities, and after careful
 screening of the Banyarwanda, the Tanzanian Government
 discovered that the situation had been exaggerated and that it
 was only dealing with some 3,000 people, of whom only about
 150 had arrived in 1984. The 3,000 people were placed in a
 camp and as of the end of 1984 were awaiting resettlement
 elsewhere in Tanzania.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the party.
 President Nyerere directs the party structure and bureaucracy,
 which are the dominant forces in the country. There are no
 overt opposition groups, although the coup plot discovered in
 January 1983, and the publicity associated with the trial of
 the plotters in late 1984, suggested at least some internal
 opposition to the regime. Some Tanzanian nationals living
 abroad who consider themselves political exiles advocate a
 change of government. Under the Constitution which was in
 effect throughout 1984, one-half of the national parliament
 
 
 349
 TANZANIA
 was chosen in elections, with only limited choice of
 contending candidates approved by the party. The other half
 was composed of members appointed by the Government and the
 various 'mass organizations" associated with the party. The
 new Union Constitution adopted in late 1984 will increase the
 proportion of representatives chosen in elections. Any
 citizen is free to enter the first stage election process.
 The National Executive Committee of the party chooses at least
 two candidates from a list provided by each constituency to
 compete in the general election. Voters have registered
 dissatisfaction by sending incumbent members of Parliament to
 defeat. Following recent changes in the party constitution,
 candidates will be rank-ordered on the ballot according to
 their party record. Party membership and, hence, active
 participation in the political process are not open to anyone
 engaged in private business. This includes landlords and
 directors and shareholders of private companies. The
 restriction is not uniformly applied, but serves as a
 mechanism of control over party members. The business
 community traditionally consisted largely of Asians, but is
 slowly being joined by more and more Africans.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives. Under the 1979
 Zanzibar Constitution which remained in effect throughout
 1984, its powers were severely limited and only 10 of its 97
 members were directly elected. The new Zanzibar Constitution
 which was promulgated at the end of 1984 appears to have
 satisfied broad-based public demand for a more popular,
 representative, directly elected legislature in Zanzibar.
 Under the new Constitution the House of Representatives will
 have from 40 to 55 directly elected members, and only 15
 members will be appointed, 10 by the President of Zanzibar and
 5 by the Women's Committee of Zanzibar.
 Julius Nyerere has run unopposed in the four presidential
 elections since independence. While voters have the option of
 voting 'no" by secret ballot or staying home, local party
 officials bring pressure to bear in elections to ensure a high
 turnout. There have been reports of election fixing and
 intimidation of village leaders both on the mainland and on
 Zanzibar. In an effort to break down ethnic and linguistic
 distinctions, the election code requires that campaigns be
 conducted only in Swahili and prohibits references to ethnic
 and regional origin. An appeal process is available to
 candidates who feel that the code has been violated, and a
 number of appeals have been successful.
 Women have been encouraged to take an active role in politics
 and government. Using its powers of direct appointment, the
 Government has ensured that about 20 percent of the membership
 of village councils is female. In late 1984, there were 2
 women cabinet ministers, 1 woman on the 18-member Central
 Committee of the party, and 13 women on the National Executive
 Committee.
 The party's proposal to change the country's Constitution
 attracted widespread public debate within Tanzania. Criticism
 ranged from the basic form of government and the single party
 political system to the question of the nature of the union
 between the mainland and Zanzibar. The party and the
 Government were not required to heed the public's desire, but
 the constitutions which were promulgated were different from
 
 
 350
 TANZANIA
 those which were originally proposed. Both the Union
 Parliament and the Zanzibar House of Representatives
 introduced amendments to the draft constitutions presented to
 them. After debate, which was covered extensively by the
 media, both drafts were adopted with revisions added by the
 legislators.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Tanzania is a party to U.N. convenants on human rights and has
 signed but not yet ratified the Organization of African Unity
 Charter on Human and People's Rights. Tanzania is a member of
 the UN Human Rights Commission. The International Labor
 Organization has raised the issue of forced labor a number of
 times with the Tanzanian Government. In its 1984 report
 (covering 1983), Amnesty International expressed concern about
 indefinite detention without charge or trial, and about the
 involuntary repatriation of refugees to Kenya. However, some
 of the detainees about whom Amnesty has in the past inquired
 have been set free, and in 1984 there was an apparent return
 to a general regard for the rule of law. The Government's
 concern for international opinion was evident in its decision
 to release foreigners detained in the economic sabotage
 campaign provided they left Tanzania, as well as in its
 decision to release Wolfgang Dourado from detention in May
 1984. Individuals can appeal to the Permanent Commission of
 Enquiry, established in 1965 as a balance to the possibility
 of abuse of power in a one-party state. Freedom House
 considers Tanzania "not free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Tanzania had a 1982 per capita gross national product of $270,
 a 10 percent decline from 1981. More than 90 percent of the
 population of about 21.1 million are peasant farmers living in
 rural areas. The official population growth rate was 3.2
 percent in 1984; the actual rate is probably higher.
 Unemployment and underemployment have traditionally caused
 serious social problems in the cities. These problems have
 become more acute as the country's economic situation has
 worsened.
 The economy has suffered considerably from a sharp drop in
 agricultural output. Government pricing policies,
 traditionally designed to keep consumer prices low for urban
 dwellers, and a consistent pattern of late payments to
 producers and shortages of necessary items, such as
 fertilizers, have contributed to a decrease in the growth of
 export crops by producers. Many of these farmers have
 increasingly reverted to food crop agriculture. Recent
 producer price increases, consumer price hikes, and more
 systematic payment to producers by state-owned enterprises
 represent government efforts to reverse this trend.
 There has been a parallel decrease in the output of
 manufactured goods, primarily due to poor management in
 state-owned enterprises and an inability to finance imports of
 raw materials and spare parts. The economy has suffered
 further from worldwide inflation, high energy costs, and
 continued low prices for export crops.
 
 
 351
 TANZAN IA
 The Government continued efforts to expand health and
 education facilities. Since independence in 1961, life
 expectancy has risen from 42 to 52.9 years. Infant mortality
 remains high, largely as a result of malnutrition and the
 resulting lack of resistance to disease. More than 42 percent
 of the population had access to clean water in 1982, up from
 39 percent in 1975.
 Since the institution of free and compulsory education for all
 in 1977, the vast majority of children of primary school age
 have been enrolled. There is growing public demand for more
 emphasis on basic education, and concern over the severely
 restricted number of places in secondary schools and
 universities.
 Adult education is available and encouraged. According to
 World Bank figures for 1978, 73.5 percent of the adult
 population is literate. United Nations Educational,
 Scientific, and Cultural Organization statistics for 1980
 indicate that 79 percent of the adult population is literate,
 the highest literacy rate in Africa. This represents an
 increase of more than 69 percent in the literacy rate since
 1960. In practice, tradition and social attitudes have
 seriously limited the participation of women beyond the
 primary school level. In addition, women suffer
 disproportionately from the increased abuse of the examination
 system which now allows a significant number of unqualified
 students to enter secondary schools.
 For most of Tanzania's ethnic groups, women's traditional role
 has been that of mother and field laborer, and women are still
 proportionately underrepresented in government, the
 professions, and in skilled occupations. Social limitations
 on the role of women are particularly pervasive on Zanzibar.
 Women in many parts of the country continue to suffer
 discriminatory restrictions on inheritance and ownership of
 property because of concessions to custom and Islamic law.
 Customary and Islamic law in many areas dictate that daughters
 receive smaller shares of their father's property than do
 sons. Although the practice is declining, female circumcision
 is still performed by a minority within some 20 of the
 country's 120 mainland ethnic groups. Notwithstanding the
 obstacles, the Government has made progress in its efforts to
 ensure equality for women, especially in the urban areas where
 traditional values have a weaker hold on the population. The
 Union of Tanzanian Women, a wing of the party, is dedicated to
 the eradication of inequality of women in all spheres of
 society.
 The Asian community, estimated at 40,000, is both culturally
 and economically exclusive, a business-oriented minority in a
 society committed to 'socialist" policies. Although official
 government policy is one of equal rights for all citizens,
 reports of harassment and discrimination against Tanzanian
 Asians by individual government officials are widespread. In
 recent months, there have been reports that harassment of the
 Asian community is declining and the Asian entrepreneurs are
 being encouraged to invest in areas previously reserved to the
 public sector.
 
 
 352
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TANZANIA
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       19.6      7.9     6.4
 LOANS ..............       5.0      5.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       14.6     2.9      6.4
 A.AID  .................       10.6     0.0      1.2
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      10.6      0.0      1.2
 (SEC.SUPPASSST ...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......        7.6      6.5      3.9
 LOANS ..............       5.0      5.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       2.6      1.5      3.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        5.0      5.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....        5.0      5.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR....         0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE I1-TOTAL ........        2.6      1.5      3.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.9      0.1     2.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         1.7     1.4      1.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.4     1.4      1.3
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ............. 1.4           1.4      1.3
 PEACE CORPS ......        1.4     1.4      1.3
 NARCOTICS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      0.0      0.0      0-.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS .............. 0.0           0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.INTL IL.EO.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       19.6      7.9     6.4
 LOANS ................     5.0      5.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       14.6     2.9      6.4
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL .........  111.7    74.2     38.9   1288.4
 IBRD              0.0      0.0      0.0    318.2
 IFC               0.0      0.0      3.9     11.0
 IDA              75.0     46.8     35.0    799.9
 lOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AD8                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               8.6    22.4      0.0     97.9
 UNDP              14.7     5.0      0.0     15.4
 OTHER-UN          13.4     0.0      0.0     41.0
 EEC               0.0      0.0      0.0      5.0
 
 
 353
