 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state, and, in late 1995, conducted its first multiparty general elections
 for president and parliament in more than 30 years. The ruling party, Chama Cha
 Mapinduzi (CCM), continued to control the Union Government, winning 186 of the
 232 elective seats in Parliament. The CCM p residential candidate, Benjamin
 Mkapa, won a four-way race with 61.8 percent of the vote. The islands of Zanzibar
 are integrated into the United Republic's governmental and party structure; how-
 ever the Zanzibar Government, which has its own p resident and parliament, exer-
 cises considerable autonomy. Elections for the president and parliament of Zanzibar
 were also held in 1995. International observers noted serious discrepancies during
 the vote-counting process, calling into question the reelection of CCM incumbent Dr.
 Salmin Amour Juma as Zanzibar's President. In the period since that election, oppo-
 sition parties called for new elections, prompting reprisals by the authorities, and,
 in response, most donors halted aid to Zanzibar.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They had
 formerly been supported by citizens' anticrime groups and patrols known as
 "Sungusungu," but these generally became inactive after the elections. The police
 regularly committed human rights abuses.
 Agriculture provides 85 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea,
 gemstones, and tourism account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is
 small. Economic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization of aricul-
 tural policy, the privatization of state-owned enterprises, rescheduling of foreign
 debt payments, and the freeing of the currency exchange rate, have he ped stimu-
 late economic growth, a  as the decline in the rate of inflation. However, poor gov-
 ernment fiscal management and corruption limit economic progress.
 The Government's human rights record did not improve and problems persisted.
 Although the 1995 multiparty elections represented an important development, citi-
 zens' right to change their government in Zanzibar is severely circumscribed. Al-
 though new opposition parti~es were ompetitive in many 1995 races and won in
 some constituencies, police often harassed and intimidated members and supporters
 of the political opposition. Other human rights problems included police beatings
 and mistreatment of suspects which sometimes resulted in death. Soldiers attacked
 civilians, and police in Zanzibar used torture, including beatings and floggings. Pris-
 on conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Arbitrary arrest ant prolonged
 detention continued, and the inefficient and corrupt judicial system did not provide
 expeditious and fair trials for many citizens and foreigners. There were limitations
 on freedom of the press, association, assembly, and worker rights, and infringe-
 ments on citizens' privacy. The Government obstructed formation of local human
 rights groups. Mob justice remained severe and widespread. Discrimination and vio-
 lence against women remained serious problems. Some abuse of children and child
 labor continued. Following a change in 1995 in its longstanding policy of offering
 asylum, the Government formally closed its borders to new asylum seekers from
 Rwanda and Burundi and refused entry to or forcibly repatriated several hundred.
 In December several hundred thousand asylum seekers left Tanzania to return to
 Rwanda.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. Credible observers estimate that as many as 10 prisoners die each year in
 part as a result of inadequate nutrition, health care, and sanitation, but the major-
 ity of these die as a result of police beatings of persons in detention (see Section
 1.c.). In one instance, Dar es Salaam police have not explained the March death of
 a young man who died in their custody.
 There were no developments in the 1993 police killing of a member of the opposi-
 tion party Civic United Front (CUF) on the island of Pemba. After a lengtby inves-
 tigation, the policeman who fired the shots was charged with murder without intent
 and remains free on bail. CUF leaders complained that the President and Attorney
 
 
 General of Zanzibar blocked the prosecution of the police officer. Nearly 4 years
 after the event, the trial was still pending.
 Instances of mob justice against suspected criminals continued to claim dozens of
 lives. The media reported numerous incidents in which mobs kill suspected thieves
 who have been stoned, lynched, beaten to death, or doused with gasoline and set
 on fire. Such events are so commonplace that they are often bunched together with
 reporting on car accidents and other mishaps. Many instances are never reported.
 In September a mob attacked a suspected thief in front of the home of a diplomat;
 security guards at the residence rescued the seriously injured suspect who was
 taken by security patrol to police custody. The widespread belief in witchcraft has
 led, in some instances, to killing of alleged witches by their "victims," aggrieved rel-
 atives, or mobs. A deputy minister estimated that one hundred mostly older women
 in the Mwanza and Shinyanga regions are killed every year by those who believe
 them to be witches. Government officials have condemned these practices, but in
 only one known instance, in Kwimba, were authorities able to identify and arrest
 individuals for engaging in mob violence. No preventive measures have been taken.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment,
 but the police regularly threaten, mistreat, and occasionally beat suspected crimi-
 nals during and after their apprehension and interrogation. Although government
 officials usually condemn these practices, the Government seldom prosecutes offi-
 cials for such abuses. The People's Militia Laws, as amended by Parliament in 1989,
 bestow quasi-legal status on the traditional Sungusungu neighborhood and village
 anticrime groups. In the past, these groups were criticized for using excessive force
 with criminal suspects, but they became largely moribund following the installation
 of the new government.
 There have been repeated reports from credible sources of torture, including beat-
 ings and floggings by police, in Zanzibar, notably on Pemba island. The Zanzibar
 and Union Governments have both denied these charges.
 On May 30, eight soldiers attacked residents of Songea, allegedly to retaliate for
 the theft of a soldier's bicycle. In June another group of soldiers attacked Mererani
 village near Arusha, looting and setting homes ablaze, reportedly in revenge for the
 stabbing of a soldier several days earlier. Some of the troops interfered with villag-
 ers' efforts to protect their property and defend themselves. A government commis-
 sion of inquiry was established, but it has not reached any conclusions. Similar inci-
 dents involving soldiers, such as an attack on residents of Boko-Kunduchi in late
 1995, have also been reported.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Government officials ac-
 knowledged that prisons are overcrowded and living conditions poor. Prisons are au-
 thorized to hold 21,000 prisoners, but their population was estimated at 47,000. The
 Government is expanding prisons to accommodate the increased population, and
 some prisoners are paroled or receive suspended sentences as a means of relieving
 congestion. One person released from Ukonga prison told of guards beating and
 abusing prisoners, particularly during monthly searches during which time all pris-
 oners were assembled and required to strip. Serious diseases, such as dysentery,
 malaria, and cholera, are common and result in deaths. Medical treatment is lim-
 ited, and friends and family of prisoners generally need to provide medication or the
 funds with which to purchase them. In February a prisoner held in pretrial deten-
 tion in Mbeya died of diarrhea as he was entering court. Convicted prisoners are
 not allowed to receive food from the outside and are often moved to different prisons
 without notification to their families. Pretrial detainees are held together with those
 serving sentences but are allowed to receive food from the outside.
 There is no outside monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile.-The Criminal Procedure Code, amended
 in 1985, requires that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a magistrate within
 24 hours. However, in practice, the police often fail to do so. An opposition member
 of the Pemba House of Representatives was detained by the police for more than
 3 weeks from late February to mid-March without charge. The 1985 amendments
 also restricted the right to bail and imposed strict conditions on freedom of move-
 ment and association when bail is granted. Because of backlogs, an average case
 still takes 2 to 3 years or longer to come to trial. Thirty-five people charged with
 causing disturbances during the 1995 election campaign remained in police custody
 for more than 9 months. The code provides for a right to defense counsel. The Chief
 Justice assigns lawyers to indigent defendants charged with serious crimes such as
 murder, manslaughter, and armed robbery. There are only a few hundred practicing
 
 
 283
 lawyers in Tanzania, and most indigent defendants charged with lesser crimes do
 not have legal counsel.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President may order the arrest and in-
 definite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. This act was also amended in 1985 to require the Govern-
 ment to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the reason
 for their detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the grounds for de-
 tention at 90-day intervals. Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in
 1991 that the Preventive Detention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons
 not considered dangerous to society, the Government has still not introduced correc-
 tive legislation. The Preventive Detention Act was not used in 1996. While the Law
 Reform Commission recommended that the act be repealed, the President said that
 repeal is unnecessary if the law is not being used. The Government has additional
 broad detention powers under the Regions and Regional Commissioners Act and the
 Area Commissioners Act of 1962. These acts permit regional and district commis-
 sioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons who may "disturb public tran-
 quility."
 Police continued to make arbitrary arrests, although less frequently than in the
 ast. For example, the police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects and
 hold them in custody without charge for as long as several years in efforts to force
 the suspects to surrender. Such relatives who manage to get their cases before a
 judge are usually set free, only to be immediately rearrested when they leave the
 courtroom. The Government has not taken any legal action to correct these abuses.
 Since the 1995 election, police in Zanzib  articularly on Pemba, have regularly
 detained, arrested, and harassed CUF members, and suspected suppoers. Despite
 orders from the Union Government's Inspector General of Police, office in Zanzi-
 bar continued these activities.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and in practice, the judicialy has been increasingly willing to demonstrate its
 independence of the Government. In the past, senior police or government officials
 pressured and sometimes reassigned judges who made unpopurar rulings. No such
 incidents occurred in 1996. Independent observers, however, continue to view the ju-
 diciary as corrupt and inefficient, and question a defendant's ability to obtain an ex-
 peditious and fair trial.
 The legal system is based on the British model, with modifications to accommo-
 date customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Military courts do not try civilians,
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal
 decisions to the High Court and Court of A p peal.
 Zanzibars court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system but re-
 tains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce, child custody,
 and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in
 Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the Court of Appeal of the
 United Republic of Tanzania.
 The majority of individuals held in the two major prisons in Dar es Salaam are
 awaiting trial. In many instances, bribes determine whether bail is granted or even
 whether a case is judged as a civil or criminal matter. The Government initiated
 efforts as early as 1991 to highlight judicial corruption and increased its oversight
 in 1996, but scant progress has been made.
 Criminal trials are open to the public and to the press; courts must give reasons
 on the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of
 Zanzbwere no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, which are generally provided for in
 the Constitution. The CCM has historically penetrated alllevels of society through
 local cells, varying in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings
 and containing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials serve as 10-cell lead-
 ers with authority to resolve problems at the grassreots level and to report to au-
 thorities any suspicious behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night
 patrol service in the neighborhood. In 1993 elections were held for new grassroots
 leadera to replace the Cu 10-cell leaders in non party business. Few voters partici-
 pated in these elections, which were boycotted by the opposition and the 10-cell
 leadrer retain nearly all of their power and influence.
 CCM membership is voluntary and is estimated at 2 to 3 million card holders.
 While in the past, CM membership had been necessary for advancement in politi-
 cal and other areas, the importance of such membership is waning.
 The Criminal Procedures Act of 1985 authorizes police officials and official civilian
 anticrime units to issue search warrants; however, the act also authorizes searches
 
 
 of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss or de-
 struction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious and
 urgent. In practice warrants are rarely requested, and police and other security
 services search  rivate homes and business establishments at will. The security
 services reportedly monitor telephones and correspondence of some citizens and se-
 lected foreign residents.
 The police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects and detain them with-
 out charge in an effort to force suspects to surrender (see Section 1.d.).
 National employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and loca-
 tion of residence give authorities the right to transfer citizens to another area to
 ensure productive employment (see Section 2.d.).
 Compulsory participation in Sungusungu anticrime groups ended after the No-
 vember elections. The Sungusungu now exist essentially in name only.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, however, the Government pressures journalists to practice sell-cen-
 srship. Opposition political party members and others openly criticize the Govern-
 ment and ruling party in public forums.
 Private radio and television stations broadcast in Dar es Salaam and in a few
 other urban areas. On Zanzibar radio and television are controlled by the Govern-
 ment which also practices a restrictive policy with regard to print media. Private
 mainland newspapers are widely available, and many residents of Zanzibar can re-
 ceive mainland television.
 The press in Tanzania is, on the whole, lively and outspoken, and even the gov-
 ernment-owned newspaper occasionally reports events that portray the Government
 in an unflattering light. There are 9 daily newspapers and 15 other newspapers in
 English and Kiswahili, along with another dozen periodicals, some of which are
 owned or influenced by political parties, both CCM and opposition. During 1996 the
 rising cost of newsprint resulted in the closure of 15 newspapers. There is no official
 censorship, but throughout the year the Government continued to pressure news-
 papers to kill or ameliorate unfavorable stories. In fear of government reprisals the
 media continued to practice self-censorship.
 On January 25, the Government of Zanzibar banned from the islands the circula-
 tion of the privately owned Kiswahili daily Majira on the grounds that it was carry-
 ing antigovernment articles. Also in January, the local government barred a
 Zanzibari journalist from further reporting, charging that he had written articles
 "aimed at disrupting the peace and national unity in Zanzibar." The Kiswahili tab-
 loid Heko was banned nationally in July; the ban was lifted in early October after
 the managing editor issued a letter of apology to the Government.
 In an October incident, police roughed up and arrested two photographers at-
 tempting to take pictures of the roundup of illegal street vendors in Dar es Salaam;
 the photographers were not charged and were subsequently released. Also in Octo-
 ber, subsequent to a high-profile by-election won by the opposition, police stifled
 media coverage of the new Member of Parliament. Television cameramen attempt-
 ing to record his swearing in were detained and not released until after the end of
 the ceremony. Perhaps in response to these incidents, the following month the Dar
 Es Salaam police commissioner warned his officers not to harass working journalists
 (see Section 2.b.).
 The Union Government sought to maintain some control over the private media
 with the establishment of a code of conduct for journalists and a Media Council. Led
 by the Tanzanian chapter of the Media Council for Southern Africa and the Associa-
 tion of Journalists and Media Workers, journalists forced the Government to agree
 to a voluntary code of ethics and the establishment of a media council intended to
 preserve and expand media freedom. The council came into existence with govern-
 ment approval on February 14, but has proven ineffectual.
 Academic freedom exists in theory and largely in practice, particularly at the uni-
 versity level. Academics have been increasingly outspoken in their criticism of the
 Government and calls for reform.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and, except in Zanzibar, citizens
 generally enjoyed the right to discuss freely political alternatives. However, the Con-
 stitution and other laws and regulations limit these rights and stipulate that citi-
 zens cannot run for public office unless they are members of a registered political
 party.
 Political parties must give police 48 hours' advance notice of rallies. Police have
 the authority to deny permission for political rallies on public safety or security
 grounds, or if the permit seeker belongs to an unregistered organization or political
 
 
 party. Persons are arrested for assembling without the approp ate permit. Opposi-
 tion parties, other than in Zanzibar, are be to hold ralies  cal government offi-
 cials there prohibited the assembly of CUP supporters and use of CUF slogans from
 the October 1995 election until August. During that 10-month period, Zanzibar offi-
 cials refused CUP applications for permits, citing a threat to public order. Police dis-
 persed meetings attended by persons thought to be opposed to the Zanzibar Govern-
 ment.
 On the mainland, a by-election in the Dar es Salaam district of Temeke was
 marked by scattered violent incidents against individuals and property, though
 there was tight security at pollingplaces. The opposition candidate won the election.
 When the opposition sought to hold a victory procession, however, the Inspector
 General of Police sent a letter to the opposition party's secretary general directing
 that no march be held under threat of arrest (see Section 2.a.), and the march was
 canceled.
 In May students demonstrating outside the Ministry of Higher Education were at-
 tacked by riot police. The police used tear gas and nightsticks and 30 people were
 injured, 4 seriously. The police arrested 74 people.
 The Registrar of Political Parties has sole authority to approve or deny the reg-
 istration of any political party and is responsible for enforcing strict regulations on
 registered or provisionally registered parties. The electoral law prohibits independ-
 ent candidates; requires any Member of Parliament to resign if they join another
 party; requires all political parties to support the union with Zanzibar, and forbids
 parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious affiliation. Parties granted provisional
 regtration may hold public meetings and recruit members. They have 6 months
 to submit lists of at least 200 members in 10 of the country's 25 regions, including
 two regions in Zanzibar, in order to secure full registration and to be eligible to field
 candidates for election. Nonregistered parties are prohibited from holding meetings,
 recruiting members, or fielding candidates.
 The most prominent unregistered party was Reverend Christopher Mtikila's
 Democratic Party, which advocates the dissolution of the union and the expulsion
 of minorities from the mainland. Despite his political party's lack of government rec-
 ognition, Mtikila, was able to publicize his views through his legally registered
 church and through ongoing lawsuits against the Government.
 In November the Registrar of Political Parties told a workshop on the Constitu-
 tion that conditions for registration under the Political Parties Act of 1992 were too
 "harsh" and suggested that changes be made to permit other parties to compete in
 elections.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. Several nongovernmental organizations NGO's) were formed in the
 last few years to address the concerns of families, the disabled, women, and chil-
 dren. In September the Ministry of Home Affairs suspended the registration of the
 National Women's Council, allegedly because it engaged in political activity. The
 Government has called on the organization to rewrite its constitution to prevent it
 from involvement in such activity. The Deput Minister said that if the council's
 constitution were not revised and such activity halted, it would be stricken from the
 official registry.
 A number of professional, business, legal, and medical associations exist. Rep-
 resentatives of the business community and President Mkapa held three meetings,
 the most recent of which included the Cabinet and lasted 5 hours, seeking radical
 changes in the tax and investment codes. The Government, for more than 2years,
 has withheld registration from an NGO called Defenders of Human Rights in Tanza-
 nia (see Section 4). Opposition leaders complain that the Zanzibar Goveent is
 even more restrictive in registering societies than the Union Government.
 c. Freedom of Resigion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice. Missionaries are allowed to
 enter the country freely to proselytize, and citizens are allowed to go abroad for pil-
 grimages and other religious_ ractices.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Count ry, Foreign Travel, Immigration, and
 Repatriation.-The Government imposes some limits on these rights. Short-term do-
 mestic travel is not restricted, but citizens must follow national employment direc-
 tives stipulating the nature of employment and location of the residence. The
 Human r esources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure
 that every resident within their area of jurisdiction engages in productive and law-
 ful employment. Those not employed are subject to transfer to another area where
 employment is available. These laws are also used by police as a means of soliciting
 bribes and intimidating urban residents. The Dar es Salaam City Council rounds
 up beggars for return to their home areas, but many return to the capital.
 
 
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain, mostly due to bureaucratic
 inefficiency, and authorities subject those planning to travel or emigrate to close
 scrutiny. Citizens who leave the country without permission are subject to prosecu-
 tion upon their return.
 Mainlanders are required to show identification to travel to Zanzibar, and are not
 allowed to work or own land on the islands.
 Tanzania traditionally maintained a generous open border policy with regard to
 asyum seekers from neighboring countries. However, in early 1995, following the
 inlxof over a hal mlion Rwandan asylum seekers, the Government closed its
 borders with Rwanda and Burndi. In practice asylum seekers continue to enter the
 county. During the year, the authorities used laws, such as those on poaching, tres-
 passing and illegal migration, to force several hundred persons previously admtted
 to return to both Rwanda and Burundi. In December, following the repatriation of
 Rwandans from eastern Zaire, the Government, in cooperation with the United Na-
 tions High Commissioner for Refugees, made a controversial decision that conditions
 in their omeland were such that Rwandans should leave Tanzania and return to
 Rwanda. Faced with the government decision, and the presence of Tanzanian
 troops, by year's end virtually all of the aslum seekers had departed the country.
 A relatively small number who feared for their safety were permitted to remain in
 Tanzania temporarily. Some humanitarian refugee organizations had limited access
 to the process.
 Tanzania continued to offer first asylum to about 300,000 other refugees, prin-
 cipally from Burundi and Zaire.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was officially introduced in 1992. Three years later,
 for the first time in more than 30 years, citizens exercised their right to shange
 their government through national elections for president and par liament. The
 CCM, with huge advantages over opposition parties in membership and access to
 resources Duin g its own daly Kiswahii-languag newspaper, retained the presi-
 dency and 186 of 232 elective seats in Parliament. The Government employed tac-
 tics to restrict or delay activities of opposition arties, which nonetheless made cred-
 ible challenges in many districts and for president.
 Because of widespread problems with the distribution of ballots on election day,
 the Government nullified the results and conducted new elections in seven Dar es
 Salam constituencies. Some opposition parties demanded that the election be rerun
 nationwide and boycotted the new elections in Dar es Salaam.
 The Constitution of Zanzibar allows citizens the right to change their government
 peacefully; however, this right has been severely circumscribed. The 1995 presi-
 dential election in Zanzibar was seriously flawed. Government-owned broadcast
 media in Zanzibar were biased in favor of COM incumbent President Salim Amour
 Juma. The government party intimidated and harassed the opsition and did acnot
 permit opposition rallies until 2 months prior to the election. Further, registration
 was limited to persons who had maintained the same residence for 5 years, which
 disenfranchised many voters. CUF party members also were detained by police
 when they attempted to campaign in rural areas.
 Election observers in Zanzibar were denied access to the tabulation of votes from
 polling stations. After 4 days, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission (ZEC) appointed
 by the Amour government, announced that Amour had won by 0.5 percent of the
 vote. Figures tabulated by the CUF showed a similarly close victory for its can-
 didate. After efforts by the international community to reconcile discrepancies in the
 vote counting, observers concluded that the official results may have been inac-
 curate. Critics questioned the probity of the ZEC chairman who defended the elec-
 tion and its outcome when soon thereafter he purchased an expensive home. The
 Zanzibar and Union Governments both rejected calls to overturn the result and con-
 duct a new election. In April Zanzibar police raided the home of the CUFs presi-
 dential candidate, citing "the duty of police to maintain law and security."
 In the year since the relection, government security forces and CM gangs har-
 ased and intimidated CUF members on both of the two main Zanzibar islands,
 Pemba and Ugunja. Because CUF won all 20 seats on Pemba, Pembans living on
 Ugunja were regarded as CUF supporters and as a result were harassed. CUF
 members accused police of detaining dozens of its members, including several local
 leaders. Many CUv supporters have deserted Ugunja for Pe .ba or the mainland.
 Safety is not ensred in Pemba, where security forces dispersed gatherings, intimi-
 datedhand roughed up individuals, and expelled two tourists in September for their
 contact with CUF members. Most internatonal donors have suspended direct assist-
 ance to Zanzibar in response to activities of the authorities.
 
 
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. In practice, however, few women are politically active. Eight of 232 elected
 members of the Union Parliament are women. In addition, 37 women from both the
 CCM and opposition parties were appointed to Parliament to seats reserved for
 women. Three of the cabinet's 23 ministers are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government has obstructed the formation of local human rights groups. Per-
 sons seeking to register human rights NGO's such as the Defenders of Human
 Rights in Tanzania and the Tanzania Human Rights Education Society, complained
 that the Ministry of Home Affairs continued to delay action on their applications
 (see Section 2.b.). This hampered their access and efforts to monitor violations of
 human rights. The Government refused to register the African Human Rights and
 Justice Protection Network on the grounds that it was politically oriented.
 Government officials have said that international human rights groups are wel-
 come to visit Tanzania.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, religion, or lifestyle. Discrimination based on sex, age, or dis-
 ability is not specifically prohibited by law but is publicly discouraged in official
 statements.
 Women.-Violence against women remained widespread. Legal remedies exist but
 in practice are difficult to obtain. Traditional customs subordinating women remain
 strong in both urban and rural areas, and often local magistrates upheld such prac-
 tices. Women may be punished for not bearing children. It is accepted for a husband
 to treat his wife as he wishes, and wife beating can occur at all levels of society.
 Cultural, family, and social pressure prevent many women from reporting abuses
 to authorities. Government officials frequently make public statements decrying
 such abuses, but rarely take action against perpetrators.
 Although the Government advocates equal rights for women in the workplace, it
 does not ensure these rights in practice. In the public sector, which employs 80 per-
 cent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict women's access to some jobs
 or hours of employment. While progress on women's rights has been more noticeable
 in urban areas, strong traditional norms still divide labor along gender lines and
 place women in a subordinate position. Discrimination against women is most acute
 in the countryside, where women are relegated to farming and raising children with
 almost no opportunity for wage employment. Custom and tradition often hinder
 women from owning property such as land, and these may override other laws that
 provide for equal treatment. Women seeking higher education may be harassed by
 male colleagues; the authorities have largely ignored the practice.
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there, and in many parts of the mainland, face discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Gov-
 ernment and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage
 Act provide certain inheritance and property rights for women, the decision to apply
 customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions
 of the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inherit-
 ance claims, primarily in rural areas. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under
 the age of 21 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment.
 Several NGO's provide counseling and education programs on women's rights is-
 sues, particularly sexual harassment and molestation.
 Children.-Government funding of programs for children's welfare remained min-
 uscule. The Government made some constructive efforts to address children's wel-
 fare, including working closely with NGO's to assess the well-being of orphans and
 nelected children.
 The law provides for 7 years of compulsory schooling. In the past, girls who be-
 came pregnant were expelled from school. During 1996 procedures were put into ef-
 fect to permit such girls to continue their education following their maternity ab-
 sence.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to bth physical and psychological health. Although the Govern-
 ment officially discourages FGM, it is still performed at an early age by approxi-
 mately 20 of the country's 130 main ethnic groups, affecting perhaps 10 percent of
 the population. In some groups, FGM is compulsory, and, in others, a woman who
 has not undergone the ritual might not be able to marry. Government officials have
 
 
 288
 called for changes in customs that adversely affect women, but no legislation has
 been introduced that would specifically restrict the practice of FGM. Some local gov-
 ernment officials have begun to combat the practice, and in 1996 five persons were
 convicted and imprisonedr for assault for mutilating young girls between the ages
 of 1 and 3 years. Seminars sponsored by various governmental and nongovern-
 mental organizations are regularly held in an attempt to educate the public on the
 dangers of these and other traditional practices. Health authorities believe the prac-
 tice is declining, but other sources maintain that it is on the rise, especially in
 central Tanzania.
 Peo.ple With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate access to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for people with disabilities. Al-
 though there is no official discrimination against the disabled, in practice the phys-
 ically disabled are effectively restricted in their access to education, employment,
 and provision of other state services due to physical barriers. The Government pro-
 vides only limited funding to special facilities and programs.
 Religious Minoities.-The Muslim community claims to be disadvantaged in
 terms of its representation in the civil service and government and in state-owned
 business, in part because both colonial and past, post-independence administrations
 refused to recognize the credentials of traditional Muslim schools. As a result, there
 is widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived advantages enjoyed by Chris-
 tians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of what they perceive as undue favor-
 itism accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scholarships by former Presi-
 dent Mwinyi, a Muslim. Some leaders in both camps appear to be playing up reli-
 gious tensions. In fact there does not at present appear to be any serious problem
 of discrimination due to religion in access to employment or educational opportuni-
 ties.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-In the past, the Government discriminated
 against the Barabaig and other nomadic people in northern Tanzania. These ethnic
 groups continued to complain of government discrimination based on government ef-
 forts to make them adopt a more modern lifestyle and to restrict their access to land
 that was turned into large government wheat farms.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent, over the years, to about 50,000,
 a result of considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. There are, however,
 no laws or official policies which discriminate against them. As the Government
 places greater emphasis on market-oriented policies and privatization, public con-
 cern regarding the Asian community's economic role has increased. This has led to
 demands for policies of "indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not in-
 crease the Asian community's economic predominance at the expense of the coun-
 trys African population.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both the Constitution and the 1955 Trade Union Or-
 dinance refer to the right of association of workers. Nevertheless, workers do not
 have the right to form or join organizations of their own choice. The Organization
 of Tanzania Trade Unions Act of 1991 addresses all labor union issues. The act cre-
 ated the Organization of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU) which is the only trade
 union orgamzation in Tanzania. Renamed the Tanzania Federation of Trade Unions
 (TF1TU), subject to pariamentary approval of its new onstitution, O1TUITFTU is
 omprised of11 independent trade unions. The individual unions are given the right
 to leave the TFTU and to collect their own dues, 5 percent of which must be contrib-
 uted to the federation. More than a year after the labor reorganization, only 1 of
 the 11 new independent unions, the Tazanian Teachers Union, is fully registered.
 OTI'IrFTU represents 60 percent of workers in industry and government, but
 it has little influence on labor policy. Overall, roughly 25 percent of Tanzania's 2
 million wage earners are orgamzed. All workers, including those classified as "es-
 sential" service workers, are permitted to join unions, but essential workers are not
 permitted to strike.
 There are no laws prohibiting retribution against legal strikers. Workers have the
 legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted mediation and conciliation
 procedures leading ultimately to the Industrial Court, which receives direction from
 the Minister of Labor and Youth Development. If the OTTU/TFTU is not satisfied
 with the decision of the Industrial Court, it can then conduct a legal strike. These
 procedures can prolong a dispute by months without resolving it. Pending a resolu-
 tion, frustrated workers have staged impromptu, illegal, wildcat strikes and walk-
 outs.
 The TFTU expanded beyond its forerunner's membership in regional and pan-Af-
 rican trade union organizations by joining the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions.
 
 
 b. The Right to Orgae and Bargain Colectively.---Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limited to the private sector. Wages for employees of the Govern-
 ment and state-owned organizations, which account for the bulk of the salaried
 labor force, are administratively set by the Government.
 Al though the OTTUTFTU negotiates on behalf of most private sector employees
 with the Association of Tanzanian Employers, collective agreements must be sub-
 mitted to the Industrial Court for approval. The International Labor Organization
 (IL) has observed that these provisions are not in conformity with  LO Convention
 98 on Collective Ba inand the Right to Organize. Tanania's Security of Em-
 ployment Act of 1964 prohbits disriminatory activities by an employer against
 union members. Employers found guilty of antinnion activities are legally required
 to reinstate workers.
 There are no export processing zones (EPZ's) on the mainland, but there are three
 in Zanzibar. Work conditions are comparable to those in other work places. Labor
 law ptections apply to EPZ workers.
 . rohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor, though the ILO observed that provisions of various laws are incompatible
 with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor. Specifically, the Human Re-
 sources Deployment Act of 1983 requires every local government authority to ensure
 that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school engage in productive or
 other lawful employment. In some rural areas, villagers are obligated to work in the
 village communal gardens or on small construction projects such as repairing roads.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children under 12 years of age
 are prohibited by law from working in the formal wage sector in both urban and
 rural areas. However, this prvision does not apply to children working on family
 farms or herding domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may
 be employed on a daily wage and on a day-to-day basis, but they must have parental
 permission and return to the residence of their guardian at night.
 The minimum age for entry into work of a contractual nature in approved occupa-
 tions is set at 15 years. The law prohibits a young person from employment in any
 occupation that is injurious to heth and that is dangerous or otherwise unsuitable.
 Young persons between the ages of 12 and 15 may be employed in industrial work
 but only between the hours of-6 a.m. and 6 p.m., with some exceptions allowed. The
 Ministry of Labor and Youth Development is responsible for enforcement, but the
 number of inspectors is inadequate to police conditions. The effectiveness of govern-
 ment enforcement has reportedly declined with increased privatization. Approxi-
 mately 3,000 to 5,000 children engage in seasonal employment on sisal, tea, tobacco,
 and coffee plantations. Children working on plantations generally receive lower
 wages than their older counterparts, although they may be in comparable jobs.
 Work on sisal plantations is particularly hazardous and detrimental to children. On
 one sisal plantation, children made up 30 percent of the work force; only half of the
 children had completed primary school. They had a high incidence of skin and res-
 piratory problems, were not provided protective clothing, and lacked adequate nour-
 ishment and lodging. Another 1,500 to 3,000 children work in unregulated gemstone
 mines. In the informal sector, children assist their parents in unregulated piecework
 manufacturing.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ-
 ment in the formal sector. The TFTU often negotiates higher minimum waes with
 individual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. The legal
 minimum wage is $30 (17,500 Tanzanian shillings) per month. Even when supple-
 mented with various benefits such as housing, transport allowances, and food sub-
 sidies, the minimum rate may not always be sufficient to provide an adequate living
 for a worker and family, and workers often must depend on the extended family,
 or a second or third job. Despite the minimum wage, many workers, especially in
 the informal sector, are paid less.
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44- to 48-hour
 workweek. In general women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Sev-
 eral laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safety fac-
 tory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is managed by the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare and Youth Development. Its effectiveness,
 however, is limited.
 OTTU/TFTU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is effec-
 tive in the formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. Workers
 may take an employer to court through their TFTU branch if their working condi-
 tions do not comply with the Ministry of Labor's health and environmental stand-
 ards. Workers making such complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. However,
 workers do not have the have the right to remove themselves from dangerous situa-
 
 
 290
 tions without jeopardizing their employment. Enforcement of labor standards is non-
 existent in the informal sector.
