 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state. In 1995 the nation conducted its first multiparty general elections
 for president and parliament in more than 30 years. The ruling party, Chama Cha
 Mapinduzi (CCM), continued to control the Union Government, winning 186 of the
 232 elective seats in Parliament. The CCM presidential candidate, Benjamin
 Mkapa, won a four-way race with 61.8 percent of the vote. The islands of Zanzibar
 are integrated into the United Republic's governmental and party structure; how-
 ever, the Zanzibar Government, which has its own president and parliament, exer-
 cises considerable autonomy. Elections for the President and Parliament of Zanzibar
 also were held in 1995. International observers noted serious discrepancies during
 the vote-counting process, calling into question the reelection of CCM incumbent Dr.
 Salmin Amour Juma as Zanzibar's President. In the period since that election, calls
 for new elections by opposition parties were met with reprisals by the authorities.
 In response most donors halted economic aid to Zanzibar. The judiciary is formally
 independent but suffers from corruption, inefficiency, and executive influence.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They for-
 merly were supported by citizens' anticrime groups and patrols known as
 "Sungusungu," which have been inactive in urban centers since late 1995 but still
 are in existence in rural areas. The police regularly committed human rights
 abuses.
 Agriculture provides 85 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea, and
 gemstones account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is small. Eco-
 nomic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization of agricultural policy,
 the privatization of state-owned enterprises, the rescheduling of foreign debt pay-
 ments, and the freeing of the currency exchange rate, helped to stimulate economic
 growth, as has the decline in the rate of inflation. While the Government has at-
 tempted to improve its fiscal management, pervasive corruption is one factor con-
 straining economic progress.
 There continued to be serious problems in the Government's human rights record.
 Although the 1995 multiparty elections represented an important development, citi-
 zens' right to change their government in Zanzibar is severely circumscribed by
 abuses of and limitations on civil liberties. While new opposition parties on the
 mainland and Zanzibar were competitive in many races in 1995 and in by-elections
 since that time, winning in various constituencies, police often harassed and intimi-
 dated members and supporters of the political opposition. Other human rights prob-
 lems included police beatings and mistreatment of suspects that sometimes resulted
 in death. Soldiers attacked civilians, and police in Zanzibar used torture, including
 beatings and floggings. Throughout the country, prison conditions remained harsh
 and life threatening. Arbitrary arrest and detention, and prolonged detention contin-
 ued. The inefficient and corrupt judicial system often did not provide expeditious
 and fair trials. Pervasive corruption, documented in the Warioba Commission's 1997
 report, continued to have a broad impact on human rights. The Government in-
 fringed on citizens' privacy and limited freedom of speech, press, assembly, associa-
 tion, and movement. The release of a government white paper on constitutional re-
 form in August sparked a debate on the Government's respect for citizens' rights.
 The Government obstructed the formation of domestic human rights groups. Dis-
 crimination and violence against women remained serious problems. Female genital
 mutilation and child prostitution were problems. Discrimination against religious
 and ethnic minorities persisted. The Government infringed on workers' rights and
 child labor continued. There were some instances of forced labor. Mob justice re-
 mained severe and widespread.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. Credible observers cited the deaths of more than 50 prisoners during the
 year. Some deaths resulted from mistreatment and police beatings of persons in de-
 tention; others were a result of harsh prison conditions including inadequate nutri-
 tion, medical care, and sanitation (see Section 1.c.).
 In February riots broke out in Mwembechai when police attempted to disperse a
 crowd of Muslims protesting the arrest of a popular Muslim leader. The police
 opened fire on the protesters, killing three persons and wounding several others.
 Twenty-three members of Parliament demanded parliamentary discussion of police
 brutality in connection with the incident, but the National Assembly Speaker denied
 the request, saying that it was an internal police matter.
 In the beginning of the year over 100 refugees died due to a malaria outbreak
 and poor medical facilities (see Section 2.d.).
 In December 1997, six detainees died in detention in Morogoro. Police provided
 no explanation for their deaths (see Section 1.c.).
 In January two policemen were convicted of a 1996 killing and sentenced to
 death; nine other police officers were convicted in a murder case in Arusha.
 There were no developments in the 1993 police killing of a member of the opposi-
 tion party Civic United Front (CUF). on the island of Pemba. After a lengthy inves-
 tigation, authorities charged the policeman who fired the shots with involuntary
 manslaughter;, the officer remains free on bail. CUF leaders complained that the
 President and Attorney General of Zanzibar blocked the prosecution of the police of-
 ficer. Nearly 6 years after the event, a trial still is pending.
 Instances of mob justice against suspected criminals continued to claim dozens of
 lives. Throughout the year, the media reported numerous incidents in which mobs
 killed suspected thieves, who were stoned, lynched, beaten to death, or doused with
 gasoline and set on fire. Such events are so common that they are often grouped
 together with reporting on car accidents and other mishaps. Many instances never
 are reported. The widespread belief in witehcraft has led, in some instances, to the
 killing of alleged witches by their "victims," aggrieved relatives, or mobs. The Gov-
 erment estimates that in the Mwanza region alone at least 50 persons are killed
 every year by those who believe them to be witches. Government officials criticize
 these practices and make some arrests. However, most perpetrators of witch killing
 or mob justice elude arrest, and the Government has not taken preventive meas-
 ures.
 On August 7, terrorists bombed the U.S. Embassy in Dar Es Salaam, killing 11
 persons and injuring more than 85 others. An investigation was ongoing at year's
 end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment,
 but the police regularly threaten, mistreat, or beat suspected criminals during and
 after their apprehension and interrogation. Police also use the same means to obtain
 information about suspects from family members not in custody (see Section 1.f.).
 Police in Zanzibar use torture. Although government officials usually criticize these
 practices, the Government seldom prosecutes police for such abuses. In January the
 Inspector General of Police ordered for a period of 1-week the whipping of bus driv-
 ers and conductors for rampant violations of traffic laws. The People's Militia Laws,
 as amended by Parliament in 1989, bestow quasilegal status on the traditional
 Sungusungu anticrime groups. Participation in these groups was compulsory prior
 to the 1995 election. In the past, these groups were criticized for using excessive
 force against criminal suspects. While largely moribund since the 1995 election, the
 Sungusungu still exists, particularly in rural areas. As a result of the President's
 1997 initiative to have government law enforcement officials work cooperatively
 with Sungusungu, members of Sungusungu were given additional benefits on a par
 with those given to members of the Peoples Militia. In return, members of
 Sungusungu were to be held accountable for any abuses; however, none were held
 accountabl for abuses durig- the year.
 Repeated reports from credible sources indicate that the police use torture, includ-
 ing beatings and floggings in Zanzibar, notably on Pemba Island. Both the Zanzibar
 and Union Governments have denied these charges. Police have not yet explained
 the deaths of six detainees in the town of Morogoro who were electrocuted at the
 end of 1997; the bodies were not returned to the families but buried in two graves.
 Numerous incidents in which soldiers attacked civilians were reported, prompting
 the chief of the defense forces to remind troops that their role was to defend, and
 
 
 not harass, civilians. No other action has been taken against those responsible for
 abuses.
 Police used excessive force to quell protesters during riots in Mwembechai in Feb-
 ruary. Police opened fire on the protesters, killing three persons and wounding sev-
 eral others (see Section l.a.). There are reports that police tortured and sexually hu-
 miliated a group of women arrested during the February riots. When riots broke out
 again in March, authorities used tear gas, water cannons, and clubs to quell the ri-
 oters; at least a dozen persons were injured.
 Pervasive corruption is a serious problem in the police force. The Warioba Com-
 mission report on corruption, released in 1997, found that police arrest innocent per-
 sons and file false charges against them if they refuse to pay bribes. There were
 reports of such abuses during the year. In September the Minister for Home Affairs
 cited police abuses as a factor contributing to the country's rising crime rate.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life-threatening.. Government officials ac-
 knowledge that prisons are overcrowded and living conditions are poor. Prisons are
 authorized to hold 21,000 persons, but the actual prison population is estimated at
 47,000 persons. In February the Rukwa regional commissioner noted that two pris-
 ons in his region with a capacity of 184 inmates actually held 556 inmates. The Gov-
 ernment is expanding prisons, but its efforts have not kept pace with the growing
 number of prisoners. Some prisoners are paroled or receive suspended sentences as
 a means of relieving overcrowding. The daily amount of food allotted to prisoners
 is insufficient to meet their nutritional needs, and even this amount is not always
 provided. However, in April the Government distributed an emergency ration of
 3,000 tons of food to overcrowded prisons. Earlier, the Commissioner of Prisons stat-
 ed that his department received inadequate funds for medicine and medical sup-
 p lies. Prison dispensaries only offer imited treatment, and friends and family mem-
 bers ofprisoners generally must provide medication or the funds with which to pur-
 chase it. Serious diseases, such as dysentery, malaria, and cholera, are common and
 result in numerous deaths. Guards continued to beat and abuse prisoners.
 The Warioba Commission reported that wardens gave favorable treatment to cer-
 tain prisoners at the expense of others. Convicted prisoners are not allowed to re-
 ceive food from the outside and are often moved to different prisons without notifica-
 tion of their families. Pretrial detainees are held together with those serving sen-
 tences but are allowed to receive food from the outside.
 Women sent to remand prison report being forced to sleep naked and being sub-
 jected to sexual abuse by wardens.
 There is no outside monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Criminal Procedure Code requires that a person arrested for a crime,
 other than a national security charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be
 charged before a magistrate within 24 hours. However, in practice, the police often
 fail to comply. The code's 1985 amendments also restricted the right to bail and im-
 posed strict conditions on freedom of movement and association when bail is grant-
 ed. Because of backlogs, an average case still takes 2 to 3 years or longer to come
 to trial. Observers estimate that only about 5 percent of persons held in remand ul-
 timately are convicted, and in many cases, those convicted already had served their
 full sentences before their trial was held.
 The code provides for a right to defense counsel. The Chief Justice assigns lawyers
 to indigent defendants charged with serious crimes such as murder, manslaughter,
 and armed robbery. There are only a few hundred practicing lawyers in the country,
 and most indigent defendants charged with lesser crimes do not have legal counsel.
 In many cases, accused persons are denied the right to contact a lawyer or talk with
 family members. Bribes often determine whether bail is granted or even whether
 a case is judged as a civil or criminal matter. There are reports of prisoners waiting
 several years for trial because they could not pay bribes to police and court officials.
 Authorities acknowledge that some cases have been pending for several years.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President may order the arrest and in-
 definite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. This act requires the Government to release detainees
 within 15 days of their detention or in form them of the reason for their detention.
 A detainee also is allowed to challenge the grounds for detention at 90-day intervals.
 Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in 1991 that the Preventive De-
 tention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons not considered by authorities
 to be dangerous to society, the Government still has not introduced corrective legis-
 lation. The Preventive Detention Act was not used during the year. While the Law
 Reform Commission recommended that the act be repealed, the President said that
 repeal is unnecessary if the law is not being used. When the chairman of the Tanza-
 nian Labor Party was arrested and charged with sedition for standing on a copy of
 
 
 416
 the Constitution, bail was set at almost $200,000 (1 million shillings). Following the
 Mwembechai riots in February, the presiding judge denied bail to the 132 persons
 arrested (see Section l.a.). The Government has additional broad detention powers
 under the Regions and Regional Commissioners Act and the Area Commissioners
 Act. These acts permit regional and district commissioners to arrest and detain for
 48 hours persons who" may disturb public tranquillity."
 Police continued to make arbitrary arrests. For example, the police occasionally
 arrest relatives of criminal suspects and hold them- in custody without charge for
 as long as several years in an attempt to force suspects to surrender. Such relatives
 who manage to get their cases before a judge usually are set free, only to be re-
 arrested immediately. The Government took no action -to correct this abuse during
 the year (see Section 1.f.).
 According to the Warioba Commission report, police arrest innocent persons, ac-
 cuse them of fictitious crimes, and withdraw or reduce the charges upon payment
 of bribes. Early in the year, two police officers arrested a herdsman for not paying
 a bribe; he subsequentl paid, and in March, the officers were dismissed for accept-
 ing the bribe and for  e improper arrest. The Government began during the year
 to take action to punish police for abuse of their positions, but the impact of these
 efforts was limited.
 In February police arrested a popular Muslim leader charged with preaching in
 violation of a law prohibiting incitement against other religions (see Section 2.c.).
 The arrest led to riots in February and March, during which police arrested more
 than 300 persons.
 Since the 1995 election, police in Zanzibar, particularly on Pemba, regularly have
 detained, arrested, or harassed CUF members and suspected supporters. Despite or-
 ders from the Union Governmens Inspector General of Police, officers in Zanzibar
 continued these activities. In late 1997 and early in the year, police arrested 17
 CUF officials, including parliamentarians, and charged them with treason for at-
 tempting to overthrow the Zanzibar Government. Their hearing was postponed re-
 peatediy by Government prosecutors, and no trial date had been set by year's end.
 The Government continued to arrest opposition politicians for acts that it regarded
 as seditious (see Sections 2.b. and 3).
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; in practice the higher courts increasingly have demonstrated their independ-
 ence of the Government, although executive interference exists. Senior police or gov-
 ernment officials no longer pressure or reassign judges who make unpopular rul-
 ings. For example, in June the Chief Justice of the Court of Appeal denied the Gov-
 ernments appeal against an injunction granted to the National Women's Council,
 thereby permitting its continued operation. However, independent observers contin-
 ued to criticize the judiciary, especially at lower levels, as corrupt and inefficient
 and questioned the system's ability to provide a defendant with an expeditious and
 fair trial. The Warioba Commission found that pervasive corruption affected the ju-
 diciary from clerks to magistrates. Clerks took bribes to decide whether or not to
 open cases and to hide or misdirect the files of those accused of crimes. Magistrates
 often accepted bribes to determine guilt or innocence, pass sentences, withdraw
 charges, or decide appeals. The Government initiated efforts as early as 1991 to
 highigght judicial corruption and increased its oversight, but has made limited
 progress. During the year, several magistrates resigned after the Chief Justice was
 presented with credible evidence of their corruption.
 The legal system is based on the British model, with modifications to accommo-
 date customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Military courts do not try civilians,
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal
 decisions to the High Court and Court of Appeal.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system but re-
 tains Islamic courts to adjudicate Muslim family cases such as divorce, child cus-
 tody, and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard
 only in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the national Court of
 Appeal.
 I Criminal trials are open to the public and to the press; courts must give reasons
 on the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of
 appeal.
 While juvenile courts have existed in principle since 1964, no separate facility ex-
 isted for young offenders until 1997. However, the court is underutilized and many
 juvenile offenders still are tried in adult courts. In September a magistrate ordered
 prosecutors to stop prosecuting juveniles in adult courts.
 There were no reports of political prisoners on the mainland. At year's end, there
 were 18 political prisoners in Zanzibar.
 
 
 417
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, which generally are provided for in
 the Constitution. The CCM historically has penetrated all levels of society through
 local cells, varying in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings
 and containing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials serve as 10-cell lead-
 ers with authority to resolve local problems at the grassroots level and to report to
 authorities any suspicious behavior or event in the neighborhood. In 1993 elections
 were held for new grassroots leaders to replace the CCM 10-cell leaders in nonparty
 business. Few voters participated in these elections, which were boycotted by the
 o position. While the 10-cell leaders retain some power and influence, the role of
 te cells has diminished considerably since 1993, especially in areas where opposi-
 tion parties are strong. Although CCM membership was once necessary for advance-
 ment in political and other areas, the importance of such membership is waning.
 Nonetheless, in Zanzibar some government employees who voted for the opposition
 in a late 1997 by-election have lost their jobs, and some students have been expelled
 from school because of their families' political affiliation (see Section 3).
 The Criminal Procedures Act authorizes police officials, including the citizens'
 anticrime groups, to issue search warrants. However, the act also authorizes
 searches of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice, police and members of other security services rarely request
 warrants and often search private homes and business establishments at will. In
 January police searched the offices of the opposition CUF party and removed docu-
 ments from its files (see Section 3). The security services reportedly monitor the
 telephones and correspondence of some citizens and foreign residents.
 The police threaten, mistreat and occasionally beat and arrest relatives of crimi-
 nal suspects and detain them without charge in an effort to obtain information
 about suspects or to force them to surrender (see Sections 1.c. and 1.d.).
 National employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and loca-
 tion of residence give authorities the right to transfer citizens to another area to
 ensure their productive employment (see Section 2.d.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government limited these rights in practice. Various
 laws, such as the Newspaper Act and the Broadcasting Act, limit the media's ability
 to function effectively. Government ministers and the Registrar of Newspapers pres-
 sure journalists to practice self-censorship. The Government also demed unre-
 stricted access to the media to political opponents. Except in Zanzibar, citizens gen-
 erally enjoyed the right to discuss political alternatives freely. Opposition political
 party members and others openly criticize the Government and ruling party in pub-
 lic forums. However, persons using "abusive language" against the country's leader-
 ship may be subject to arrest, and the Government occasionally used this provision
 to detain opposition figures. An opposition leader in Zanzibar was sentencedin April
 to 6 months in prison for insulting the island's President; government prosecutors
 appealed the sentence as too lenient.
 In Zanzibar, radio and television are controlled by the island's Government, which
 also practices a restrictive policy with regard to print media. In February a Zanzibar
 government minister threatened three newspapers because of their alleged negative
 reporting. Soon thereafter, amendments to the Zanzibar News Act further cir-
 cumscribed journalists' freedom of action, by giving authorities greater cover for the
 harassment, detention and interrogation of journalists.
 Private mainland newspapers are widely available in Zanzibar, and many resi-
 dents can receive mainland television. The press on the mainland is, on the whole,
 lively and outspoken, and even the government-owned newspaper occasionally re-
 ports events that portray the Government in an unflattering light. There are 9 daily
 newspapers and 15 other newspapers in English and Kiswahili, along with another
 dozen periodicals, some of which are owned or influenced by political parties, both
 the CCM and the opposition. In June the Government banned the printing, publica-
 tion, and circulation of the Chombeza, Arusha Leo, and Kasheshiya newspapers for
 publishing abusive cartoons. When two new tabloids took their place, the Govern-
 ment also closed them. The ban on the Chombeza was lifted in October, but the
 Government banned the Chombeza again in December for publishing lewd material.
 Private radio and television stations broadcast in Dar Es Salaam and in a few
 other urban areas, although their activities may be circumscribed. The Government
 reportedly does not censor news reports, but attempts to influence their content.
 Some journalists, such as those in Zanzibar, exercise self-censorship on sensitive
 issues. Journalists who report arrests can be charged with obstructing police activity
 
 
 under the Police Act. In December authorities denied a journalist access to the trea-
 son trial of 18 CUF members on the grounds that the courtroom was full. Journal-
 ists inside the courtroom reported that the media's bench was nearly empty.
 The Union Government sought to maintain some control over the private media
 with the establishment in 1997 of a code of conduct for journalists and the media
 council. With the leadership of the local chapter of the Media Council for Southern
 Africa and the Association of Journalists and Media Workers, journalists forced the
 Government to agree to a voluntary code of ethics and the establishment of a Media
 Council intended to preserve and expand media freedom. The council was inaugu-
 rated formally in 1997, but so far has proved ineffectual except as a sounding board
 for complaints against the media.
 Academic freedom largely is respected in practice. Academics, increasingly out-
 spoken in their criticism of the Government, continued to call for political reform.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly; however, the Government limits this right in practice.
 Political parties and other groups that seek to hold rallies must give the police 48
 hours' advance notice. Police have the authority to deny permission on public safety
 or security grounds or if the permit seeker belongs to an unregistered organization
 or poitical party. Authorities arrested citizens for assembing without the appro-
 priate permit. In February police dispersed a demonstration organized by the Tan-
 zania Society for the Disabled. In March, police dispersed a peaceful demonstration
 at a Mwembechai mosque by Muslim women who were protesting their abuse by
 police while in detention. In April police dispersed a demonstration at the university
 of Dar Es Salaam and arrested 20 persons. Opposition parties, other than in Zanzi-
 bar, generally are able to hold rallies, although in February, police in Tanga banned
 a procession organized by an opposition party (see Section 3). Zanzibar Government
 officials continue to ban CUF meetings, although they occasionally lift the ban. Po-
 lice continue to break up meetings attended by persons thought to be opposed to
 the Zanzibar Government. In Pemba security forces broke up gatherings and intimi-
 dated opposition party officials.
 The Government continued to arrest opposition politicians for holding meetings,
 distributing information, and other acts that it regarded as seditious (see Sections
 1.d. and 3).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association; however, the Government
 limits this right in practice. The Registrar of Political Parties has sole authority to
 approve or deny the registration of any political party and is responsible for enforc-
 ing strict regulations on registered or provisionally registered parties. The Constitu-
 tion and the law stipulate that citizens cannot establish new political parties; can-
 didates must be members of 1 of the 13 registered political parties. The electoral
 law prohibits independent candidates; requires all standing Members of Parliament
 to resign if they join another party; requires all political parties to support the union
 with Zanzibar; and forbids parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious affiliation.
 Parties granted provisional registration may hold public meetings and recruit mem-
 bers. They have 6 months to submit lists of at least 200 members in 10 of the coun-
 try's 25 regions, including 2 regions in Zanzibar, in order to secure full registration
 and to be eligible to field candidates for election. Nonregistered parties are prohib-
 ited from holding meetings, recruiting members, or fielding candidates. Although
 the Registrar of Political Parties called the registration provisions too restrictive, no
 remedial action has been taken. The registrar also expressed the view in 1997 that
 parties that failed to win 3 percent of the vote in the last election should be
 deregistered.
 The most prominent unregistered party was the Reverend Christopher Mtikilas
 Democratic Party, which advocates the dissolution of the union and the expulsion
 of minorities from the maiuland. Despite his party's lack of government recognition,
 Mtikila was able to publicize his views through his legally registered church and
 through ongoing lawsuits against the Government.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. Several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) were formed in the
 last few years to address the concerns of families, the disabled, women, and chil-
 dren. The Government suspended registration of new NGO's in 1997, pending the
 enactment of new NGO legislation that was to have been introduced during the
 year. However, such legislation was not introduced and details of the proposed legis-
 lation (which is viewed as restrictive) still were being discussed within the Govern-
 ment, with some input from NGO's, at years end. The result of this delay is that
 new registrations have been suspended. The Vice President said that the Govern-
 ment sought to regulate NGO's so that they would work "responsibly." The National
 Women's Council, registered in 1993, suspended by the Ministry in 1996 and or-
 dered deregistered in 1997, was reinstated in June (see Section i.e.); however, the
 
 
 419
 Government continues to harass the group for allegedly engaging in political activity
 contrary to its charter. The Government delayed action for 3 years on the case of
 an NGO called Defenders of Human Rights in Tanzania (see Section 4) before it
 halted registration of new NGO's. In 1997 a youth group was denied registration
 on the grounds that there already was a youth organization affiliated with the
 CCM. Opposition leaders complain that the Zanzibar Government is even more re-
 strictive in registering societies than is the Union Government. In May the principal
 secretary in the Zanzibari President's Office told NGO's that their role should be
 to support government initiatives.
 A number of professional, business, legal, and medical associations have begun to
 address political topics.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice, subject to measures that it
 claims are necessary to ensure public order and safety. Missionaries are allowed to
 enter the country freely, particularly if proselytizing is ancillary to their other reli-
 gious activities. Citizens are allowed to go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious
 practices.
 The law prohibits preaching if it incites persons against other religions. In Feb-
 ruary police arrested a popular Muslim leader for violating this law, which triggered
 widespread riots. Following those riots, the Government charged that some religious
 leaders were inciting their adherents to violence. The Prime Minister said that the
 Government would further restrict persons and organizations that were involved.
 The Ministry of Home Affairs subsequently sent 22 religious organizations a letter
 demanding that they show cause why they should not be deregistered and expelled
 from the country. The Ministry was assessing the organizations' responses to its let-
 ters at year's end.
 The Government failed to respond to tensions between the Muslim and Christian
 communities (see Section 5), and cancelled several meetings with Muslim and Chris-
 tian leaders aimed at improving relations between the two communities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government imposes some limits on these rights. Short-term do-
 mestic travel is not restricted, but citizens must follow national employment direc-
 tives stipulating the nature of employment and location of the residence. The
 Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure
 that every resident within their area of jurisdiction engages in productive and law-
 ful employment. Those not employed are subject to transfer to another area where
 employment is available. These laws, although enforced neither generally or rigor-
 ously, are used by police as a means of soliciting bribes and intimidating urban resi-
 dents. The Dar Es Salaam City Council rounds up beggars for return to their home
 areas, but many return to the capital.
 Passports for foreign travel may be difficult to obtain, mostly due to bureaucratic
 inefficiency and officials' demands for bribes. Citizens can return without difficulty.
 Mainlanders are required to show identification to travel to Zanzibar; although
 Zanzibaris need no special identification to travel to the mainland. Under Zanzibar
 law, only persons born on the islands are allowed to own land there. Mainlanders
 are permitted to work in Zanzibar.
 The law includes provisions for the granting of refugee and asylee status in ac-
 cordance with the provisions of the 1951 United Nations (U.N.) Convention Relating
 to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. The Government cooperates with
 the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The Government traditionally
 maintained a generous open border policy both with regard to neighboring countries'
 refugees and to persons seeking political asylum. However, following an influx of
 Rwandan refugees in early 1995, the Government closed the borders with Rwanda
 and Burundi. Nevertheless, tens of thousands of asylum seekers were able to enter
 the country. Occasionally local authorities used laws, such as those on poaching,
 trespassing, and illegal migration, to repatriate forcibly several hundred Rwandan
 refugees previously admitted. By early 1997, virtually all Rwandans had departed
 because of the Governments use of force and intimidation, but during the year
 Rwandans again were allowed to seek asylum in Tanzania. There were 6,543
 Rwandans in the country at year's end.
 Tanzania continues to offer first asylum to over 300,000 refugees from Burundi
 and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
 Refugee camps in the west were plagued by food shortages, overcrowding, and ma-
 laria outbreaks during the year. Over 100 persons died in the Mtendedi refugee
 camp due to malaria and poor medical facilities (see Section l.a.).
 
 
 420
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was introduced officially in 1992, and in 1995, for
 the first time in more than 30 years, citizens exercised their right to change their
 government through national elections for president and parliament. The CCM,
 with huge advantages over opposition parties in membership and access to re-
 sources, including its own daily Kiswahili language newspaper, retained 186 of 232
 elective seats in Parliament-and won the presidency. Despite government tactics to
 restrict or delay the activities of its opponents, the opposition achieved occasional
 success in judicial challenges and received about 38 percent of the vote. The Govern-
 ment arrested opposition politicians for holding meetings, distributing information,
 and other acts that it regarded as seditious (see Sections 1.d. and 2.b.). In January
 police searched the offices of the opposition CUF party and removed documents from
 its files (see Section 1.f.). In February police in Tanga banned a procession organized
 by an opposition party (see Section 2.b.).
 On the mainland, by-elections held throughout the year were marred by violence
 on occasion. Tight security was employed at polling places. Opposition candidates
 won some of these elections.
 The Constitution of Zanzibar provides citizens with the right to change their gov-
 ernment peacefully; however, this- right has been circumscribed severely. The 1995
 presidential election in Zanzibar was seriously flawed. Government-owned broadcast
 media in Zanzibar were biased in favor of the CCM incumbent President Salmin
 Amour Juma. The government party intimidated and harassed the opposition and
 did not permit opposition rallies until 2 months prior to the election. Further, reg-
 istration was limited to persons who had maintained the same residence for 5 years,
 which disenfranchised many voters. CUF Party members also were detained by po-
 lice when they attempted to campaign in rural areas.
 Election observers in Zanzibar were denied access to the tabulation of votes from
 polling stations. After 4 days, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission, appointed by the
 Amour government, announced that Amour had won by 0.5 percent of the vote. Fig-
 ures tabulated by the CUF showed a similarly close victory for its candidate. After
 efforts by the international community to reconcile discrepancies in the vote count-
 ing, observers concluded that the official results may have been inaccurate. The
 Zanzibar and Union Governments both rejected calls to overturn the result and con-
 duct a new election for the presidency of Zanzibar.
 In the 3 years since the election, government security forces and CCM gangs har-
 assed and intimidated CUF members on both main Zanzibar islands, Pemba and
 Ugunja. Because the CUP won all 20 seats on Pemba, Pembans living on Ugunja
 were regarded as CUP supporters and as a result were harassed. The CUF accused
 police of detaining dozens of its members including several local leaders. Many CUP
 supporters left Ugunja for Pemba or the mainland. However, citizens' safety is not
 assured in Pemba, where security forces dispersed gatherings and intimidated per-
 sons. Some Zanzibar government employees who voted for the opposition in a late
 1997 by-election lost their jobs, and students on Pemba report expulsions from
 school because of their families' political affiliations. Almost all international donors
 have suspended direct assistance to Zanzibar in response to the authorities' human
 rights abuses.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. However, in practice few women are politically active. Only 8 of 232 elect-
 ed members of the Union Parliament are women. There are also 37 female members
 of the CCM and opposition parties who were appointed to Parliament to seats re-
 served for women in order to meet the legal requirement that at least 15 percent
 of the Members of Parliament be women. The President has set a goal that women
 should constitute 30 percent of parliamentarians elected in 2000. Three of the Cabi-
 net's 23 ministers are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government has obstructed the formation of local human rights groups. Per-
 sons seeking to register human rights NGO's, such as the Defenders of Human
 Rights in Tanzania and the Tanzania Human Rights Education Society, complained
 that the Ministry of Home Affairs delayed action on their applications until 1997
 when it suspended action on all applications (see Section 2.b.). This hampered appli-
 cants' access and efforts to monitor violations of human rights. The Government
 continued to refuse registration of the African Human Rights and Justice Protection
 Network on the grounds that it was politically oriented. In June the Government
 reinstated the National Women's Council, an NGO it had deregistered in 1997 (see
 Section 2.b.).
 
 
 421
 
 Government officials have said that international human rights groups are wel-
 come to visit the country. Amnesty International visited 3 times during the year.
 There were discussions, both within the Government and among NGO's, concerning
 the formation of a human rights commission. However, there are sharp differences
 on how independent it should be.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, or religion. Discrimination based on sex, age, or disability is
 not prohibited specifically by law but is discouraged publicly in official statements.
 Discrimination against women and religious and ethnic minorities persisted.
 Women.-Violence against women remained widespread. Legal remedies exist in
 the form of assault provisions under the criminal code, but in practice are difficult
 to enforce. The Marriage Act of 1971 makes a declaration against spousal battery,
 but does not prohibit it or provide for any punishment. Traditional customs that
 subordinate women remain strong in both urban and rural areas and local mag-
 istrates often upheld such practices. Women may be punished by their husbands for
 not bearing children. It is accepted for a husband to treat his wife as he wishes,
 and wife beating occurs at all levels of society. Cultural, family, and social pressure
 prevent many women from reporting abuses to authorities. Nonetheless, the Min-
 istry of Home Affairs noted that an average of 10,000 cases of wife beating are re-
 ported annually. In July the Ruvuma regional crime officer noted that a large num-
 ber of women are killed by their husbands or commit suicide as a result of domestic
 battery. Government officials frequently make public statements criticizing such
 abuses, but rarely take action against perpetrators.
 Several NGO's provide counseling and education programs on women's rights
 problems, particularly sexual harassment and molestation. In response to intensi-
 fied concern about this problem, in May Parliament passed the Sexual Offenses Spe-
 cial Provisions Bill which, among other things, provides for life imprisonment sen-
 tences for persons convicted of rape and child molestation.
 Although the Government advocates equal rights for women in the workplace, it
 does not ensure these rights in practice. In the public sector, which employs 80 per-
 cent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict women's access to some jobs
 or hours of employment. While progress on women's rights has been more noticeable
 in urban areas, strong traditional norms still divide labor along gender lines and
 place women in a subordinate position. Discrimination against women is most acute
 in the countryside, where women are relegated to farming and raising children, and
 have almost no opportunity for wage employment. Custom and tradition often
 hinder women from owning property such as land, and these factors may override
 other laws that provide for equal treatment. Women seeking higher education may
 be harassed by male colleagues, but authorities largely have ignored the practice.
 Overall, the situation for women is even less favorable in Zanzibar. Women there,
 and in many parts of the mainland, face discriminatory restrictions on inheritance
 and ownership of property because of concessions by the Government and courts to
 customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage Act provide for certain
 inheritance and property rights for women, application of customary, Islamic, or
 statutory law depends on the life style and stated intentions of the male head of
 household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inheritance claims, pri-
 marily in rural areas. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under the age of 21
 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment.
 Children.-Government funding of programs for children's welfare remained min-
 uscule. The Government has made some constructive efforts to address children's
 welfare, including working closely with the U.N. Children's Fund and other inter-
 national and local organizations to improve the well-being of orphans and neglected
 children. A 1998 study funded by the International Labor Organization (ILO) re-
 ported a growth in child prostitution, including forced prostitution (see Section 6.c.).
 The law provides for 7 years of compulsory schooling through the age of 15. Some
 teachers demand money to enroll students in school, with the result that some chil-
 dren have been denied an education. The primary school dropout rate is between
 30 and 40 percent. In the past, girls who became pregnant were expelled from
 school. In 1996 officials put into effect procedures to permit pregnant girls to con-
 tinue their education following their maternity absences. However, the application
 of these procedures is limited, and laws forcing girls out of school remain in effect.
 The rate of girls' enrollment in school is lower than that of boys and generally de-
 clines with each additional year of schooling. In some districts, there was a decline
 in attendance as the result of early marriage, often at the behest of parents. Never-
 
 
 422
 theless, there have been across the board increases in the rate of girls' participation
 since 1990.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health. Although the Govern-
 ment officially discourages the practice, it is still performed at an early age in ap-
 proximately 20 of the country's 130 main ethnic groups, affecting 18 percent of the
 female population, according to a 1996 health survey conducted by the Bureau of
 Statistics. In some ethnic groups, FGM is compulsory, and in others, a woman who
 has not undergone the practice may not be able to marry. Government data show
 this to be a problem varying by region, with the most affected regions being Arusha
 (81 percent of women), Dodoma (68 percent), Mara (44 percent), Kilimanjaro (37
 percent), Iringa (27 percent), Tanga/Singida (25 percent), and Morogoro (20 percent).
 FGM is almost nonexistent in the rest of the country. Government officials have
 called for changes in practices that adversely affect women, but introduced no legis-
 lation that would restrict the practice of FGM specifically. Some local government
 officials have begun to combat the practice and convicted and imprisoned some per-
 sons who mutilated young girls. Seminars sponsored by various governmental and
 nongovernmental organizations are held regularly in an attempt to educate the pub-
 lic on the dangers of FGM and other traditional practices. These practices include
 the tradition of inherited wives, which critics contend contributes to the spread of
 HIV/AIDS, and child marriages which are sanctioned with parental consent under
 the Marriage Act of 1971 for girls 12 years of age or older. While some authorities
 believe that FGM is declining, a government report has suggested that it is on the
 rise, especially in the central region. The Dodoma Traditional Practices and Beliefs
 Committee, supported by a World Health Organization grant, began a program to
 eliminate FGM in the Dodoma region.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate access to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for persons with disabilities. Al-
 though there is no official discrimination against the disabled, in practice the phys-
 ically disabled effectively are restricted in their access to education, employment,
 and provision of other state services due to physical barriers. The Government pro-
 vides only limited funding for special facilities and programs. In February the Gov-
 ernment dispersed a demonstration by the Society of the Disabled because it did not
 have the required permit (see Section 2.b.).
 Religious Minorities.-A few leaders in the Christian and Muslim communities
 appear to be fomenting religious tension between their groups. The Muslim commu-
 nity claims to be disadvantaged in terms of its representation in the civil service,
 government, and parastatals, in part because both colonial and early post-independ-
 ence administrations refused to recognize the credentials of traditional Muslim
 schools. As a result, there is broad Muslim resentment of perceived advantages that
 Christians enjoy. In turn, Christians criticize what they perceive as lingering effects
 of undue favoritism accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scholarships by
 former president Ali Hassan Mwinyi, a Muslim. Despite these perceptions, there
 does not appear to be any serious widespread problem of religious discrimination
 in access to employment or educational opportunities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-In the past, the Government discriminated
 against the Barabaig and other nomadic groups in the north. These ethnic groups
 continued to complain of past governmental discrimination- because of efforts to
 make them adopt a more modern lifestyle and to restrict their access to pastoral
 land that was turned into large government wheat farms.
 The Asian community, which is viewed unfavorably by many African Tanzanians,
 has declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about 50,000. However, there are
 no laws or official policies that discriminate against Asians. As the Government
 places greater emphasis on market-oriented policies and privatization, public con-
 cern regarding the Asian minority's economic role has increased. This has led to de-
 mands for policies of "indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not increase
 the Asian community's economic predominance at the expense of the country's Afri-
 can population.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both the Constitution and the 1955 Trade Union Or-
 dinance refer to the right of association of workers. Nevertheless, workers do not
 have the right to form or join organizations of their choice. The 1991 Organization
 of Tanzania Trade Unions Act that addresses labor union problems; however, it
 serves to impede the creation of unions. The Act established the Organization of
 Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU), renamed the Tanzania Federation of Trade Unions
 (TFTU) in 1995, as the only trade union organization. Although it still has not been
 registered, formally, the TFTU acts in all but juridical proceedings under its new
 
 
 423
 name. The TFTU has little influence on labor policy. It is comprised of 11 independ-
 ent trade unions that have the right to leave the TFTU and to collect their own
 dues, 5 percent of which are contributed to the federation. More than 3 years after
 the labor reorganization, only 1 of these 11 independent unions, the Tanzanian
 Teachers' Union, which predates the OTTU, is registered. Unions exist in the work-
 place, but the absence of registration makes relations with employers difficult.
 Overall, about 10 to 15 percent of the country's 2 million wage earners are orga-
 nized. Although the TFTUnominally represents 60 percent of workers in industry
 and government, in some sectors it deducts dues from workers' pay whether or not
 they are members. All workers, including those classified as "essential" service
 workers, are permitted to join unions, but essential workers are not permitted to
 strike.
 There are no laws prohibiting retribution against legal strikers. However, workers
 have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted mediation and
 conciliation procedures ultimately leading to the Industrial Court, which receives di-
 rection from the Minister of Labor and Youth Development. If the TFTU is not sat-
 isfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it may then conduct a legal strike.
 These procedures can prolong a dispute by months without resolving it. Pending a
 resolution, frustrated workers have staged impromptu, illegal wildcat strikes and
 walkouts. In September the Zanzibar Government pledged to review the island's
 labor laws in an effort to improve industrial relations and minimize labor disputes.
 In March the regional ILO representative called on the Government to ratify con-
 ventions on freedom of association, minimum working age, equal opportunity, and
 freedom from discrimination. The Government had not yet responded to the ILO at
 year's end.
 The TFTU expanded upon its forerunner's membership in regional and pan-
 Africanist trade union organizations by joining the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions in 1996.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but does not apply to the public sector. Wages for government and
 parastatal employees are set administratively by the Government, although privat-
 ization and reductions in public sector employment have reduced such employees to
 about 5 percent of the work force.
 Although the TFTU negotiates on behalf of most private sector employees with
 the Association of Tanzanian Employers, collective agreements must be submitted
 to the Industrial Court for approval. The ILO has observed that these provisions are
 not in conformity with ILO Convention 98 on Collective Bargaining and the Right
 to Organize. The Security of Employment Act of 1964 prohibits discriminatory ac-
 tivities by an employer against union members. Employers found guilty of antiunion
 activities are required by law to reinstate workers. The Warioba Commission found
 that bribes may determine whether a worker dismissed from his job may be rein-
 stated.
 There are no export processing zones (EPZ's) on the mainland, but there are three
 in Zanzibar. Working conditions are comparable to those in other areas. Labor law
 protections apply to EPZ workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, which also applies to children, although such labor by children
 is not prohibited specifically. The Government is working with NGO's to establish
 this prohibition explicitly. However, the ILO observed that various provisions of law
 are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor. Specifically, the
 Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires that every local government au-
 thority ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school engage
 in productive or other lawful employment. In some rural areas, villagers still are
 obligated to work in the village community gardens or on small construction
 projects, such as repairing roads. There were reports of children forced into prostitu-
 tion by parents or guardians in need of extra income.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-By law,
 children under the age of 12 are prohibited from working in the formal wage sector
 in both urban and rural areas, and the Government enforces this prohibition. How-
 ever, this provision does not apply to children working on family farms or herding
 domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may be employed on a
 daily wage and on a day-to-day basis, but they must have parental permission and
 return to the residence of their guardian at night. The ILO estimated that in 1995
 29.4 percent of children between the ages of 10 and 14 were economically active.
 The minimum age for work of a contractual nature in approved occupations is set
 at 15 years. The law prohibits a young person from employment in any occupation
 that is injurious to health and that is dangerous or otherwise unsuitable. Young
 persons between the ages of 12 and 15 may be employed in industrial work but only
 
 
 between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., with some exceptions. The Ministry of
 Labor and Social Welfare and Youth Development is responsible for enforcement,
 but the number of inspectors is inadequate to police conditions. The effectiveness
 of government enforcement reportedly has declined with increased privatization. Ap-
 proximately 3,000 to 5,000 children engage in seasonal employment on sisal, tea,
 tobacco, and coffee plantations. Children working on plantations generally receive
 lower wages than their older counterparts, although they may be in comparable
 jobs. Work on sisal and tobacco plantations is particularly hazardous and detrimen-
 tal to children. From 1,500 to 3,000 children work in unregulated gemstone mines.
 Girls often are employed as domestic servants, mostly in urban households under
 abusive and exploitative conditions. In the informal sector, children assist their par-
 ents in unregulated piecework manufacturing.
 The Constitution does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded child labor, and
 there were reports of children forced into prostitution by their parents or their
 guardians (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ-
 ment in the formal sector. The TFTU often negotiates higher minimum wages with
 individual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. The legal
 minimum wage is $26 (17,500 shillings) per month. Even when supplemented with
 various benefits such as housing, transport allowances, and food subsidies, the mini-
 mum rate may not always be sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family, and workers must depend on their extended family or on a
 second or third job. Despite the minimum wage, many workers, especially in the
 small but growing informal sector, are paid less.
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44- to 48-hour
 workweek. In general women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Sev-
 eral laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safety fac-
 tory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is managed by the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare and Youth Development. However, its effec-
 tiveness is limited.
 TFTU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is effective in the
 formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. Workers may sue an
 employer through their TFTU branch if their working conditions do not comply with
 the Ministry of Labor's health and environmental standards. Workers making such
 complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. However, workers do not have the
 right to remove themselves from dangerous situations without jeopardizing their
 employment. Labor standards are not enforced in the informal sector.
