 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state. In 1995 the nation conducted its first multiparty general elections
 for president and parliament in more than 30 years. The ruling party, Chama Cha
 Mapinduzi (CCM), continued to control the Union Government, winning 186 of the
 232 elective seats in Parliament. The CCM presidential candidate, Benjamin
 Mkapa, won a four-way race with 61.8 percent of the vote. The islands of Zanzibar
 are integrated into the United Republic's governmental and party structure; how-
 ever, the Zanzibar Government, which has its own president and parliament, exer-
 cises considerable autonomy. Elections for the president and parliament of Zanzibar
 were also held in 1995. International observers noted serious discrepancies during
 the vote-counting process, calling into question the reelection of CCM incumbent Dr.
 Salmin Amour Juma as Zanzibar's President. In the period since that election, calls
 for new elections by opposition parties were met with reprisals by the authorities.
 In response, most donors halted economic aid to Zanzibar. The judiciary is formally
 independent but suffers from corruption, inefficiency, and executive influence.
 The olice have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They were
 formerly supported by   citizens' anticrime groups and  patrols known   as
 "Sungusungu,' which have been largely inactive since late 1995 but are still in ex-
 istence. The police regularly committed human rights abuses.
 Agriculture provides 85 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea, and
 gemstones account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is small. Eco-
 nomic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization of agricultural policy,
 the privatization of state-owned enterprises, the rescheduling of foreign debt pay-
 ments, and the freeing of the currency exchange rate, helped to stimulate economic
 growth, as has the decline in the rate of inflation. While the Government has at-
 tempted to improve its fiscal management, pervasive corruption constrains economic
 progress.hua
 The Government's human rights record did not improve appreciably, and prob-
 lems persisted. Although the 1995 multiparty elections represented an important
 development, citizens' right to change their government in Zanzibar is severely cir-
 cumscribed. While new opposition parties on the mainland and Zanzibar were com-
 petitive in many races in 1995 and in by-elections since that time, winning in var-
 ious constituencies, police often harassed and intimidated members and supporters
 of the political opposition. Other human rights problems included police beatings
 and mistreatment of suspects that sometimes resulted in death. Soldiers attacked
 civilians, and police in Zanzibar used torture, including beatings and floggings.
 Throughout the country, prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Ar-
 bitrary arrest and prolonged detention continued, and the inefficient and corrupt ju-
 dicial system often did not provide expeditious and fair trials. Pervasive corruption,
 which was documented in the Warioba Commission's report, continued to have a
 broad impact on human rights. The Government infringed on citizens' privacy and
 limited freedom of speech and of the press, and freedom of assembly, association,
 and movement. The Government obstructed the formation of domestic human rights
 grups. Discrimination and violence against women remained serious problems.
 Abuse of children and child labor continued. The Government infringed on workers'
 rights. Mob justice remained severe and widespread.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. Credible observers estimate that as many as 10 prisoners die each year as
 a result of inadequate nutrition, health care, sanitation, and mistreatment, includ-
 ing police beatings of persons in detention (see Section 1.c.).
 
 
 There were no developments in the 1993 police killing of a member of the opposi-
 tion party Civic United Front (CUF) on the island of Pemba. After a lengthy inves-
 tigation, authorities charged the policeman who fired the shots with involuntary
 manslaughter; the officer remains free on bail. CUF leaders complained that in 1996
 the President and Attorney General of Zanzibar blocked the prosecution of the police
 officer. Nearly 5 years after the event, a trial is still pending.
 Instances of mob justice against suspected criminals continued to claim dozens of
 lives. Throughout the year, the media reported numerous incidents in which mobs
 killed suspected thieves, who were stoned, lynched, beaten to death, or doused with
 gasoline and set on fire. Such events are so commonplace that they are often
 grouped together with reporting on car accidents and other mishaps. Many in-
 stances are never reported. The widespread belief in witchcraft has led, in some in-
 stances, to the killing of alleged witches by their "victims," aggrieved relatives, or
 mobs. A deputy minister estimated that 100 mostly older women in the Mwanza
 and Shinyanga regions are killed every year by those who believe them to be witch-
 es. Government officials condemn these practices and some arrests occur. However,
 most perpetrators of witch-killing or mob justice elude arrest, and the Government
 has not taken preventive measures.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Tortur and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading  reatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment,
 but the police regularly threaten, mistreat, or occasionally beat suspected criminals
 during and after their apprehension and interrogation. Police also use the same
 means to obtain information about suspects from family members not in custody.
 Although government officials usually condemn these practices, the Government sel-
 dom prosecutes police for such abuses. The People's Militia Laws, as amended by
 Parliament in 1989, bestow quasilegal status on the traditional Sungusungu neigh-
 borhood and village anticrime groups. Participation in these groups was compulsory
 prior to the 1995 election. In the past, these groups were criticized for using exces-
 sive force with criminal suspects. While largely moribund since that election, the
 Sungusungu still exist and in July the President asked that government law en-
 forcement officials work cooperatively with the Sungusungu. He created a committee
 to recommend ways of strengthening relations between the traditional and formal
 security entities.
 Repeated reports from credible sources indicate that the police use torture, includ-
 ing beatings and floggings in Zanzibar, notably on Pemba Island. The Zanzibar and
 Union Governments have both denied these charges. In June police in Arusha were
 charged with torturing 10 women detainees, 1 of whom had a miscarriage. In Sep-
 tember the Zanzibar prisons commissioner confirmed the death of a remand pris-
 oner who reportedly died of illness en route to a hospital; the family alleged that
 the prisoner was taken to the prison after being severely beaten at a police station.
 Numerous incidents of soldiers attacking civilians were reported. In October undisci-
 plined troops seized a bus and beat and robbed its passengers traveling to Kigoma.
 A government commission of inquiry established following a similar 1996 incident
 had not reached any conclusions at year's end.
 Pervasive corruption is a serious problem in the police force. The report of the
 Warioba Commission on Corruption that was released in April found that police ar-
 rest innocent people and file false charges against them if they refuse to pay bribes.
 The Government did not punish or prosecute any police officers for such abuses.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Government officials ac-
 knowledged that prisons are overcrowded and living conditions are poor. The daily
 amount of food allotted to prisoners is insufficient to meet their nutritional needs,
 and even this amount is not always provided. Prisons are authorized to hold 21,000
 persons, but the actual prison population is estimated at 47,000 persons. The Gov-
 ernment is expanding prisons, but its efforts have not kept pace with the growing
 number of prisoners. The Government does not release timely statistics on the pris-
 on expansion proram or on the exact extent of the overcrowding.
 In August the law review commission called for the construction of 22 new pris-
 ons. Some prisoners are paroled or receive suspended sentences as a means of re-
 lieving overcrowding.
 The Warioba Commission reported that wardens give favorable treatment to cer-
 tain prisoners at the expense of others. One person released from Ukonga prison
 in 1996 reported that guards beat and abused prisoners, particularly during month-
 ly searches in which all prisoners were assembled and required to strip. Serious dis-
 eases, such as dysentery, malaria, and cholera, are common and result in deaths
 because of inadequate medical care by the authorities. Medical treatment is limited,
 and friends and family of prisoners generally need to provide medication or the
 funds with which to purchase them. A prisoner denied medical treatment for almost
 
 
 347
 a month died in January en route to a hospital. Soon thereafter, another person
 died at a bus stop within minutes of being released from Segerea prison. Convicted
 prisoners are not allowed to receive food from the outside and are often moved to
 different prisons without notification of their families. Pretrial detainees are held
 tgether with those serving sentences but are allowed to receive food from the out-
 side.
 There is no outside monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitraty arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Criminal Procedure Code, amended in 1985, requires that a person ar-
 rested for a crime, other than a national security charge under the Preventive De-
 tention Act, be charged before a magistrate within 24 hours. However, in practice,
 the police often fail to comply. The 1985 amendments also restricted the right to
 bail and imposed strict conditions on freedom of movement and association when
 bail is granted. Because of backlogs, an average case still takes 2 to 3 years or
 longer to come to trial. The Code provides for a right to defense counsel. The Chief
 Justice assigns lawyers to indigent defendants charged with serious crimes such as
 murder, manslaughter, and armed robbery. There are only a few hundred practicing
 lawyers in the country, and most indigent defendants charged with lesser crimes do
 not have legal counsel. In many cases, accused persons are denied the right to con-
 tact a lawyer or talk with family members.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President may order the arrest and in-
 definite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. This act was amended in 1985 to require the Government
 to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the reason for
 their detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the grounds for deten-
 tion at 90-day intervals. Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in 1991
 that the Preventive Detention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons not con-
 sidered dangerous to society, the Government has still not introduced corrective leg-
 islation. The Preventive Detention Act was not used during the year. While the Law
 Reform Commission recommended that the act be repealed, the President said that
 repeal is unnecessary if the law is not being used. The Government has additional
 broad detention powers under the Regions and Regional Commissioners Act and the
 Area Commissioners Act of 1962. These acts permit regional and district commis-
 sioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons who may "disturb public tran-
 quility."
 Police continued to make arbitrary arrests, although less frequently than in the
 East. For example, the police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects and
 old them in custody without charge for as long as several years to attempt to force
 suspects to surrender. Such relatives who manage to get their cases before a judge
 are usually set free, only to be immediately rearrested when they leave the court-
 room. The Government took no action to correct this abuse during the year.
 According to the Warioba Commission report, police arrest innocent people, accuse
 them of crimes not committed, and withdraw or reduce the charges upon payment
 of bribes. The Government has not taken any action to correct these abuses.
 Since the 1995 election, police in Zanzibar, particularly on Pemba, have regularly
 detained, arrested, or harassed CUF members and suspected supporters. In Septem-
 ber police detained a prominent opposition politician for 6 days before releasing her.
 Despite orders from the Union Government's Inspector General of Police, officers in
 Zanzibar continued these activities.
 The Government does not used forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; in practice the higher courts have increasingly demonstrated their independ-
 ence of the Government, although executive interference exists. In the past, senior
 police or government officials pressured and sometimes reassigned judges who made
 unpopular rulings; no such incidents occurred during the year. Independent observ-
 ers, however, continue to criticize the judiciary, especially at lower levels, as corrupt
 and inefficient and question the system's ability to provide a defendant with an ex-
 peditious and fair trial. In June the Chief Justice suspended a magistrate who had
 refused for 4 years to produce a copy of her ruling so that the defendant could file
 an appeal. The Warioba Commission found that pervasive corruption affected the
 judiciary from clerks to magistrates. Clerks took bribes to decide whether or not to
 open cases and to hide or misdirect the files of those accused of crimes. Magistrates
 often accept bribes to determine guilt or innocence, pass sentence, withdraw
 charges, or decide appeals. In Dar es Salaam 235 remand prisoners refused to ap-
 pear in court in January, charging that they could not get fair trials. A committee
 was later formed to petition the Government to improve prison conditions and speed
 up trials.
 
 
 348
 The legal system is based on the British model, with modifications to accommo-
 date customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Military courts do not try civilians,
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal
 decisions to the High Court and Court of Appeal.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system but re-
 tains Islamic courts to adjudicate Muslim family cases such as divorce, child cus-
 tody, and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard
 only in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the national Court of
 Appeal.
 The majority of individuals held in the two major prisons in Dar es Salaam are
 awaiting trial, and in many instances bribes determine whether bail is granted or
 even whether a case is judged as a civil or criminal matter. There are reports of
 prisoners waiting several years for trial because they could not pay bribes to police
 and court officials. Authorities acknowledge that some cases have been pending
 since 1988. The Government initiated efforts as early as 1991 to highlight judicial
 corruption and increased its oversight. Limited progress has been made, and during
 the year several magistrates resigned after the Chief Justice was presented with
 credible evidence of corruption.
 Criminal trials are open to the public and to the press; courts must give reasons
 on the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of
 appeal.
 Wile juvenile courts have theoretically existed since 1964, no separate facility ex-
 isted for young offenders, many of whom were tried in adult courts. A separate juve-
 nile court facility, funded by donors, opened in July.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, which are generally provided for in
 the Constitution. The CCM has historically penetrated all levels of society through
 local cells, varying in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings
 and containing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials serve as 10-cell lead-
 ers with authority to resolve problems at the grassroots level and to report to au-
 thorities any suspicious behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night
 eatrol service in the neighborhood. In 1993 elections were held for new grassroots
 eaders to replace the CCM 10-cell leaders in nonparty business. Few voters partici-
 pated in these elections, which were boycotted by the opposition, and the 10-cell
 leaders retain nearly all of their power and influence. However, since the 1993 elec-
 tions the role of the cells has diminished considerably.
 CCM membership is voluntary and is estimated at 2 to 3 million members. While
 in the past CCM membership was necessary for advancement in political and other
 areas, the importance of such membership is waning.
 The Criminal Procedures Act of 1985 authorizes police officials, including the ci-
 vilian anticrime units, to issue search warrants. However, the act also authorizes
 searches of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice warrants are rarely requested, and police and other security
 services search private homes and business establishments at will. The security
 services reportedly monitor telephones and correspondence of some citizens and for-
 eign residents.
 The police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects and detain them with-
 out charge in an effort to force suspects to surrender (see Section 1.d.).
 National employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and loca-
 tion of residence give authorities the right to transfer citizens to another area to
 ensure their productive employment (see Section 2.d.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, the Government limited these rights in practice. The
 Government pressures journalists to practice self-censorship and denied unrestricted
 access to political opponents. In September police interrogated a journalist for the
 Majira newspaper for writing articles about problems along the border with Bu-
 rundi. Except in Zanzibar, citizens generally enjoyed the right to discuss freely polit-
 ical alternatives. Opposition political party members and others openly criticize the
 Government and ruling party in public forums. However, persons using "abusive
 language" against the country's leadership may be subject to arrest, and the Gov-
 ernment used this provision to detain some opposition figures. In July a former
 presidential candidate was arrested in Zanzibar and charged with making seditious
 comments about the chairman of the electoral commission. Earlier in the year,
 
 
 349
 President Mkapa intimated publicly that government officials who support the oppo-
 sition could lose their jobs.
 On Zanzibar, radio and television are controlled by the Government, which also
 practices a restrictive policy with regard to print media. Private mainland news-
 papers are widely available, and many residents can receive mainland television.
 The press on the mainland is, on the whole, lively and outspoken, and even the
 government-owned newspaper occasionally reports events that may portray the Gov-
 ernment in an unflattering light. There are 9 daily newspapers and 15 other news-
 papers in English and Kiswahili, along with another dozen periodicals some of
 which are owned or influenced by political parties, both the CCM and the opposi-
 tion. The rising cost of newsprint resulted in the closure of 15 newspapers in 1996.
 There is no official censorship, but throughout the year the Government continued
 topressure newspapers to suppress or change articles unfavorable to it.
 In 1996 the Government of Zanzibar banned from the islands'the privately owned
 Kiswahili Language newspaper Majira. A member of an opposition party central
 committee was arrested in June for entering Zanzibar with four copies of the news-
 paper. In July that newspaper was charged with sedition for having published a
 speech made by a presidential candidate in 1995.
 Private radio and television stations broadcast in Dar es Salaam and in a few
 other urban areas, although their activities may be circumscribed. The Government
 reportedly does not censor news reports, but attempts to influence their content.
 Some journalists, such as those in Zanzibar, exercise self-censorship on sensitive is-
 sues. Authorities prevented television cameramen from filming the swearing in of
 an opposition member of Parliament. Journalists who report arrests can be charged
 with obstructing police activity under the 1964 Police Act. In March a journalist was
 sentenced to 1 year in prison for possessing a supposedly secret document, which
 was in fact a personal letter. The arrest and conviction were widely publicized, and,
 in an example of judicial independence, a court later overturned the conviction.
 The Union Government sought to maintain some control over the private media
 with the establishment of a code of conduct for journalists and a Media Council.
 With the leadership of the local chapter of the Media Council for Southern Africa
 and the Association of Journalists and Media Workers, journalists forced the Gov-
 ernment to agree to a voluntary code of ethics and establishment of a media council
 intended to preserve and expand media freedom. The council was formally inaugu-
 rated on August 16, although it came into existence in 1996. Thus far, it has proved
 ineffectual.
 Academic freedom is largely respected in practice. Academics, increasingly out-
 spoken in their criticism of the Government, stepped up their calls for reform.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of peaceful assembly; however, the Government limits this right in practice.
 Political parties must give the police 48 hours' advance notice of rallies. Police have
 the authority to deny permission on public safety or security grounds or if the per-
 mit seeker belongs to an unregistered organization or political party. In September
 1996, an opposition party canceled its march to celebrate the victory of one of its
 by-election candidates because of government intimidation, and police dispersed an-
 other opposition procession in February. Authorities arrested citizens for assembling
 without the appropriate permit. Opposition parties, other than in Zanzibar, are able
 to hold rallies. Zanzibar government officials prohibited the assembly of CUF sup-
 porters and use of CUF slogans for the 10 months following the 1995 election. They
 continue to ban CUF meetings, although they occasionally lift the ban. Police con-
 tinue to break up meetings attended by persons thought to be opposed to the Zanzi-
 bar Government. In Pemba security forces broke up gatherings and intimidated offi-
 cials.
 On the mainland, by-elections that were held 6 times during the year were on oc-
 casion marred by violence. Tight security was employed at polling places. Opposition
 candidates won some of these elections. However, in late 1996, following its loss in
 a by-election, the Government issued new directives limiting political activity and
 fund raising on the grounds of maintaining order. In advance of a Zanzibar by-elec-
 tion in November, government officials harassed opposition supporters, and some
 violent incidents took place in connection with voter registration.
 Police arrested 7 CUF officials including two Parliamentarians on the eve of the
 November 30 Mkunazini by-election in Zanzibar, which was won by the CUF. After
 the election, police arrested an additional 7 party officials, eventually charging each
 of the 14 persons with treason for having attempted to overthrow the Zanzibar Gov-
 ernment.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association; however, the Government
 limits this right in practice. The Registrar of Political Parties has sole authority to
 approve or deny the registration of any political party and is responsible for en orc-
 
 
 ing strict regulations on registered or provisionally registered parties. The Constitu-
 tioln and other legal acts and stipulate that citizens cannot establish new political
 parties; candidates must be members of 1 of the 13 registered political parties. The
 electoral law prohibits independent candidates; requires all standing Members of
 Parliament to resign if they join another party; requires all political parties to sup-
 port the union with Zanzibar; and forbids parties based on ethnic, regional, or reli-
 gious affiliation. Parties granted provisional registration may hold public meetings
 and recruit members. They have 6 months to submit lists of at least 200 members
 in 10 of the country's 25 regions, including 2 regions in Zanzibar, in order to secure
 full registration and to be eligible to field candidates for election. Nonregistered par-
 ties are prohibited from holding meetings, recruiting members, or fielding can-
 didates. Although the Registrar of Political Parties called the registration provisions
 too restrictive, no remedial action has been taken. Moreover, the registrar an-
 nounced plans to deregister parties that failed to win 3 percent of the vote in the
 last election.
 The most prominent unregistered party was the Reverend Christopher Mikila's
 Democratic Party, which advocates the dissolution of the union and the expulsion
 of minorities from the mainland. Despite his party's lack of government recognition,
 Mtikila was able to publicize his views through his legally registered church and
 through ongoing lawsuits against the Government.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. Several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) were formed in the
 last few years to address the concerns of families, the disabled, women, and chil-
 dren. NGO's formed during the year emphasized gender and environmental prob-
 lems. Registration of new NGO's was suspended, pending the enactment of a new
 NGO act. The National Women's Council, registered in 1993, was suspended by the
 Ministry in 1996 and deregistered in 1997, allegedly because it engaged in political
 activity contrary to its charter. The Council challenged the deregistration in the
 courts, and the matter had not been finally resolved by year's end. The incident,
 however, provoked the drafting by the Tanganyika Law Society of a model NGO
 law, which was presented to the Government for its consideration. A number of pro-
 fessional, business, legal, and medical associations have only begun to address polit-
 ical topics. The Government for more than 3 years withheld registration from an
 NGO called Defenders of Human Rights in Tanzania (see Section 4) until finally de-
 nying registration during the year. A youth group has also been denied registration
 on the grounds that there already was a youth organization affiliated with the
 CCM. Opposition leaders complain that the Zanzibar government is even more re-
 strictive in registering societies than the Union Government.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice, subject to measures that it
 claims are necessary to ensure public order and safety. Missionaries are allowed to
 enter the country freely, particularly if proselytizing is ancillary to other religious
 activities. Citizens are allowed to go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious prac-
 tices.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government imposes some limits on these rights. Short-term do-
 mestic travel is not restricted, but citizens must follow national employment direc-
 tives stipulating the nature of employment and location of the residence. The
 Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure
 that every resident within their area of jurisdiction engages in productive and law-
 ful employment. Those not employed are subject to transfer to another area where
 employment is available. These laws, although generally not rigorously enforced, are
 used by police as a means of soliciting bribes and intimidating urban residents. The
 Dar es Salaam City Council rounds upbeggars for return to their home areas, but
 many return to the capital. In June the Zanzibar government returned thousands
 of persons to their places of birth in an effort to curb urban congestion.
 assports for foreign travel may be difficult to obtain, mostly due to bureaucratic
 inefficiency and officials' demands for bribes. Citizens can return without difficulty.
 Mainlanders are required to show identification to travel to Zanzibar and are not
 allowed to work or own land on the islands.
 The Government cooperates with the U. N. High Commissioner for Refugees. The
 Government traditionally maintained a generous open border policy both with re-
 ard to neighboring countries' refugees and to persons seeking political asylum.
 owever, following an influx of Rwandan refugees in early 1995, the Government
 closed the borders with Rwanda and Burundi. Tens of thousands of asylum seekers
 nonetheless entered the country thereafter. Occasionally local authorities used laws,
 such as those on poaching, trespassing, and illegal migration, to forcibly repatriate
 several hundred Rwandan refugees previously admitted. By early 1997, virtually all
 
 
 Rwandans had departed because of the Government's use of force and intimidation.
 Most remaining Rwandans are considered illegal immigrants, but a relatively small
 number of Rwandans who feared for their safety were granted asylum by the Gov-
 ernment, and appeals by others who petitioned for asylum are pending.
 Tanzania continues to offer first asylum to over 250,000 refugees from Burundi
 and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was officially introduced in 1992. In 1995, for the
 first time in more than 30 years, citizens exercised their right to change their gov-
 ernment through national elections for president and parliament. The CCM, with
 huge advantages over opposition parties in membership and access to resources in-
 cluding its own daily Kiswahii Language newspaper, retained 186 of 232 elective
 seats in Parliament and won the presidency. Despite government tactics to restrict
 or delay the activities of its opponents, the opposition achieved occasional success
 in judicial challenges and received about 38 percent of the vote. The Government
 arrested opposition politicians for holding meetings, distributing information, and
 other acts that it regarded as seditious.
 The Constitution of Zanzibar provides citizens with the right to change peacefully
 their government; however, this right has been severely circumscribed. The 1995
 presidential election in Zanzibar was seriously flawed. Government-owned broadcast
 media in Zanzibar were biased in favor of the CCM incumbent president Salmin
 Amour Juma. The government party intimidated and harassed the opposition and
 did not permit opposition rallies until 2 months prior to the election. Further, reg-
 istration was limited to persons who had maintained the same residence for 5 years,
 which disenfranchised many voters. CUF party members were also detained by po-
 lice when they attempted to campaign in rural areas.
 Election observers in Zanzibar were denied access to the tabulation of votes from
 polling stations. After 4 days, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission appointed by the
 Amour government, announced that Amour had won by 0.5 percent of the vote. Fig-
 ures tabulated by the CUF showed a similarly close victory for its candidate. After
 efforts by the international community to reconcile discrepancies in the vote count-
 ing, observers concluded that the official results may have been inaccurate. The
 Zanzibar and Union Governments both rejected calls to overturn the result and con-
 duct a new election for the presidency of Zanzibar.
 In the 2 years since the election, government security forces and CCM gangs har-
 assed and intimidated CUF members on both main Zanzibar islands, Pemba and
 Ugunja. Because the CUF won all 20 seats on Pemba, Pembans living on Ugunja
 were regarded as CUF supporters and as a result were harassed. CUF members ac-
 cused lice of detaining dozens of its members including several local leaders.
 Many CF supporters left Ugunja for Pemba or the mainland. Citizens' safety is
 not ensured in Pemba, however, where security forces dispersed gatherings and in-
 timidated individuals. Almost all international donors have suspended direct assist-
 ance to Zanzibar in response to activities of the authorities.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. In practice, however, few women are politically active. Eight of 232 elected
 members of the Union Parliament are women. In addition, 37 female members of
 the CCM and opposition parties were appointed to Parliament to seats reserved for
 women in order to meet the legal requirement that at least 15 percent of Members
 of Parliament be women. The President has set a goal that women constitute 30
 percent of parliamentarians elected in 2000. Three of the Cabinet's 23 ministers are
 women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government has obstructed the formation of local human rights groups. Per-
 sons seeking to register human rights NGO's, such as the Defenders of Human
 Rights in Tanzania and the Tanzania Human Rights Education Society, complained
 that the Ministry of Home Affairs continued to delay action on their applications
 (see Section 2.b.). This hampered their access and efforts to monitor violations of
 human rights. The Government continued to refuse registration of the African
 Human Rights and Justice Protection Network on the grounds that it was politically
 oriented. The Government deregistered the National Women's Council (see Section
 2.b.).
 Government officials have said that international human rights groups are wel-
 come to visit Tanzania. Amnesty International visited 5 times during the year.
 
 
 352
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 ,The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, religion, or lifestyle. Discrimination based on sex, age, or dis-
 ability is not specifically prohibited by law but is publicly discouraged in official
 statements.
 Women.-Violence against women remained widespread. Legal remedies exist, but
 - in practice are difficult to obtain. Traditional customs subordinating women remain
 strong in both urban and rural areas and local magistrates often upheld such prac-
 tices. Women may be punished for not bearing children. It is accepted for a husband
 to treat his wife as he wishes, and wife beating can occur at all levels of society.
 Cultural, family, and social pressure prevent many women from reporting abuses
 to authorities. Nonetheless, the Ministry of Home Affairs noted that an average of
 10,000 cases of wife beating are reported annually. Government officials frequently
 make public statements decrying such abuses, but rarely is action taken against
 perpetrators.
 Although the Government advocates equal rights for women in the workplace, it
 does not ensure these rights in practice. In the public sector, which employs 80 per-
 cent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict women's access to some jobs
 or hours of employment. While progress on women's rights has been more noticeable
 in urban areas, strong traditional norms still divide labor along gender lines and
 place women in a subordinate position. Discrimination against women is most acute
 in the countryside, where women are relegated to farming and raising children, and
 have almost no opportunity for wage employment. Custom and tradition often
 hinder women from owning property such as land, and these factors may override
 other laws that provide for equal treatment. Women seeking higher education may
 be harassed by male colleagues, but authorities have largely ignored the practice.
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there, and in many parts of the mainland, face discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Gov-
 ernment and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage
 Act provide for certain inheritance and property rights for women, application of
 customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions
 of the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inherit-
 ance claims primarily in rural areas. Under Zanzibar law, unmarried women under
 the age of 21 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment.
 Several NGO's provide counseling and education programs on women's rights
 problems, particularly sexual harassment and molestation. The Government
 deregisteredthe National Woman's Council (See Section 2.b.).
 Children.-Government funding of programs for children's welfare remained min-
 uscule. The Government has made some constructive efforts to address children's
 welfare, including working closely with the U.N. Children's Fund and other inter-
 national and local organizations to improve the well-being of orphans and neglected
 children.
 The law provides for 7 years of compulsory schooling through the age of 15. In
 January the Education Minister said that some teachers were demanding money to
 enroll students in school with the result that some children have been denied an
 education. The Warioba Commission confirmed that bribes may determine whether
 a child is eligible to register in school. In the past, girls who became pregnant were
 expeled from school. In 1996 officials put into effect procedures to permit pregnant
 girls to continue their educations following their maternity absences. However, the
 application of these procedures is not universal, and laws forcing girls out of school
 remain in effect.
 Female genital mutilation (FM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both ph sical and pschological health. Although the Govern-
 ment officially discourages FGM, it is stil performed at an early age in approxi-
 mately 20 of the country's 130 main ethnic groups, affecting 1 percent of the fe-
 male population, according to a 1996 health survey conductedby the Bureau of Sta-
 tistics. In some groups, F GM is compulsory, and in others, a woman who has not
 undergone the ritual may not be able to marry. In the Arusha and Dodoma regions,
 a reported 81 and 68 percent of women, respectively, have suffered FGM. Govern-
 ment officials have called for changes in practices that adversely affect women, but
 introduced no legislation that would specificallyurstrict the practice of FGM. Some
 local government officials have begun to combat the practice, and in 1996 convicted
 and imprisoned some persons who mutilated young girls. Seminars sponsored by
 various governmental and nongovernmental organizations are regularly held in an
 attempt to educate the public on the dangers of FGM and other traditional prac-
 tices. These practices include the tradition of inherited wives, which critics contend
 
 
 353
 contributes to the spread of H1V/AIDS. While some authorities believe that FGM
 is declining, a government report suggests that it is on the rise, especially in the
 central region.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate access to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for people with disabilities. Al-
 though there is no official discrimination against the disabled, in practice the phys-
 ically disabled are effectively restricted in their access to education, employment,
 and provision of other state services due to physical barriers. The Government pro-
 vides only limited funding for special facilities and programs.
 Religious Minorities.-The Muslim community claims to be disadvantaged in
 terms of its representation in the civil service and government and in state-owned
 business, in part because both colonial and past post-independence administrations
 refused to recognize the credentials of traditional Muslim schools. As a result, there
 is widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived advantages enjoyed by Chris-
 tians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of what they perceive as undue favor-
 itism accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scholarships by former Presi-
 dent Ali Hassan Mwinyi, a Muslim. Some leaders in both groups appear to be fo-
 menting religious tension. There does not appear to be any serious problem of dis-
 crimination due to religion in access to employment or educational opportunities.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-In the past, the Government discriminated
 agalnst the Barabaig and other nomadic people in the north. These ethnic groups
 continued to complain of past government discrimination because of efforts to make
 them adopt a more modern lifestyle and to restrict their access to pastoral land that
 was turned into large government wheat farms.
 The Asian community declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about 50,000
 a result of considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. There are, however,
 no laws or official policies that discriminate against Asians. As the Government
 places greater emphasis on market-oriented policies and privatization, public con-
 cern regarding the Asian minority's economic role has increased. This has led to de-
 mands for policies of "indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not increase
 the Asian community's economic predominance at the expense of the country's Afri-
 can population.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both the Constitution and the 1955 Trade Union Or-
 dinance refer to the right of association of workers. Nevertheless, workers do not
 have the right to form or join organizations of their choice. The Organization of Tan-
 zania Trade Unions Act of 1991 addresses all labor union issues. The act created
 the Organization of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU), the only trade union organiza-
 tion; it was renamed the Tanzania Federation of Trade Unions (TFTU) in 1995. The
 Federation is able to function, although it has still not been formally registered. The
 TFTU is comprised of 11 independent trade unions, which have the right to leave
 the TFTU and to collect their own dues, 5 percent of which are contributed to the
 federation.
 In May the regional International Labor Organization (ILO) representative called
 for the repeal of the OTTrU act, noting that the law hindered the registration of
 unions. More than 2 years after the labor reorganization, only 1 of the 11 new inde-
 pendent unions, the Tanzanian Teachers' Union, is fully registered. Although unions
 exist in the work place, the absence of registration makes relations with employers
 difficult. Noting this, in July the chairman of the Association of Tanzania Employers
 called on the Government to recognize the unions in law. 'In late 1996, the Zanzibar
 Government suspended the activwties of the teachers' union and stated that it did
 not recognize any trade union, even those officially registered.
 Although the TFTU may nominally represents 60 percent of workers in industry
 and government, in some sectors it deducts dues from workers' pay whether or not
 they are members. The TFTU has little influence on labor policy. Overall, less than
 25 percent of the country's 2 million wage earners are organized. All workers, in-
 cluding those classified as "essential" service workers, are permitted to join unions,
 but essential workers are not permitted to strike.
 There are no laws prohibiting retribution against legal strikers. However, workers
 have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted mediation and
 conciliation procedures leading ultimately to the Industrial Court, which receives di-
 rection from the Minister of Labor and Youth Development. If the TFTU is not sat-
 isfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it may then conduct a legal strike.
 These procedures can prolong a dispute by months without resolving it. Pending a
 resolution, frustrated workers have staged impromptu, illegal wildcat strikes and
 walkouts. The Tanzanian Harbor Authority workers, glass workers, textile workers,
 and newspaper workers staged such strikes during the year.
 
 
 354
 The TFTU expanded upon its forerunner's membership in regional and pan
 Africanist trade union organizations by joining the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions in 1996.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limited to the private sector. Wages for employees of the Govern-
 ment and state-owned organizations, which account for the bulk of the salaried
 labor force, are administratively set by the Government.
 Although the TFTU negotiates on behalf of most private sector employees with
 the Association of Tanzanian Employers, collective agreements must be submitted
 to the Industrial Court for approval. The ILO has observed that these provisions are
 not in conformity with ILO Convention 98 on Collective Bargaining and the Right
 to Organize. The Security of Employment Act of 1964 prohibits discriminatory ac-
 tivities by an employer against union members. Employers found guilty of antiunion
 activities are legally required to reinstate workers. According to the Warioba Com-
 mission, bribes may determine whether a worker dismissed from his job may be re-
 installed.
 There are no export processing zones (EPZ's) on the mainland, but there are three
 in Zanzibar. Working conditions are comparable to those in other areas. Labor law
 protections apply to EPZ workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, which also applies to children. However, the ILO observed that
 various provisions of the law are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on
 forced labor. Specifically, the Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires
 that every local government authority ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years
 of age not, in school engage in productive or other lawful employment. In some rural
 areas, ordinary villagers are still obligated to work in the village communal gardens
 or on small construction projects, such as repairing roads.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution does not specifically prohibit forced or bonded child labor, but the Govern-
 ment is working with NGO's to establish this prohibition explicitly (see Section 6.c.).
 By law children under the age of 12 are prohibited from working in the formal wage
 sector in both urban and rural areas, and the Government enforces this prohibition.
 However, this provision does not apply to children working on family farms or
 herding domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may be em-
 ployed on a daily wage and on a day-to-day basis, but they must have parental per-
 mission and return to the residence of their guardian at night.
 The minimum age for work of a contractual nature in approved occupations is set
 at 15 years. The law prohibits a young person from employment in any occupation
 that is injurious to health and that is dangerous or otherwise unsuitable. Young
 persons between the ages of 12 and 15 may be employed in industrial work but only
 between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., with some exceptions. The Ministry of
 Labor and Social Welfare and Youth Development is responsible for enforcement,
 but the number of inspectors is inadequate to police conditions. The effectiveness
 of government enforcement reportedly has declined with increased privatization. Ap-
 proximately 3,000 to 5,000 children engage in seasonal employment on sisal, tea,
 tobacco, and coffee plantations. Children working on plantations generally receive
 lower wages than their older counterparts although they may be in comparable jobs.
 Work on sisal plantations is particularly hazardous and detrimental to children. On
 one sisal plantation, children made up 30 percent of the work force; only half the
 children had completed primary school. They had a high incidence of skin and res-
 piratory problems, were not provided protective clothing, and lacked adequate our
 ishment and lodging. Another 1,500 to 3,000 children work in unregulated gemtone
 mines. In the informal sector, children assist their parents in unregulated piecework
 manufacturing.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A legal minimum wage for employment exists
 in the formal sector. The TFTU often negotiates higher minimum wages with indi-
 vidual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. The legal mini-
 mum wage is $27 (17,500 Tanzanian shillings) per month. Even when supp emented
 with various benefits such as housing, transport allowances, and food subsidies, the
 minimum rate may not always be sufficient to provide a decent standard of living
 for a worker and family, and workers must depend on the extended family or a sec-
 ond or third job. Despite the minimum wage, many workers, especially in the infor-
 mal sector, are paid less.
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44- to 48-hour
 workweek. In general, women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
 Several laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safety
 factory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is now managed
 
 
 355
 by the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare and Youth Development. Its effective-
 ness, however, is limited.
 TFTU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is effective in the
 formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. Workers may sue an
 employer through their TFTU branch if their working conditions do not comply with
 the Ministry of Labor's health and environmental standards. Workers making such
 complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. Howeyer, workers do not have the
 right to remove themselves from dangerous situations' without jeopardizing their
 employment. Enforcement of labor standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
