 TANZANIA
 Tanzania was formed in 1964 when mainland Tanganyika united
 with the newly independent island of Zanzibar. Julius K.
 Nyerere served as President from the independence of
 Tanganyika in 1961 until 1985. In 1985 Nyerere voluntarily
 retired and sanctioned the election of Ali Hassan Mwinyi, the
 former President of Zanzibar and First Vice President of
 Tanzania. Nyerere, however, remains as before the chairman of
 the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), the sole legal political
 party. The party attempts to control activity at all levels
 of society through its system of 10-family cells. Zanzibar is
 ruled by the same party as the mainland but exercises a
 considerable degree of autonomy.
 More than 40,000 men participate in the Tanzanian People's
 Defense Forces (TPDF). Paramilitary units consist of a police
 marine unit, a police field force, and a large citizen's
 militia.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries. Its
 population of 22 million, growing at 3.3 percent per year, has
 an annual per capita income of approximately $240. In 1986
 the Government launched an economic recovery program which has
 been supported by the International Monetary Fund, the World
 Bank, and Western donor governments. Bilateral debt
 rescheduling allowed the resumption of a substantial U.S.
 development assistance program in 1987. In response to
 economic reforms and good weather, Tanzania's per capita
 income in 1986 increased for the first time in this decade.
 The 1984 Zanzibar Constitution includes a bill of rights which
 provides for freedom of movement, speech, religion, and
 association. The addition of a similar bill of rights and
 obligations in 1985 to the National Tanzania Constitution and
 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code and Preventive
 Detention Act increased public awareness of legal rights,
 especially in regard to proper procedures for arrest and trial.
 At the time of its passage in 1985, the bill of rights was
 suspended for 3 years by Parliament. All laws which would now
 be unconstitutional under the bill of rights must be revised
 by March 1988. Revisions are to be made by Parliament on the
 basis of recommendations of the law reform commission; however,
 no changes were made from 1985 through 1987. The Legal Aid
 Committee at the University of Dar es Salaam began publishing
 a bulletin and holding legal aid camps in rural areas in 1987
 to educate Tanzanians on their rights under the new bill of
 rights.
 Despite the progress toward implementing a bill of rights, the
 Government still severely restricts freedom of speech, of the
 press, of association, and of movement. In 1987 forced
 repatriation of refugees from Tanzania occurred when 3,500
 Burundis, including 350 recognized refugees, were expelled to
 Burundi. The year also saw a startling increase in the number
 of killings of elderly women suspected of witchcraft.
 Approximately five people were in preventive detention at the
 end of the year.
 
 
 313
 TANZANIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappeatance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture is prohibited by law, and the Tanzanian Government
 opposes torture as a matter of policy. However, torture and
 other forms of mistreatment are occasionally used on an
 unauthorized basis by police and prison authorities, mainly in
 the form of beatings. This occurs typically either at the
 time of apprehension, when a suspect is first taken to a
 police station, or during the subsequent criminal
 investigation. Police have shot and killed fleeing suspects.
 Amnesty International has in past years expressed concern
 about the use of torture by police interrogat6rs. The use of
 such force has been severely criticized by the government
 press. Police officials have been sentenced to lengthy terms
 of imprisonment for abuses of suspects and prisoners.
 Prison conditions are poor, largely as a result of Tanzania's
 economic difficulties and not because of a deliberate
 government effort to subject prisoners to inhumane conditions.
 In 1987 the Government announced it would institute new court
 and bail procedures-to reduce the number of accused in remand
 prisons. President Mwinyi declared an amnesty releasing 1,800.
 prisoners in May and another 835 in December.
 Mob justice sometimes occurs in both cities and rural areas,
 and in 1987 mobs killed several suspected bandits and
 disfigured others. Traditional defense groups in central
 Tanzania, the Sungu Sungu and Wasalama, which in the past were
 encouraged by both government and party officials to help
 eliminate cattle rustling, often use such extreme tactics
 against rustlers. In 1987 the Government announced plans to
 control the defense groups' operations through supervision by
 government and party leaders.
 In June, 20 women were killed in witchcraft riots in Shinyanga,
 resulting in an exodus of elderly women from their villages to
 towns where they have become homeless beggars. No action was
 taken by the Government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The Preventive Detention Act allows, upon a written order from
 the President, the arrest and indefinite detention without
 bail of any person considered dangerous to the public order or
 national security. A detainee has the right to challenge the
 grounds for his detention in a court of law at 90-day
 intervals. In October 1987, the High Court heard the petition
 of two persons who were detained 12 months by presidential
 order without being informed of the reasons for their
 detention or allowed to challenge the detention order within
 the required time limits. The court noted that the
 
 
 314
 TANZANIA
 Government rescinded the detention order in July 1987 and that
 it was now holding the detainees under the Deportation Act,
 which also permits the detainees to challenge the detention
 order. These were the first long-term detentions reported
 under President Mwinyi. In March 1987, the names of 11 people
 in detention were published in the Government Gazette. Since
 then, four have been released and two convicted, leaving five
 persons in detention, including the two mentioned above held
 under the Deportation Act and three-apparently detained
 earlier under President Nyerere.
 In 1985 the Preventive Detention Act was amended to require
 that detainees be released within 15 days of their detention
 or informed of the reason for their detention. Although the
 Act was extended to Zanzibar in 1985, no one was known to have
 been detained there under its provisions in 1987. The Court
 of Appeals, the highest court in Tanzania, ruled in 1986 that
 time spent in prison in preventive detention cannot be
 considered to be time served for the accused's subsequent
 conviction and sentence under the penal code, although the
 court may take such time served into account when imposing its
 sentence.
 The 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code requiring
 that a person arrested for a crime, other than a security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a
 magistrate within 24 hours, raised public consciousness
 concerning legal rights at the time of arrest. It also made
 the police more cautious about making arrests without good
 cause. However, the new criminal procedure amendments also
 restricted the right to bail. It limited judges' discretion
 in granting bail, and imposed strict conditions on freedom of
 movement and association when bail is granted. In 1987 judges
 usually followed the recommendations of prosecutors in granting
 or denying bail. The legal community in Zanzibar believes
 that the new amendments to the criminal procedure code do not
 apply to Zanzibar, which retains the less restrictive old
 system of the right to bail in all cases except murder and
 treason.
 The Economic and Organized Crime Control Act of 1984, which
 replaced the Economic Sabotage Act of 1983, placed persons
 newly accused of economic crimes within the procedural
 safeguards of normal judicial process, giving defendants the
 right to attorneys and, under certain conditions, bail.
 Because these cases are heard in special sessions within the
 court system, it is difficult to determine the number of
 arrests for economic crimes in 1987. In 1987 the President
 ordered the removal of 18 cattle rustlers to isolated southern
 regions under the Act, which allows such removal when a
 person's actions endanger peace and security.
 With regard to fqrced labor, the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) continues to express concern over laws
 requiring unemployed persons to work in communal agriculture
 and development projects.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Trials are open to the public and the press.
 The court must give its reasons on the record for holding
 proceedings in camera. Criminal defendants have the right of
 appeal. Military courts do not try civilians, and there are
 
 
 315
 TANZANIA
 no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts
 may appeal decisions to the High Court. Lower Court
 magistrates are appointed by the Chief Justice of the Court of
 Appeals on the recommendations of-two judicial service
 commissions. Judges of the High Court and the Court of
 Appeals are appointed by the President after consultations
 with the Chief Justice.
 While an independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated,
 some members of the legal community, including judicial
 officers, have complained that the legal system is being
 corrupted through bribery. Police and Lower Court officials
 are often bribed to delay the process of investigation and
 trials. Although the 1985 amendments to the Criminal
 Procedure Code were supposed to lessen court congestion, in
 1987 it was taking from 2 to 3 years for an average case to
 come to trial.. The Government initiated double-shift court
 sessions and urged courts to open on time in 1987. The
 Government provides free legal counsel to those charged with
 treason and murder. In Dar es Salaam, the Legal Aid Committee
 of the Tanganyika Law Society and the Faculty of Law at the
 University of Dar es, Salaam offer legal services to indigents,
 but their resources are severely strained, and most indigents
 do not receive legal representation. The Magistrates Courts
 Act of 1984 bars advocates from appearing in primary courts
 (similar to the small claims courts in the United States),
 although a person who wishes legal representation may transfer
 the case to District Court.
 Under the 1984 Zanzibar Constitution, the people's courts,
 which did not provide defendants the right of legal
 representation, were abolished. The island's court system now
 parallels the legal system of the United Republic of Tanzania
 but retains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such
 as divorce, child custody, and inheritance. Cases concerning
 Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in Zanzibar's
 courts. Beginning in 1985, all other cases may be appealed to
 the Court of Appeals of the United Republic of Tanzania. In
 1987 the Court of Appeals held its first'sessions in Zanzibar,
 hearing criminal and civil appeals.
 In 1987 the appeal of nine defendants sentenced to life
 imprisonment in a 1985 treason trial was dismissed by the.
 Court of Appeals. Also in 1987, five persons arrested for
 assisting in the escape of two of the original defendants were
 sentenced to from 2 1/2 to 3 years in prison. Three of the
 five convictions were overturned on appeal.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary, the Government uses
 the party structure to intervene in the private lives of its
 citizens. The CCM-has party cadres covering the smallest
 units of society. Cells vary in size from single family homes
 to large apartment buildings and may contain from 10 to several
 hundred persons. Unpaid "10-cell" leaders are the party
 officials responsible for resolving problems at the grassroots
 level and reporting any suspicious behavior or event within
 their neighborhoods to authorities.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of "undesirable" or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of
 residence or origin if no work is found for them. In 1987
 groups of hawkers, suspected criminals, beggars, and unemployed
 
 
 316
 TANZANIA
 persons were rounded up in Dar es Salaam and other cities under
 these ordinances. The city of Dar es Salaam has a Human
 Resources Department to assist the urban unemployed in finding
 productive work rather than return them to the rural areas at
 government expense.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for under the
 Constitution but is limited in practice. Tanzanian citizens
 show few inhibitions about criticizing the political system in
 private conversations but are cautious in public statements.
 The mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the National Press Agency, and the mainland radio
 facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a radio and
 television station. The Swahili-language paper, which has a
 daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by the party. The
 Newspaper Act, which allows government search and seizure of
 any publication without a warrant and withdrawal of the
 license to publish at any time, makes the launching of a
 private newspaper or magazine extremely difficult. There is a
 monthly Catholic newspaper with a circulation of 120,000 which
 covers largely religious news. The official media, as organs
 of the State, usually present a unified point of view on
 important policy matters and do not criticize the premises of
 government domestic or foreign policies. The Government
 encourages the media to publish articles and letters to the
 editor criticizing corruption, mismanagement, and "economic
 sabotage" in the government ministries and state-owned
 corporations. Such reporting is not without risk: In 1987
 police beat a newsphotographer who was taking pictures of
 evicted tenants. One weekly newspaper column, "Society and
 the Law," was removed when it became too critical of the
 Government.
 Visiting foreign reporters are required to register with the
 Government and obtain a permit. They are then allowed
 considerable freedom, including access to government and party
 leaders. Journalists and photographers can fall victim to the
 widespread fear of South African espionage and have been
 detained for short periods of time until their bona fides were
 established.
 Academic freedom is officially guaranteed, but in practice
 most academicians, relying on the government-run educational
 system for their livelihood, limit their exploration of
 sensitive subjects. Under the Films and Stage Plays Act,
 films may be censored. The importation of foreign publications
 is not prohibited, but it is limited by the acute shortage of
 foreign exchange.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Given the nature of Tanzania's one-party system, the freedoms
 of public assembly and association are limited. Permits must
 be obtained through the Government for any public meeting,
 political or otherwise. Student organizations are party
 controlled, and students are inhibited from public criticism
 by concern that their future employment prospects may be
 jeopardized. A number of professional business, legal, and
 medical associations exist, but they are careful to
 concentrate on nonpolitical topics.- Under the societies
 ordinance, all associations must be registered with and
 
 
 317
 TANZANIA
 approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Candidates for
 office in maj~r sports clubs and coopegatives are screened by
 the appropriate government ministry, which also supervises
 their elections. No organizations which would compete with
 party organizations are approved, including labor unions.
 There is only one labor union, Juwata, an organ of the party.
 No other unions may operate. All business and government
 offices with more than a few employees are required to have a
 Juwata chapter. Juwata represents about 60 percent of the
 workers in the industrial and government sectors. Juwata,
 however, has little influence on labor policy. Wages are set
 by the Government, and Juwata does not bargain collectively on
 behalf of the workers. At the local level, it promotea
 employee welfare by filing grievances against employers,
 usually involving pay disputes. Grievances which cannot be
 settled in the workplace are taken to the Permanent Labor
 Tribunal, whose decisions on the merits of a case are final.
 In July 1986, a labor disturbance occurred when approximately
 500 workers gathered at a sugar factory entrance in Kilombero
 to protest wage deductions. A police field-force unit opened
 fire, killing 3 and wounding 20. A government-established
 Commission of Inquiry, with representatives from the party,
 government, police, and Juwata, discovered shortcomings in
 factory management, organization of the workers, and party and
 government leadership. In December 1986, President Mwinyi
 announced that he had taken action on recommendations made by
 the Commission, although the report and recommendations were
 not made public.
 Juwata maintains relations with the ILO, and the Government
 has ratified most ILO conventions. The ILO believes that the
 appointment of the leader of Juwata by the President of
 Tanzania violates its Conventions Nos. 87 and 98 on Freedom of
 Association. In 1987 the party agreed to the election of the
 union leadership by the membership. The first elections will
 be held in early 1988.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to pr6selytize (although Jehovah's Witnesses
 have been banned), and Tanzanians are allowed to go abroad for
 pilgrimages and other religious purposes. The population of
 the mainland is roughly 30 percent Christian, 35 percent
 Muslim, and 35 percent adherents of traditional religions.
 There appear to be no social or political advantages or
 disadvantages attached to membership in any given faith on the
 mainland. While there has been some controversy in
 overwhelmingly Muslim Zanzibar regarding state support of
 certain mosques, Zanzibaris are generally free to practice any
 faith they choose without interference.
 d. Preedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, travel generally is
 not restricted within Tanzania. Citizens must follow national
 employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and
 location of residence. For years police checks in urban areas
 have forced persons unable to show proof of employment to
 return to rural areas. This policy is an effort to control
 
 
 318
 TANZANIA
 increasing pressure on urban resources and reverse declining
 levels of agricultural production. The Human Resources
 Deployment Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure
 that every resident within their areas of jurisdiction engages
 in productive or lawful employment. Those not so employed are
 subject to transfer to another area where employment is
 available. Although the Act was not enforced in 1987, the
 Government expressed concern over the increasing numbers of
 young people migrating to urban areas to seek work rather than
 remaining in the countryside to engage in agriculture and
 raise livestock.
 Passports are required for foreign travel and can be difficult
 to obtain. Tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank
 are required in order to buy airline tickets. The Foreign
 Exchange Act prohibits taking foreign currency out of the
 country (although allowed on Zanzibar for business purposes),
 and those accused under the Act must surrender their passports.
 In practice, those planning to travel or emigrate are subject
 to intense scrutiny by police and tax authorities. Tanzanians
 who leave the country without authorization are subject to
 prosecution on return. In 1987 Tanzanian immigration
 authorities continued their increased border post surveillance
 and requirement that all people crossing borders out of the
 country present travel documents detailing the purpose of
 their journey. This requirement was aimed at the large number
 of unemployed youths who leave the country. To discourage
 increasing numbers of those who do so by stowing away, the
 Government has tightened passport requirements for youths,
 compiled a public list of stowaways, and imposed fines, jail
 sentences, and the costs of repatriation on those who return.
 The Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to
 try Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country.
 Although it is legally possible for citizenship to be revoked,
 there have been no reports of such action in recent years.
 In late 1986, Parliament passed the bill for the registration
 and identification of persons resident in Tanzania, the stated
 purpose of which is to ensure the rights of citizens over
 noncitizens and to help the Government obtain reports on
 citizens outside the country. The bill also appears to be an
 attempt to obtain information on the activities of foreign
 businessmen in Tanzania, and registration assists the
 Government in monitoring their activities. Registration is
 voluntary, although the Government has proposed mandatory
 registration in border areas to help control smuggling and
 other illegal activities.
 Tanzania generally has a liberal policy towards refugees and
 displaced persons. As of January 1987, there were about
 220,000 refugees and displaced persons in Tanzania, of whom
 more than half were from Burundi, with large numbers also from
 Rwanda and Zaire. In 1987 the Government worked with the
 United Nations High Commissioner for refugees (UNHCR) to
 protect and settle 15,000 newly arrived Mozambicans on the
 southern border, bringing the number of refugees in Tanzania
 to approximately 235,000, subject to registration. Tanzania
 accepts refugees from almost all countries. Only South
 Africans who have left their liberation movements and Kenyans
 are required to find resettlement elsewhere. The UNHCR is
 presently attempting to resettle approximately 50 South
 Africans and 24 Kenyans who have not been granted asylum in
 Tanzania.
 
 
 319
 TANZANIA
 In April 1987, 3,500 Burundis were forcibly repatriated by the
 Government to Burundi from the Kigoma region of northwestern
 Tanzania. Many villagers had their homes destroyed and
 propert? looted or confiscated. About 350 of those expelled
 had been granted asylum as refugees in Tanzania. The
 Government later agreed to allow the refugees to return to
 their villages, to restore their property, and to compensate
 them for their losses, although no compensation had been made
 by the end of 1987. This was the first known instance of mass
 forced repatriations from Tanzania.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the party.
 Therefore, as a practical matter, Tanzanian citizens cannot
 change the one-party political system or the party in power.
 There are no overt opposition groups. Two advocates of a
 multiparty system who distributed leaflets on the subject were
 detained in October 1986 under the Preventive Detention Act
 and remain in custody.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members. In 1985
 under the amended Constitution, voters were allowed to choose
 between two party-selected candidates for each of 169 (or 75
 percent) of the 244 seats in Parliament. The remaining 25
 percent are filled by members appointed by the Government and
 the various "mass organizations" associated with the party.
 The one-party system does not permit political participation
 through the open nomination of multiple candidates. Voters
 register dissatisfaction by voting incumbent members of
 Parliament out of office. While membership in the party is
 voluntary, overzealous party functionaries have been known to
 require proof of membership for receipt of basic government
 services or employment. This practice has been publicly
 deplored by party chairman Nyerere.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives, and the
 majority of the members were directly elected from a
 party-selected slate for the first time in 1985. Under the
 new Constitution, the House of Representatives consists of 50
 elected members, 10 members nominated by the President of
 Zanzibar, 5 regional commissioners, 5 seats reserved for
 women, and 5 representatives from the party's mass
 organizations.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government traditionally has spoken out in international
 forums against human rights abuses. Tanzania is a party to
 the United Nations' covenants on human rights and in 1984
 ratified the Organization of African Unity Charter on Human
 and Peoples' Rights. There were no outside investigations of
 human rights violations in Tanzania in 1987. There are no
 active local human rights groups in Tanzania. There was no
 published government reaction to Amnesty International's
 concern about torture by police interrogators, the death
 penalty, and the two prisoners in preventive detention.
 
 
 320
 TANZANIA
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In practice, the participation of women in education beyond
 the primary school level is seriously limited by tradition and
 social attitudes. Women students at the University of Dar es
 Salaam are subjected to the "punch", written signs posted by
 male students which humiliate and degrade women who refuse
 their sexual advances or otherwise act too independently. For
 most of Tanzania's ethnic groups, women's traditional role has
 been that of mother and field laborer, and women are still
 underrepresented in government, the professions, and skilled
 occupations. Social limitations on the roles women play are
 generally more pervasive on Zanzibar than on the mainland.
 Women in many parts of the country continue to suffer from
 discriminatory restrictions on inheritance and ownership of
 property because of concessions to customary and Islamic law.
 Although the practice is declining, female circumcision is
 still performed within approximately 20 of the country's 120
 mainland ethnic groups.
 Despite obstacles, the Government has made progress in its
 efforts to ensure equality for women, especially in urban
 areas where traditional values have a weaker hold on the
 population. The Marriage Act provides that womens' domestic
 services are a marital asset to be considered in divorce
 settlements. The United Women of Tanzania, a wing of the
 party, is dedicated to the eradication of inequality for women
 in all spheres of society. The ILO has assisted groups of
 women in starting small-scale business ventures and achieving
 economic independence.
 Attention recently was drawn to the plight of the indigenous
 Hadzabe people who live in the north of the country around
 Lake Eyasi. These hunters and gatherers were among the
 earliest settlers in Tanzania. Lack of food, water, and
 shelter has reduced their population from 2,000 to 250 in the
 last few years. Although the Government is investigating the
 problem, in 1987 it had no plans to reverse the impending
 extinction of the Hadzabe, known as "the forgotten people of
 Lake Eyasi."
 The Asian community, estimated at about 40,000, is both
 culturally and economically exclusive, a business-oriented
 minority in a society still committed to Socialist policies.
 Official government policy is one of equal rights for all
 citizens, and Asian entrepreneurs are being encouraged to
 invest in areas previously reserved for the public sector,
 including large-scale agriculture.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Workers in the formal wage sector in Tanzania work a 40-hour,
 6-day workweek. Section 77 of the employment ordinance
 prohibits children under the age of 15 from working. This
 provision applies only to the wage sector in both urban and
 rural areas and not to children working on family farms or
 herding domestic livestock. A young person between the ages
 of 15 and 18 may be employed provided the work is "safe and
 not injurious to health." There is no legal discrimination in
 wages on the basis of sex, but in practice discrimination
 occurs. In general, women cannot be employed between 10 p.m.
 and 6 a.m., and young people are not allowed to work between 6
 p.m. and 6 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the workplace,
 including the factories ordinance, the Accidental and
 
 
 321
 TANZANIA
 Occupational Diseases Notification Ordinance, and the
 Workman's Compensation Ordinance. The safety enforcement
 system iS still in the early stages of implementation. In
 1986 the ILO and the Ministry of Labor completed a project
 establishing an occupational health and safety factory
 inspection system. Employers in Tanzania are required to have
 insurance.
 
 
 322