TANZANU
The report on Tanzania fails to give an adequate account of human rights violations, which took a n<^ceable turn for the worse in 1988, especially in the autonomous islands of 21anzibar. This failure may stem from political sympathy for President Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who is presiding over a Uberalization of the economy which brings Tanzania more in line with the prescriptions of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund after years of rejecting orthodox Western development strategies. Unfortunately, this has not been accompanied by a corresponding poUtical Uberalization - rather, the reverse.
The report is least adequate in addressing an incident in May 1988 in which poUce in Zanzibar shot dead two Muslims taking part in a protest against proposed reforms in the status of women. There is no entry on these killings in the section of the report devoted to poUtical killings. Only five pages later, after several references to "a large, noisy demonstration in Zanzibar town that resulted in two deaths," does the careful reader fmaUy discover (under the section on the right of citizens to change their government) that it was the security forces who were responsible for the killings. To its credit, the Zanzibar government promptly set up a commission of inquiry to investigate the killings and the circumstances surrounding them. This was important because there were major discrepancies between official explanations of the deaths and eyewitness accounts. For example, PresideiU Mwinyi stated that the poUce had opened fire when it appeared that demonstrators were about to storm the Zanzibar State House. Eyewitnesses maintain, on the other hand, that the demonstration had moved several hundred yards beyond the State House before shots were fired. By the end of the year the commission of inquiry had reported to Zanzibar President Idris Abdul Wakil, but its fmdings had not been made pubUc. No discipU-nary or criminal charge is known to have been brought against any poUce officer involved.
185
Critique
The report mentions the detention of a number of people after the May demonstration but fails to refer to the 23 people who at year's end still faced criminal charges arising from their alleged participation in the protest. Various obstacles were mounted to prevent the accused from receiving proper legal representation. The accused initially wished to be represented by a barrister-at-law, Wolfango Dourado, who had fulfilled all the requirements to appear in the courts of 21anabar. However, the District Ma^trate stated that the government had refused Dourado — himself a former political prisoner — a license to practice. Later the accused engaged a new advocate, Hamidu Ali Mbwelezeni, but he was approached by the police, told to drop the case, and offered a government job at the Arusha International Conference Center on the mainland, which meant that he left the islands and the accused were again unrepresented. They only obtained proper representation by retaining an advocate from Dar es Salaam, on the mainland. The charges against the 23 related to alleged breaches of the peace, but in some instances also arose from the circulation of leaflets criticizing proposed legal changes which were said to conflict with Muslim practices. Abdelhakim Abeid, one of the 23, also faces a charge arising out of an earlier demonstration in which he was arrested for carrying a placard stating "Zanzibar sio Mkoa" (Zanzibar is not a province) ~ a correct statement of the constitutional position and in any case a legitimate expression of political opinion.
These charges are indicative of a disturbing tendency during 1988 to use the criminal law to inhibit free expression by government critics in Zanzibar — a development which finds no reflection in the State Department report. Thus in June, Kwenda Kote Mukungu was sentenced to two years' imprisonment by a people's court in Mkoani district, Pemba (which is part of Zanzibar). His offense was tearing up a picture of Julius Nyerere, chairman of the ruling Chama cha Mapinduzi party, and former President of Tanzania. The sentence was clearly disproportionate to the physical damage caused and was rather a result of the political implications of Mukungu's action. Similarly in December, Sheikh Kurwa Shauri was arrested for speaking in a mosque after Friday prayers without a permit. (In early 1989 he was released, but was later rearrested and detained, apparently without charge.)
186
Tanzania
In September the Zanzibar government significantly extended its legal powers to restrict freedom of expression with the passage of a new law imposing penalties of up to five years in prison on journalists who write articles deemed critical of the government. The State Department refers to this law but only mentions the power that it confers on the government to ban the import of publications. It does not refer to the penalties against journalists or to the courts' new power to impose prison sentences for possession of banned publications.
In mainland Tanzania, as the report notes without elaboration, the government has used administrative measures to restrict critics of the single-party political system. James Mapalala and Mwinyijuma Othman Upindo were detained in October 1986 for advocating the repeal of the 1965 law making Tanzania a one-party state. They were held under the Preventive Detention Act, which had been amended in 1985 to allow technical challenges to detention orders in the country's courts and a regular administrative review of the grounds for detention.
In 1987, before the courts could hear a legal challenge to their detention, Mapalala and Upindo were redetained under the Deportation Ordinance and later banished to remote areas of the coimtry, where they remained throughout 1988. The Deportation Ordinance dates from the early years of British colonial rule in Tanganyika and allows the President to consign any person to internal exile by an administrative order. Such orders are not subject to review and cannot be appealed. Arguably this denial of the right of appeal is in breach of the country's Bill of Rights, which became justiciable in 1988.
It is likely that a case testing the constitutionality of the Deportation Ordinance will come before the courts in 1989. This Ordinance has been used in at least one other political case not referred to in the State Department report. Joseph Kasella Bantu, an exiled former party leader, returned to Tanzania in 1987 after official assurances of his safety. He was promptly placed under house arrest until March 1988 when he was restricted imder the terms of the Deportation Ordinance. He apparently remained in internal exile at the end of 1988. The government is believed to have used the Deportation Ordinance more extensively to punish alleged cattle rustlers. In at least one case a person has been
187
Critique
acquitted of stock theft only to be served with an order under the Deportation Ordinance.
The report is also incorrect in stating that there were no outside investigations of human righU abuses in 1988. An Amnesty International delegation visited Tanzania in October, precisely in response to the violations which the State Department has reported so inadequately.
188
