 TANZANIA
 Tanzania was formed in 1964 when mainland Tanganyika united
 with the newly independent island of Zanzibar. Under the
 union, Zanzibar retains considerable autonomy. Tanzania is
 governed by a single political party, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 (CCM). Julius K. Nyerere served as President and party
 chairman almost continuously since independence in 1961 until
 November 1985, during which time the country enjoyed a
 remarkable degree of political stability. In elections held
 in October 1985, Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who had previously served
 as Vice President of Tanzania and President of Zanzibar, was
 elected to replace Nyerere as President while Nyerere retained
 the party chairmanship. Within Tanzania's one-party system,
 voters have some choice of contending political candidates for
 Parliament and local government but not for president or
 vice-president. The party controls activity at all levels of
 society. Through its system of 10-family cells, it monitors
 even the most remote areas of the country.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries and is
 largely dependent on foreign aid for development. The economy
 has deteriorated steadily in recent years. Its 21.7 million
 people have an annual per capita gross national product of
 approximately $240. Sixty-one percent of the rural population
 lives below the absolute poverty level. Some economic reforms
 were initiated in 1984, but little additional progress was
 made in 1985.
 During 1985, the Government took steps to improve its human
 rights record. It added a Bill of Rights to the Constitution,
 amended the 1962 Preventive Detention Act to limit abuses, and
 adopted a new criminal code which grants detainees more
 rights. These and other trends, including constitutional
 reforms which require that a majority of members of the
 Zanzibari and Union parliaments be directly elected by popular
 vote, indicate that Tanzania is moving toward greater
 liberalization. Nevertheless, legal rights embedded in the
 national and Zanzibar Constitutions have not always been
 observed, particularly freedom of speech. Both on the
 mainland and in Zanzibar, religion, custom, and rigid
 tradition, especially in rural areas, often work against the
 exercise of these rights, particularly with regard to the
 treatment and equality of women. Freedom of the press is
 severely restricted. Government policy prohibits the use of
 torture, but it occasionally occurs. Police officials have
 been sentenced to stiff terms of imprisonment for torture,
 abuse, and killing of prisoners.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no reports in 1985 of politically motivated
 killings.,
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reported cases of disappearance in 1985.
 
 
 341
 TANZANIA
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Tanzanian Government opposes the use of torture as a
 matter of policy. Nonetheless, there have been allegations
 during the past year that torture has at times been used by
 police and prison authorities. During the 1985 trial of those
 arrested in early 1983 for their reputed participation in an
 attempted coup d'etat, several of them complained of torture
 during their interrogations by authorities. When beatings of
 persons arrested by the police occur, they almost invariably
 take place at the time of apprehension or when the person is
 first taken to the police station.
 Tanzania's prisons are generally unsanitary and overcrowded.
 Prison conditions are largely a result of Tanzania's economic
 difficulties and not a deliberate government effort to subject
 prisoners to inhumane conditions. In 1985, the Government
 announced that it would take measures to reduce congestion in
 prisons by changing some of the legal procedures involved in
 bringing cases'to court.
 Traditional defense groups in central Tanzania called Sungu
 Sungu or Wasalama, encouraged by both government and party
 officials in recent years to help eliminate cattle rustling in
 some areas, often use extreme tactics and occasionally take on
 the appearance of vigilante groups. In September 1985, the
 Tanzania high court sentenced two Sungu Sungu members to death
 for the murder of two villagers in 1984.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 In January 1985, the National Assembly amended the 1962
 Preventive Detention Act under which police and security
 officers could, with a written order from the President,
 arrest and detain indefinitely any person considered dangerous
 to the public order or national security. Previously,
 detainees had no recourse to the judicial system. Under the
 amended Act, the Government is now required to inform
 detainees within 15 days of the reasons for their detention.
 Otherwise, they must be released immediately. In addition,
 the order must be reviewed by an Advisory Committee within 90
 days, and the names of the detainees are to be published in
 the Government Gazette. Detainees can also challenge the
 legality of the detention order in the High Court. The
 amendment also extends applicability of the law to Zanzibar
 for the first time. Approximately 15-20 people were held
 under the Preventive Detention Act in 1985, most of whom were
 accused of participating in a 1983 plot to overthrow the
 Government.
 Approximately 1,000 people were detained in 1984 under
 presidential decree for alleged violations of the Economic
 Sabotage Act of 1983, such as hoarding and exchange control
 violations. However, new legislation adopted in September
 1984 placed persons newly accused of economic crimes within
 the normal judicial process. Persons already charged under
 the previous law were tried by special tribunals which did not
 always provide full procedural safeguards.
 Tanzanian law requires that a person arrested for crimes,
 other than security violations under the Preventive Detention
 Act, must be brought within 24 hours before a magistrate to be
 charged. Under the new criminal procedure code, enacted in
 
 
 342
 TANZANIA
 1985, the accused person is guaranteed bail either by the
 police or by the court. Also under the new codo, the accused
 has the right to challenge the order for his arrest, his name
 must be published in the Government Gazette, and his case must
 be referred to a board of review within three months. If it
 is not referred within this time, he is entitled to be
 released. Although the new system has been in effect only a
 short time, it appears that it is being respected by legal
 authorities.
 The 1983 Human Resources Deployment Act required local
 governments to ensure that every resident be engaged in
 productive or other lawful employment. Those persons not so
 engaged were. subject to transfer to another area where they
 would be required to engage in gainful employment. In 1983
 and 1984 there were large scale roundups of unemployed in Dar
 es Salaam who were then repatriated to their home villages or
 other areas for agricultural work. The roundups were ended in
 mid-1984 because they were ineffective, and the Government is
 no longer compelling individuals to return to the rural areas.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public, and the
 more sensational trials are covered by the press. Defendants
 have the right of appeal. While an independent judiciary is
 constitutionally mandated, some members of the legal
 community, including judicial officers, have complained that
 lower level officials of the legal system are highly
 susceptible to bribery. There has been no evidence that
 either the Court of Appeals or the High Court are corrupt.
 Judges are appointed by the Chief Justice, except those for
 the Court of Appeals and High Court, who are-appointed by the
 President. Military courts do not try civilians, and there
 are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military
 courts may appeal decisions to the High Court. The Government
 offers legal counsel to all defendants charged with treason or
 murder. In Dar es Salaam, the Tanzania Bar Association and
 the Legal Aid Society also provide free counsel to indigent
 defendants.
 Under the 1984 Zanzibar Constitution, People's Courts, which
 did not provide defendants the right of legal representation,
 were abolished. The court system now parallels the legal
 system of the United Republic of Tanzania. High Court judges
 are required to have both a degree in law and several years'
 practice prior to appointment to the bench. The right to
 appeal the original judgment is guaranteed within a specified
 time period. The new Constitution retains Islamic, or Kadhi,
 courts to deal with marriage, divorce, inheritance, and child
 care cases involving only Muslims. Cases concerning Zanzibar
 constitutional issues and Islamic law are justiciable only
 within Zanzibar's own courts. Beginning in 1985, for the
 first time, all other cases can be appealed to the Court of
 Appeals of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 In January 1985, the Tanzanian Government began the civil
 court trial of 19 individuals (14 Army officers and 5
 civilians) accused of plotting to overthrow the Government in
 1983. Ten were acquitted (four in mid-1985 and six at the end
 of 1985) while nine were found guilty and sentenced to life
 imprisonment. The nine are expected to appeal their
 convictions. The trial appears to have been conducted fairly.
 
 
 343
 TANZANIA
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Through the party structure, the Government intervenes in the
 private lives of its citizens. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi has
 party cadres covering the smallest units of society. The
 "10-cell" leader is the party official responsible for
 monitoring events and resolving problems at the grassroots
 level. Individual cells vary in size from single family homes
 to large apartment buildings. Hence, individual 10-cells may
 contain from ten to several hundred individuals. Ten-cell
 leaders, who are unpaid, monitor store rationing to ensure
 "equitable" distribution and report to authorities any
 suspicious behavior or event within their neighborhood.
 The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 empowered the Labor
 Commissioner or his agent to search any house for unemployed
 persons. Those who were not considered productively employed
 were not allowed to remain in urban areas. After widespread
 criticism of human rights violations under the aegis of this
 Act in 1983 and .1984, it was not actively implemented in 1985,
 and the instances of forced entry, search, and harassment of
 persons suspected of economic crimes were significantly fewer
 -than during the previous 2 years.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedoms of speech and press are guaranteed under the
 Constitution but limited in practice. The mainland Government
 owns the only English-language daily newspaper, the National
 Press Agency, and the mainland radio facility. The Zanzibar
 Government operates a radio and television station. The
 Swahili-language paper, which has a daily circulation of
 100,000, is owned by the party. The official media, as organs
 of the State, usually present a unified point of view on
 important policy matters and do not criticize the premises of
 government domestic or foreign policies.
 Tanzanian citizens show few inhibitions about expressing
 criticisms of the system in private conversations. Visiting
 foreign reporters have considerable freedom, including access
 to government and party leaders. Academic freedom of inquiry
 is officially guaranteed, but in practice, most academicians,
 relying on the government-run educational system for their
 livelihood, appear to limit their exploration of sensitive
 subjects. The importation of foreign books and periodicals is
 acutely limited by the shortage of foreign exchange.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The nature of the one-party state limits the freedom of public
 assembly and association. Legal political gatherings may be
 organized only by the party or its subgroups. Student
 organizations are party-controlled, and students are inhibited
 from public criticism by concern that their future employment
 prospects may be jeopardized. A number of professional
 associations exist, including legal and medical associations,
 but they are careful to concentrate on nonpolitical topics.
 There is one labor union, Juwata, which is an organ of the
 party. No other unions may operate. All business and
 government offices with more than a few employees are required
 
 
 344
 TANZANIA
 to have a Juwata chapter. Juwata represents about 60 per cent
 of the workers in the modern, industrial, and government
 sectors. At the local level, it is charged with promoting
 employee welfare. As the workers' representative, Juwata can
 file grievances against employers. Those cases which cannot
 be settled at the workplace are referred to the Permanent
 Labour Tribunal, whose decisions are final. While strikes are
 not prohibited by law, they do not take place because the
 decisions of the Labour Tribunal are binding. The Government
 sets wages and Juwata, as an organ of the party, acts as an
 adviser to the Government on wages but does not engage in
 collective bargaining on behalf of the workers.
 Juwata maintains relations with the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), and the Government has ratified most ILO
 conventions. During recent years the ILO was concerned about
 convict labor in prisons and several laws requiring work by
 adults in communal agriculture and development projects.
 However, the Government no longer enforces these laws, and ILO
 concern has lessened.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to
 go abroad for religious purposes. There is one monthly
 Catholic newspaper, with a circulation of approximately
 120,000, which covers mainly religious news.
 The population of the mainland is roughly 50 percent
 Christian, 40 percent Muslim, and 10 percent animist. There
 appear to be no social or political advantages or
 disadvantages attached to membership in any given faith on the
 mainland. While there has been a degree of controversy in
 overwhelmingly Muslim Zanzibar regarding state support of
 certain mosques, Zanzibaris are generally free to practice any
 faith they choose without interference.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for travel documentation
 between Zanzibar and the mainland, the Government generally
 does not restrict travel within the country. Tanzania
 continues to require its citizens to follow national
 employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and
 where they reside. For years, city dwellers have been the
 subject of police checks for proof of employment. Those
 without proper documentation have, in some cases, been forced
 to return to the rural areas in an effort to control
 increasing pressure on urban resources and to reverse
 declining levels in agricultural production. The Human
 Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local government to
 ensure that every resident within its area of jurisdiction
 engages in productive or other lawful employment. Those
 persons who are not so engaged are subject to transfer to
 another area. Implementation of the Human Resources
 Deployment Act was suspended in 1985 while municipal
 authorities, under whose jurisdiction the Act now falls,
 searched for ways of enforcing it without the abuses which
 occurred in 1983 and 1984.
 
 
 345
 TANZANIA
 In 1985, an incident was reported of villagers from one region
 of Tanzania-being forced by the regional government to settle
 in another because of population pressures. The Government
 prohibits people from shifting their villages to other places
 without its permission, and peasants have been prosecuted for
 doing so.
 There are no restrictions on repatriation. The
 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try
 Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. Passports
 are required.for foreign travel and can be difficult to
 obtain. Tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank are
 also required to buy airline tickets. In practice, those
 planning to emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny by police
 and tax authorities. Those who leave the country without
 authorization are subject to prosecution. Although it is
 legally possible for citizenship to be revoked, there have
 been no reports during the last several years that this has
 been done.
 Tanzania has a liberal policy towards refugees and displaced
 persons, There are approximately 180,000 refugees and
 displaced persons in Tanzania of whom 80 percent are from
 Burundi, with the rest mainly from Uganda and Zaire. However,
 Tanzania's acceptance of refugees and displaced persons is
 largely limited to persons from contiguous countries.
 Refugees from other countries are required to find
 resettlement elsewhere. South Africans who enter Tanzania as
 members of liberation groups are in a special category and are
 allowed to remain in the country. However, those who leave
 the liberation groups are refused work and residence permits.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
 actively engaged in resettling over 70 former members of such
 groups.
 Three thousand Banyarwanda refugees from Uganda. who were
 threatened with expulsion from Tanzania in 1984 and later
 placed in a camp, were finally given a locale within Tanzania
 in 1985 in which to settle. The UNHCR is assisting the
 Government to prepare the resettlement area for the refugees.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the party.
 While he relinquished the presidency in 1985, chairman Julius
 Nyerere continues to direct the party structure and
 bureaucracy, which are the dominant forces in the country.
 President Ali Hassan Mwinyi, formerly President of Zanzibar
 and Vice President of Tanzania, remains party vice chairman.
 Mwinyi ran unopposed in national elections on October 27. He
 is a strong supporter of Zanzibar's union with the mainland.
 There are no overt opposition groups, although the alleged
 coup plot discovered in January 1984, and the publicity
 associated with the trial of the plotters, suggested at least
 some internal opposition to the regime. Some Tanzanian
 nationals living abroad, who consider themselves political
 exiles, advocate a change of government.
 In addition to the smooth transition in the presidency, voters
 on October 27 chose 169 elected members of the 244-seat
 Parliament. Under the new Constitution, which went into
 effect in 1985, the proportion of representatives chosen by
 popular vote in those elections increased from approximately
 
 
 346
 TANZANIA
 50 to 75 percent. The remaining 25 percent is composed of
 members appointed by the Government and the various "mass
 organizations" associated with the party. All candidates for
 Parliament must be party members. The national executive
 committee of the party chooses at least two candidates from a
 list provided by each constituency to compete in the general
 election. Within this one-party system voters have registered
 dissatisfaction by sending incumbent members of Parliament to
 defeat. This happened again in the 1985 elections. In past
 years, there were reports of election fixing and intimidation
 of village leaders both on the mainland and on Zanzibar. This
 year, 23 petitions were filed, primarily by individual voters,
 challenging the results of the elections on both the mainland
 and Zanzibar. The petitions alleged a variety of voting
 irregularities. Party membership and, hence, active
 participation in the political process, is not open to anyone
 engaged in private business, which traditionally consists
 largely of Asians, but is slowly being joined by more and more
 Africans.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives. In 1985, for
 the first time, the majority of Zanzibar's representatives
 were elected directly, albeit within the one-party structure.
 This is a sharp break from the past in which all but 10 of the
 members were elected through district and regional
 "revolutionary committees" or directly or indirectly appointed
 by the Zanzibar President. Under the terms of the new
 Constitution, the House of Representatives consists of 50
 directly elected members, 10 members nominated by the
 President of Zanzibar, 5 regional commissioners, 5 seats
 reserved for women, and 1 representative from each of the
 party's 5 mass organizations.
 Women have been encouraged to take an active role in
 politics. Using its powers of direct appointment, the
 Government has ensured that about 20 percent of the membership
 of village councils is female. In late 1985, there were 2
 women cabinet ministers, 1 woman on the 18-member central
 committee of the party, and 13 women on the national executive
 committee. Under the new 1984 Union and Zanzibar
 Constitutions, 15 seats are reserved for women in the
 244-member National Assembly and 5 seats in the 75-member
 Zanzibari House of Representatives. This reform was
 instituted in recognition of the traditional obstacles women
 face in popular elections for constituency seats in Parliament.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Tanzania is a party to U.N. covenants on human rights and in
 1984 ratified the Organization of African Unity Charter on
 Human and People's Rights, 1 of only 13 African states to do
 so thus far. In its 1985 report (covering 1984), Amnesty
 International was concerned about the short-term detention
 without trial of two prisoners of conscience and about
 allegations of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners.
 However, most of the report commented on Tanzania's efforts to
 improve its human rights practices. In the past, the
 Government has shown serious concern about international
 opinion regarding its human rights situation. The Government
 hosted a regional Amnesty International Conference in late
 1984, which was opened by the Prime Minister. In contrast to
 1983, there have been no outside investigations of human
 
 
 347
 TANZANIA
 rights violations in Tanzania for the 1984-85 period. Freedom
 House rates Tanzania "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Tanzania has a population of 21.7 million people (600,000 on
 Zanzibar), growing at a high rate of 3.2 percent per year.
 Per capita gross national product in 1983 was $240, a 9
 percent decline from 1982. Government pricing policies,
 traditionally designed to keep consumer prices low for urban
 dwellers, and a consistent pattern of late payments to
 producers and shortages of necessary items, such as
 fertilizers, have contributed to a decrease in the growth of
 export (cash) crops. Many farmers have increasingly reverted
 to food crop agriculture. Producer price increases, consumer
 price hikes, and more systematic payment to producers by
 state-owned enterprises represent government efforts to
 reverse this trend.
 Industrial production continues to decline because there is a
 drastic .shortage of foreign exchange which is needed to
 purchase raw materials and spare parts. The economy has
 suffered further in recent years from worldwide inflation,
 high energy costs, and continued low prices for export crops.
 The Government continued efforts to expand health and
 education facilities. Since independence in 1969, life
 expectancy at birth has risen from 42 to 53 years. Infant
 mortality remains high, 110 in 1,000 live births (1980),
 largely as a result of malnutrition and the resulting lack of
 resistance to diseases. More than 42 percent of the
 population had access to clean water in 1982, up from 29
 percent in 1975.
 Since the institution of free and compulsory education for all
 in 1977, the vast majority of children of primary school age
 have been enrolled. There is a growing public demand for more
 emphasis on basic education and a growing concern over the
 severely restricted number of places in secondary schools and
 universities. Adult education is available and encouraged.
 According to World Bank and United Nations Education,
 Scientific, and Cultural Organization statistics, Tanzania has
 one of the highest adult literacy rates in Africa. In
 practice, tradition and social attitudes have seriously
 limited the participation of women beyond the primary school
 level.
 Workers in Tanzania perform a 40-hour, 6-day workweek.
 Section 77 of the employment ordinance prohibits children
 under the age of 15 from working. This provision applies to
 the formal wage sector in both urban and rural areas only and
 not to children working on family farms or herding domestic
 livestock. A young person between the ages of 15 and 18 may
 be employed provided the work is "safe and not injurious to
 health." There is no legal discrimination in wages on the
 basis of sex, but in practice discrimination occurs. In
 general, women cannot be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.,
 and young people are not allowed to work between 6 p.m. and 6
 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the workplace, including
 the Factories Ordinance, the Accidental and Occupational
 Diseases Notification Ordinance, and the Workman's
 Compensation Ordinance. The ILO is assisting Juwata with a
 2-year project, scheduled for completion this year, on
 occupational safety. Employers in Tanzania are required to
 have insurance.
 
 
 348
 TANZANIA
 For most of Tanzania's ethnic groups, women's traditional role
 has been that of mother and field laborer, and women are still
 underrepresented in government, the professions, and in
 skilled occupations. Social limitations on the roles women
 play are generally more pervasive on Zanzibar than on the
 mainland. Women in many parts of the country continue to
 suffer discriminatory restrictions on inheritance and
 ownership of property because of concessions to custom and
 Islamic law. These laws dictate in many areas that daughters
 receive smaller shares of their father's property than do
 sons. Although the practice is declining, female circumcision
 is still performed by a minority within approximately 20 of
 the country's 120 mainland ethnic groups. Despite the
 obstacles, the Government has made progress in its efforts to
 ensure equality for women, especially in urban areas where
 traditional values have a weaker hold on the population. The
 Union of Tanzanian Women, a wing of the party, is dedicated to
 the eradication of inequality for women in all spheres of
 society.
 The Asian community, estimated at about 40,000, is both
 culturally and economically exclusive, a business-oriented
 minority in a society committed to "socialist" policies.
 Official government policy is one of equal rights for all
 citizens, and Asian entrepreneurs are being encouraged to
 invest in areas previously reserved for the public sector,
 including large-scale agriculture. In 1985, the Asian
 community did not face the harassments experienced in 1983 and
 1984.
 
 
 349
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TANZANIA
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         7.9      6.4     7.5
 LOANS ..............        5.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    2.9      6.4     7.5
 A.AIO .....................    0.0      1.2     0.0
 LOANS .................  0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............  ..... 0.0     1.2     0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,),..        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        6.5      3.9     7.5
 LOANS .................    5.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    1.5      3.9     7.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         5.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        5.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE  IT-TOTAL .........       1.5     3.9      7.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV S WFP        0.1      2.0      1.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.4     1.9      6.1
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..          1.4      1.3     0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ...............      1.4     1.3      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.4     1.3      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.IL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS .....   o     ......  0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............O...   0.0      0.0     0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ........          0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         7.9     6.4      7.5
 LOANS .................   5.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................     2.9      6.4     7.5
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........    74.2     39.5     45.0   1334.0
 IBRO               0.0      0.0      0.0   318.2
 IFC                0.0      3.9      0.0    11.0
 IDA               46.8     35.0     45.0   844.9
 IOS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFOB              22.4      0.0      0.0     97.9
 UNOP               5.0      0.6      0.0     16.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0     41.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     5.0
 
 
 350
