 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania is a one-party state.
 Political direction for the party, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 (CCM), and the Government is provided by a party-chosen elite
 headed by Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who became President in 1985 and
 party chairman in August 1990 following the retirement of
 former party chairman and President Julius K. Nyerere. The
 CCM, under Mwinyi, lays down fundamental political and
 economic policies and monitors their implementation. The
 party attempts to control activity at all levels of society
 through its system of 10-family cells. The off-lying islands
 of Zanzibar and Pemba are integrated into the Union's
 governmental and party structure, but the Zanzibar Government
 exercises a considerable degree of autonomy.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining
 internal security. They are supported in this role by the
 Tanzanian People's Defense Force (TPDF) with some 30,000
 personnel and by paramilitary forces and a large citizens'
 militia. The Government has granted quasi-legal status to
 vigilante forces in rural areas to counter lawlessness,
 especially cattle rustling. While the armed forces
 traditionally have not been a source of human rights abuses,
 reports of the use of torture of suspects by the police that
 surfaced in 1989 remained unresolved, and evidence indicates
 that police routinely engage in beatings during interrogations.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries and has one
 of the highest rates of population growth. Its overwhelmingly
 agricultural economy has suffered from inefficient economic
 policies and unfavorable trends in international trade.
 Reforms undertaken since 1986, including higher prices paid to
 farmers for their products, rescheduled foreign debt payments,
 and sharp devaluations of the currency, stimulated growth
 rates, which remained at an estimated 4 percent in 1990.
 Zanzibar's high rate of unemployment has been a factor in its
 growing separatist sentiment.
 A bill of rights promulgated in 1988 provides for, inter alia,
 freedom of movement, speech, religion, and association, but
 civil rights are still severely restricted by the Government.
 All political activity outside the single party is tightly
 circumscribed. However, in February, reacting to developments
 in Eastern Europe, then-party chairman Julius Nyerere called
 for an open debate on Tanzania's political future. This
 resulted in a ground swell of criticism aimed at the
 Government, the CCM, and the single-party system, much of it,
 for the first time, in public. In May President Mwinyi closed
 the University of Dar es Salaam when student criticism of the
 Government, and personal attacks against him, exceeded the
 Government's level of tolerance. The University is expected
 to reopen in January 1991 minus 13 students suspended for 1
 year for their roles in the unrest. Criticism and political
 debate in other forums, such as independent newspapers and
 public meetings, have continued, fueled by widespread
 discontent with party and government corruption and misrule.
 At the same time, opposition in Zanzibar and Pemba to union
 with the mainland, which manifested itself in a campaign for a
 referendum on the union between Zanzibar and the mainland,
 gathered momentum, particularly on Pemba, leading to a severe
 government crackdown on political dissidents.
 
 
 TANZANIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 The death in custody of a prominent Burundi exile political
 dissident, Remy Gahutu, produced allegations that he had been
 killed by the Government. A doctor selected by the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) attended the autopsy and
 stated that the death appeared to have been due to natural
 causes, perhaps exacerbated by harsh prison conditions and
 mistreatment. However, clinical information released at the
 end of December indicated the death may have been the result
 of poisoning.
 Nonpolitical extrajudicial killings occur in the form of mob
 justice and vigilantism, in both urban and rural areas. In
 the cities, mobs on occasion will chase down a suspected thief
 in response to a victim's call for help and beat the suspect
 to death. In the countryside, the Government tolerates groups
 known as Sungusungu and Wasalam, associations of local
 villagers formed to combat cattle rustlers and other
 criminals. These groups will sometimes summarily kill
 suspected criminals as well as villagers accused of
 witchcraft. Government and party officials have repeatedly
 condemned these excesses but have been unable to instill
 effective discipline; perpetrators of such abuses are not
 always prosecuted. The People's Militia Laws, as amended by
 Parliament in 1989, bestows quasi-legal status, including
 powers of arrest, on the traditional Sungusungu and Wasalam
 groups.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture or inhuman and
 degrading treatment, and government officials condemn these
 practices whenever cases are made public. Police, however,
 routinely "soften up" arrested suspected criminals just after
 their apprehension in order to obtain quick confessions.
 Further beatings and torture continue if the suspect does not
 break down. The 1989 torture-murder of a suspected thief
 produced a public scandal, but the six policemen involved were
 never prosecuted.
 Tanzanian prisons are overcrowded and unsanitary. Local
 observers report that conditions are substantially worse than
 Tanzania's depressed economic conditions warrant, with
 prisoners forced to do hard labor with little food and no
 medical care.
 Numerous, credible reports of torture and mistreatment by
 African National Congress (ANC) security personnel of
 ANC-defector detainees at ANC refugee camps continued in
 1990. Since national liberation movements in Tanzania enjoy a
 kind of extraterritorial status, Tanzanian officials are
 reluctant to intervene when cases are brought to their
 attention.
 
 
 TANZANIA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Criminal Procedure Code, amended in 1985, requires that a
 person arrested for a crime, other than a security charge
 under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a
 magistrate within 24 hours. These amendments, however, also
 restrict the right to bail, reduce the number of bailable
 offenses, limit judges' discretion in granting bail, and
 impose strict conditions on freedom of movement and
 association when bail is granted.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President of Tanzania,
 upon written order, may order the arrest and indefinite
 detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to
 the public order or national security. The Act was amended in
 1985 to require the Government to release detainees within 15
 days of detention or inform them of the reason for their
 detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the
 grounds for detention at 90-day intervals.
 The most celebrated current Tanzanian detention case is that
 of former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad, who fell
 from grace for criticizing the party chairman and CCM
 policies, was stripped in 1988 of his party membership and his
 job, and was arrested in May 1989 and held without bail. He
 was later charged with illegal possession of secret government
 documents. Preliminary hearings in magistrate's court
 commenced on September 27, 1989, and continued until
 mid-November 1990, at which time Hamad was remanded for
 trial. No date for his trial has been set. Hamad has had
 difficulties in securing adequate legal counsel.
 Numerous further detentions took place on Pemba and Zanzibar
 islands in June, July, and August. Among those detained were
 Saud Yusuf Mgeni, a former minister, Ali Haji Pandu, a former
 Chief Justice, Machano Khamis Ally, Juma Othman Juma, and
 Shabaan Khamis Mloo, all former senior officials in the
 Zanzibar Government. According to local observers, about 120
 other activists on Pemba were in detention at the end of
 October, but most were released by the end of November. In
 December, the Government also released 14 dissident leaders
 (including those former government officials mentioned above)
 who had been held incommunicado and deprived of adequate food
 and medical treatment. The detainees, according to the
 Government, were involved in orchestrating a boycott of the
 parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for late
 October. The Government, according to its critics, was using
 detention to curb free speech and peaceful assembly in favor
 of a referendum. Sources familiar with the cases claimed that
 the Government did not follow the procedures laid down in the
 preventive detention law for advising detainees- of the charges
 against them, publishing the detentions in the Official
 Gazette, or providing access to counsel. Reliable sources
 observed that hundreds of Pembans were detained briefly, from
 a few days to 2 weeks, for participating in the boycott
 campaign. In addition, about 400 Pemban civil servants were
 suspended from their jobs for refusing to register to vote.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model, with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public and the
 press; courts must give reasons on the record for holding
 secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of
 
 
 TANZANIA
 appeal. Military courts do not try civilians, and there are
 no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts
 may appeal decisions to the High Court.
 While an independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated
 and in practice operates independently from the executive
 branch, the Government exerts influence in some cases. In
 addition, judges who render decisions unpopular with senior
 police or government officials may find themselves subject to
 pressure or may be transferred and reassigned. Also,
 government officials routinely ignore judicial rulings.
 Members of the legal community, including judicial officers,
 have complained that the legal system is being corrupted
 through bribery. Police and lower court officials are often
 bribed to delay the process of investigation and trials.
 Although the 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code
 were supposed to lessen court congestion, an average case
 still takes from 2 to 3 years to come to trial. Cases may be
 delayed even longer, during which time the defendant often
 remains incarcerated under appalling conditions. The law
 provides for long sentences--for example, not less than 30
 years for armed robbery.
 The Government provides legal counsel to those charged with
 treason and murder. In Dar es Salaam, the Legal Aid Committee
 of the Tanganyika Law Society and the Legal Aid Committee of
 the faculty of law at the University of Dar es Salaam offer
 legal services to indigents, but their resources are limited.
 Under the Detention Act of 1985, detainees have the right to
 be represented by a defense attorney.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's
 legal system, but retains Islamic courts to handle Muslim
 family cases such as divorce, child custody, and inheritance.
 Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only
 in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the
 Court of Appeals of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary (an estimated 2.1
 million Tanzanians are CCM members), the party structure
 permeates the private lives of all citizens. The CCM has
 party cadres at all levels of society. Individual cells vary
 in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings,
 and may contain from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid "10-cell"
 leaders are the party officials responsible for resolving
 problems at the grassroots level and reporting any suspicious
 behavior or event within their neighborhoods to authorities.
 Tanzanian security services monitor the telephones of many
 Tanzanian citizens, such as journalists and academics, and
 scrutinize correspondence. The security services also closely
 monitor the activities of foreign residents.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of "undesirable" or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of
 residence or origin if no work is found for them (see Sections
 2.d. and 6.c.).
 The Criminal Procedure Act of 1985 authorizes police officials
 (including members of the People's Militia) to issue search
 warrants; however, the Act also authorizes searches of persons
 and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the
 loss or destruction of anything connected with an offense or
 
 
 413
 TANZANIA
 if circumstances are serious and urgent. In practice,
 warrants are rarely requested, and police and other security
 services search private homes and business establishments at
 will.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for under the
 Constitution but historically has been restricted in
 practice. Of particular note were government actions to
 suppress free speech and press in Zanzibar and Pemba in order
 to prevent the expression of sentiment against union with the
 mainland and an antivoter registration drive. There is
 substantial government and party ownership and control of the
 media.
 Former party chairman Nyerere initiated a wide-ranging public
 debate over the merits of Tanzania's one-party political
 system in February, and much of this debate was covered in the
 government-owned media. Concurrently, several privately owned
 papers carried political articles severely critical of the
 Government and party and provided coverage of statements by
 Tanzania's few outspoken dissidents. Government and party
 papers also printed critical articles and letters, and
 reported critics' press conferences and statements. On
 remarkable development was the hosting of a public seminar of
 journalists and academics in August that openly concluded
 there was little press freedom in Tanzania; this conclusion
 was emblazoned across the top of the next day's edition of the
 government-owned English-language daily.
 The mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the National Press Agency (Shihata), and the
 mainland radio facility. The Zanzibar Government operates a
 radio station and a television station. The Swahili-language
 newspaper Uhuru, which has a daily circulation of 100,000, is
 owned by the party. The Newspaper Act, which allows
 government seizure of any publication without a warrant and
 withdrawal of the license to publish at any time, makes the
 launching of a private newspaper or magazine risky. Despite
 these restrictions, a privately owned weekly business
 newspaper and three tabloid-format newspapers that cover
 political topics are now being published.
 The official media present the Government's point of view on
 policy matters. Journalists are expected to appreciate the
 CCM's ideological underpinnings of socialism and self-reliance
 in order to publicize and defend the party's and Government's
 programs for the country. Official media receive extensive
 guidance from the Ministry of Information on coverage of
 political issues, and editorials are often written by senior
 government officials. There is no formal censorship, but
 journalists, even in the new, more liberal atmosphere, still
 exercise considerable self-censorship in criticizing
 government policies or officials. Media coverage of the
 anti-Union campaign on Zanzibar was limited to descriptions of
 Hamad's hearings and the statements of officials deploring
 dissident activities and threatening retaliation.
 Visiting foreign journalists must register with and obtain a
 permit from the Government. Permits and visas have become
 easier to obtain, but application remains a time-consuming
 process which sometimes requires intervention from a
 
 
 414
 TANZANIA
 high-level official. The importation of foreign publications
 is permitted, but the scope is limited by the acute shortage
 of foreign exchange in Tanzania.
 Academic freedom is officially assured, but most academics are
 employed in government-run educational institutions and until
 recently refrained from broaching sensitive subjects in their
 classrooms and publications. Organized student protests,
 supported by the university faculty, against deteriorating
 conditions at the University and the extensive corruption and
 malfeasance by government and party officials led to the
 closure of the University of Dar es Salaam in May when student
 criticism turned to personal attacks against President Mwinyi
 (who is the university chancellor). The Government kept the
 University closed until after the elections in October, with
 an expected reopening date of January 1, 1991.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Although Tanzanians enjoyed an unprecedented opportunity to
 discuss freely political alternatives in 1990, the Government
 continued to restrict freedom of assembly and association. On
 Zanzibar and Pemba the Government met organized political
 activism with a crackdown leading to mass detentions (see
 Section l.d.), and a ban on any public meeting, even the
 traditional gathering of friends at the end of the day to
 trade gossip and news.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, any new association must be
 approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. In the countryside,
 peasant farmers are required to join agricultural cooperative
 societies, controlled by the ruling party, which have forced
 farmers to sell their crops at below-market prices, to buy
 products from government monopolies, and to accept lengthy
 delays--up to 2 years--in payments. No organizations which
 would compete with party organizations are approved. In 1990
 a leading dissident, James Mapalala, attempted to register a
 new organization to promote human and civil rights on two
 occasions; the Ministry of Home Affairs rejected the
 applications. Members of existing legal and academic groups
 such as the Law Society and the University of Dar es Salaam
 faculty, however, were openly calling for the end of
 single-party rule and guarantees of basic political rights by
 the end of 1990.
 Permits must be obtained through the Government for any public
 meeting, political or otherwise, and are normally granted.
 Student organizations are controlled by the party. A number
 of professional, business, legal, and medical associations
 exist, but have only begun to address political topics.
 Candidates for office in major sports clubs and cooperatives
 are screened by the appropriate government ministry, which
 also supervises their elections.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and is
 respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the
 country freely to proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to
 go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious purposes. The
 Jehovah's Witnesses, who were banned in Tanzania for many
 years, have been allowed to return and to register as an
 organization and have been permitted to proselytize since 1988.
 
 
 415
 TANZANIA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, short-term travel
 generally is not restricted within Tanzania, but citizens must
 follow national employment directives stipulating the nature
 of employment and location of residence. For years city
 dwellers unable to show proof of employment during police
 checks have been forced to return to rural areas in an effort
 by the Government to control increasing pressure on urban
 resources. Despite official policy (and constitutional
 guarantees) of freedom of movement and settlement, in some
 areas party officials still force peasants to live and work in
 collective (ujamaa) villages. The Human Resources Deployment
 Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure that every
 resident within their areas of jurisdiction engages in
 productive or other lawful employment. Those not so employed
 are subject to transfer to another area where employment is
 available. There were no mass roundups of unemployed youths
 in 1990, in contrast to previous years.
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain. Tax
 clearances and approval from the Central Bank are required in
 order to buy airline tickets, and those planning to travel or
 emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny by police and tax
 authorities. Tanzanians who leave the country without
 authorization are subject to prosecution on their return. The
 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try
 Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. Although.
 it is legally possible for citizenship to be revoked, there
 have been- no reports that this has been done in recent years.
 Parliament passed a bill in 1986 requiring the registration
 and identification of everyone over the age of 10 who resides
 in Tanzania, apparently in an effort to control foreign
 businessmen.
 Tanzania generally has a liberal policy towards refugees and
 displaced persons. At the end of 1990, there were art
 estimated 265,000 refugees in Tanzania. The largest group of
 refugees is from Burundi. In 1989, 15 Burundian refugees,
 whose repatriation was requested by the Burundian Government
 for allegedly plotting against it, were jailed by a Tanzanian
 ministry order. Their release was conditional upon
 resettlement in a third country; however, they remained in
 detention through 1990, as the UNHCR was-not successful in
 finding an alternative country of refuge. One of the 15, the
 leader of the Burundi opposition group Palipehutu, died in
 detention on August 17 (see Section l.a.). Tanzania accepts
 refugees from almost all countries, except for South Africans
 who have left their liberation movements and Kenyans belonging
 to the dissident Mwakenya organization.
 In early 1990, the Government of Tanzania detained 122 Somalis
 who had fled to Tanzania as a result of the Kenyan
 Government's Somali registration exercise. The Government
 refused to grant refugee status to any of them. All but 38
 obtained financial assistance to return to Somalia, and these
 38 were finally accepted for asylum in Tanzania in November.
 An additional 12 Somalis claiming Tanzanian citizenship
 remained in detention at the end of 1990 awaiting resolution
 of their nationality status. A number of opposition groups
 and alleged political refugees from neighboring countries have
 found Tanzania a relatively open haven and maintain contact
 
 
 416
 TANZANIA
 with the UNHCR, even though the chances of finding permanent
 third-country settlement are remote.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Tanzanian people cannot legally remove the party in power
 or change the one-party system. Organized political activity,
 other than debate and discussion, outside the framework of the
 ruling CCM, remains forbidden. There are no overt opposition
 groups, but, with the new liberalization of political debate,
 opposition is beginning to emerge. On the mainland,
 wide-ranging debate and discussion have been officially
 encouraged. In Zanzibar and Pemba, however, attempts to
 organize anti-Union political activity were suppressed. Some
 officials' homes and party offices were burned, although it is
 unclear whether the violent acts were carried out by
 anti-Union activists or by government or party supporters
 creating an excuse to clamp down on dissidents.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members; any
 Member of Parliament stripped of party membership loses his or
 her seat in Parliament. A 1985 amendment to the Constitution
 allows voters to choose between two CCM-selected candidates
 for 75 percent of the 255 (11 new constituencies were created
 by Parliament in 1990) seats in the Union Parliament. The
 remaining 25 percent are composed of members appointed by the
 Government and the various mass organizations associated with
 the party. All CCM candidates are vetted and approved by the
 all-powerful Central Committee, which often ignores the
 preferences expressed by local party caucuses. Voters can
 register dissatisfaction with individual Members of Parliament
 by voting incumbents out of office and choosing the alternate
 candidate offered by the CCM.
 Elections for both the Presidency and Parliament are held
 every 5 years, most recently in October. While voting is by
 secret ballot, reliable observers claim that CCM officials
 take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that the correct
 candidates are elected by appropriate majorities. Many
 Zanzibaris, for example, believe that the 1985 and 1990
 elections in the islands were fraudulent, and that the vote
 totals reported by party officials were invented. The
 registration process for the 1990 elections was marred by the
 use of coercive tactics to force people to register,
 particularly on Zanzibar and Pemba. Press accounts in July
 and August cited numerous cases of Tanzanians being told they
 must produce voter registration cards before they could obtain
 government services or rationed commodities. On Zanzibar,
 reliable observers noted that public sector employees were
 told to register to vote or face dismissal, and some 400 civil
 servants in Pemba who refused to register to vote were sent
 home on compulsory leave without pay. None had been
 reinstated by year's end.
 Calls by opposition elements in the islands to show
 displeasure with the Government were successful during the
 elections in that voter turnout on the islands was
 considerably lower than in previous years. CCM incumbents for
 the most part returned to office.
 While membership in the party is voluntary, overzealous CCM
 functionaries often require proof of membership for individual
 citizens to receive basic government services or employment, a
 
 
 417
 TANZANIA
 practice which CCK leaders have publicly deplored but done
 little else to prevent.
 Zanzibar election procedures are similar to those for the
 mainland, with candidates selected by local caucuses and with
 the final selection being made by the Central Committee of the
 CCM. That this allows the mainland CCM leadership to decide
 who will hold office in Zanzibar is a source of considerable
 discontent in the islands.
 In November President Mwinyi announced that he would form a
 commission to address the issue of multiparty versus
 single-party systems. At year's end no commission had yet
 been appointed.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no local groups devoted solely to monitoring human
 rights abuses in Tanzania. The Government resents inquiries
 into alleged human rights abuses. Amnesty International (AI)
 investigated human rights violations in Zanzibar in July,
 following which several Zanzibari citizens who had assisted AI
 were briefly detained and questioned by the police. Demarches
 by Western governments concerned about the detentions on
 Zanzibar and Pemba had little effect on the situation there,
 aside from possibly speeding up the process of bringing formal
 charges against the five detainees mentioned in Section l.d.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The plight of the Barabaig people of central Tanzania has
 emerged as a human rights issue. The Barabaig and their
 attorneys maintain that the Government has illegally
 dispossessed them of their traditional lands in order to
 implement a government-run agricultural project. They have
 also accused project employees of beating them, killing their
 cattle, and despoiling tribal graves and religious sites.
 Barabaig herders are often arrested for trespassing when
 crossing project lands that lie between their homes and their
 pastures, according to local journalists. Africa Watch has
 documented several cases of abusive treatment of Barabaig
 herders by project employees and local police. The Government
 has suppressed attempts by the local independent press to
 cover the story; it has also resisted Barabaig efforts to seek
 legal redress.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past
 decade to about 40,000 (plus 4,000 in Zanzibar). A
 business-oriented minority in a society historically committed
 to Socialist policies and remaining both culturally and
 economically exclusive, the Asians are regarded with
 considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. This
 antipathy stems in part from the Asian community's
 disproportionate influence in key sectors of the economy.
 Despite this, there are no laws or official policies
 discriminating against them. As the Government's economic
 policies evolve and greater stress is given to the private
 sector, Asians are encouraged to invest in areas previously
 reserved for the public sector and are a force in the
 reawakening economy. Accordingly, there has been a gradual
 movement of Asians to Dar es Salaam from interior regions, and
 
 
 418
 TANZANIA
 their presence is more noticeable in the country's political
 and economic capital.
 Although the Government has tried to ensure equality for
 women, and both party and government constitutions endorse
 equality in the workplace, strong traditional norms still
 divide labor along sexual lines and place women in a
 subordinate position. Women face widespread discrimination in
 access to educational opportunities, for example, and in the
 countryside are largely relegated to agricultural labor and
 raising children. Statistics for 1979 showed 97 percent of
 economically active women were engaged in agriculture, the
 vast majority on small family farms.
 Progress on women's rights has been more noticeable in urban
 areas, where traditional values are weaker, but even there and
 in the public sector, which employs 80 per cent of the
 salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict their access
 to some jobs or their hours of employment. According to a
 1986 estimate, women constituted less than 14 percent of the
 wage employment sector and in 1990 most were still
 concentrated in lower salaried civil service positions such as
 clerks, secretaries, and telephone operators. A manpower
 survey showed that women occupied 20.1 percent of high and
 midlevel positions; they have little access to powerful
 decisionmaking positions. The overall situation for women is
 even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzibar.
 Women in many parts of the country face discriminatory
 restrictions on inheritance and ownership of property because
 of concessions by the Government and courts to customary and
 Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage Act provide for
 certain inheritance and property rights for women, application
 of customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the
 lifestyle and stated intentions of the male head of
 household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory
 inheritance claims, primari-ly in rural areas where individuals
 practice a traditional lifestyle.
 The problem of violence against women is widespread. Legal
 remedies exist but in practice are available only with
 difficulty. Traditional customs subordinating women remain
 strong in both urban and rural areas and are often upheld by
 local magistrates. The husband has a free hand to treat his
 wife as he wishes, and wife beating occurs at all levels of
 society. The Government has no programs to inhibit this
 practice.
 In 1990, at the University of Dar es Salaam, a group of male
 students, known as Punch, frequently harassed female students,
 subjecting them to character assassination, sexual threats,
 and actual assaults. In February one of Punch's orchestrated
 campaigns drove a first-year education student, Levina Mukasa,
 to suicide. Two students were dismissed from the University
 when the incident provoked a public scandal, but no other
 punitive action had been taken by the end of 1990.
 Although officially discouraged by the Government, female
 circumcision is still performed in approximately 20 of the
 country's 130 mainland ethnic groups. Health authorities
 state the practice is declining, but nongovernmental sources
 maintain it is on the rise, especially in central Tanzania.
 The lack of accurate statistics makes it difficult to
 determine whether the practice is increasing or not.
 
 
 419
 TANZANIA
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers do not have the right to form or join organizations of
 their own choice. The right of association is limited to one
 labor union organization, JUWATA, which is an organ of the
 ruling party and to which all unionized workers must belong.
 JUWATA represents approximately 60 percent of the workers in
 industry and government but in reality has little influence on
 labor policy. The nascent political liberalization in 1990
 encouraged JUWATA leaders to work towards making JUWATA an
 independent labor union congress, with workers permitted to
 form their own member unions in each industry or workplace.
 This reform is receiving some attention from the party and
 government leadership, but no steps were taken to implement it
 by the end of 1990.
 Workers have the legal right to strike only after complicated
 and protracted mediation and conciliation procedures have been
 followed., Each labor dispute must go through a process of
 appeals leading ultimately to the Industrial Court, which was
 established in 1989 to replace the former Permanent Labor
 Tribunal (although the Industrial Court judge was not
 appointed until September 1990). The Industrial Court
 receives direction from the Minister of Labor and Youth
 Development (who also is currently the secretary-general of
 JUWATA). If JUWATA is not satisfied with the decision of the
 Industrial Court, it can then conduct a legal strike. These
 procedures can prolong a dispute for months without resolving
 it. Pending a resolution, frustrated workers often stage
 impromptu wildcat strikes and walkouts.
 Although most strikes are in effect illegal (there were no
 legal strikes in 1990), there have been no reports of
 government prosecutions against workers involved in strikes
 and disputes. However, private managers may sue the workers
 involved; one dispute at a private hospital is now before the
 courts, with the management charging 50 workers with illegally
 restricting access to company premises and attempting to
 install a new board of directors contrary to the company's
 articles of incorporation. The High Court issued an interim
 order prohibiting the workers from interfering with
 management's access to work premises; final verdicts were
 still pending at the end of the year.
 JUWATA limits its international affiliations to regional
 organizations, including the Organization of African Trade
 Union Unity and a newly created East African National Trade
 Unions Consultative Council.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is limited to the private sector. Wages
 for employees of the Government and state-owned organizations,
 which account for the vast bulk of the salaried labor force,
 are set by the Government; JUWATA does not bargain
 collectively on behalf of government employees. However, in
 1990 JUWATA was involved in discussions with the Government on
 behalf of employees of state-owned corporations, arguing that
 those organizations should be permitted to charge market rates
 for products and services in order to ensure the economic
 viability of the enterprise, and thus the employment security
 of its employees.
 
 
 420
 TANZANIA
 JUWATA negotiates on behalf of employees at various levels.
 It may seek resolution of an individual grievance by acting as
 arbiter between the employee and management; it may represent
 the interests of employees at one particular company in wage
 or benefit matters before owners or managers; or it may
 negotiate on behalf of most private sector employees with the
 Association of Tanzania Employers. Collective agreements must
 be submitted to the Industrial Court for approval. The
 Committee of Experts (COE) of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) has observed that these provisions are not
 in conformity with ILO Convention 98 on collective bargaining
 and the right to organize. In 1989 the ILO provided technical
 support in the drafting of a national labor code, which at the
 end of 1990 was still under review by various government
 ministries.
 There are no export processing zones in Tanzania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Employment Ordinance prohibits forced labor. However, for
 a number of years the ILO Committee of Experts has observed
 that provisions of various Tanzanian laws are incompatible
 with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor.
 Specifically, the Human Resources Deployment Act (1983)
 .requires every local government authority to ensure that
 able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school engage
 in productive or other lawful employment. In the past,
 massive police raids were used to round up persons who had no
 evidence of employment. The law had recently been interpreted
 more leniently, but concern over the high crime rate and the
 increase in the number of street beggars is encouraging the
 Government to again conduct police raids against the urban
 unemployed. In September newspaper articles reported that
 over 300 persons were picked up by the police in Dar es Salaam
 for "roaming the streets aimlessly."
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 15 are prohibited from working under
 Section 77 of the Employment Ordinance. This provision
 applies only to the formal wage sector in both urban and rural
 areas, however, and not to children working on family farms or
 herding domestic livestock. A young person between the ages
 of 15 and 18 may be employed, provided the work is safe and
 not injurious to health, and young people are not allowed to
 work between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. Enforcement by the Ministry of
 Labor and Youth Development in the formal wage sector is good
 but sporadic to nonexistent in the rapidly growing informal
 sector.
 As a result of public reports of large numbers of children
 peddling items or begging in urban areas, in 1990 the ILO
 began a small-scale survey to try to identify the number of
 children engaged in formal and informal employment and the
 number of "street children."
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The minimum wage for employment in the formal sector is the
 equivalent of $12.75 a month. However, JUWATA often
 negotiates higher minimum wages on an employer-by-employer
 basis, depending on the financial status of the business. A
 worker paid at this rate, even when supplemented with various
 benefits such as housing and transport allowances and food
 
 
 421
 TANZANIA
 subsidies, could not provide an adequate standard of living
 for a family.
 Employment ordinances require workers to work a minimum of 45
 hours in a 6-day workweek. In general, women may not be
 employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Several laws regulate
 safety in the workplace, including the Factories Ordinance,
 the Accidental and Occupational Diseases Notification
 Ordinance, and the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance. Set up
 with the assistance of the ILO, an occupational health and
 safety factory inspection system is in place, managed by the
 Ministry of Labor and Youth Development. JUWATA claims that
 inspections are carried out regularly; however, an ILO
 official reported in November that, due to lack of funds and
 transport, inspections are not being performed regularly.
 JUWATA sources indicate enforcement of labor codes is fairly
 effective in the formal sector, but local observers note it is
 nonexistent in the informal sector.
 
 
