TANZANIA
The report on Tanzania provides a detailed account of human rights conditions, particularly on the mainland. However, it ignores reports of government suppression of freedom of speech and association in the semi-autonomous islands of Zanzibar and Pemba that make up the Union with the mainland.
Over the past decade, a small but vocal number of Zanzibaris have expressed discontent with Zanzibar's membership in the Union. There have been calls by certain segments of the island population to hold a referendum on this issue. In reaction, the Tanzanian government sought to integrate Zanzibar further into the Union. The mainland and Zanzibar political parties were merged to form Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) in 1977. When President Mwalimu Julius Nyerere stepped down in 1985, the presidency of the Union was handed to Ali Hassan Mwinyi, a Zanzibari. Other Zanzibaris were appointed to influential positions in the Union government. While these measures have partly succeeded in cooling anti-Union sentiments, discontent over a lagging economy, unemployment and high prices remain. These problems are widely blamed on Zanzibar's incorporation into the Union.
During 1989, the government, reacting to anti-Union sentiment, took a number of measures that have limited freedom of speech and association in the islands of Zanzibar and Pemba. The current crisis started in January 1988 when Seif Shariff Hamad, the Chief Minister of Zanzibar who favored looser ties with the mainland, was dismissed along with five other ministers, allegedly for plotting against the Zanzibar government. The six were subsequently expelled from CCM. Since then, there have been a number of arrests of individuals suspected of opposing the Union.
The State Department, as in last year's report, has failed to note that the government has increasingly addressed this issue by using the criminal legal process to inhibit freedom of speech and association in Zanzibar. There have been numerous arrests of people on charges of attending illegal meetings or other petty criminal offenses which relate to freedom of expression or assembly who are then remanded on bail. For example, 35 people were charged on June 21 with attending illegal meetings in Pemba. A further 50 are believed to have been charged in July with criminal damage to a CCM platform the day before a political rally. In March, criminal charges were brought against five government critics on the allegation that
217
Tanzania
they had been agitating for a referendum on the issue of the islands. All five were subsequently released, but three were rearrested and charged with theft. Pending their trial they were required to report to the police daily. When the case came to court in April, the charges were dismissed.
The report barely mentions the ongoing investigation of the former Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad under the National Security Act. By doing so, it underplays the improper use of the criminal trial process by the government against persons of differing political views, particularly on the issue of the union with mainland Tanzania. With regard to his case, the State Department fails to mention that:
•	Hamad was arrested in May and charged with the possession of official documents that he had kept after being fired from the position of Chief Minister. A few days before, he had given an interview to the BBC in which he had called for a referendum on the union between Zanzibar and the mainland. He was later charged with illegal assembly for taking part in a demonstration without permission.
•	Hamad has had difficulty obtaining the legal counsel of his choice. Originally the University of Dar-es-Salaam Legal Aid Committee took his case, but in June, withdrew its representation. In August, another lawyer withdrew his representation. Hamad is now being represented by two Nairobi-based lawyers who commute to Zanzibar.
•	Until recently, Hamad's legal counsel was denied access to the documents which formed the basis of the charges against him.
•	The report also fails to note that others were similarly arrested and are awaiting trial. Suleiman Seif, Omar Salim, Masoud Omar Said and Juma Ngwali were released on bail shortly after being arrested in May. The government has asserted that the case cannot proceed without the co-accused, Hamad, who is currently imprisoned in Zanzibar.
In addition, the report incorrectly states that Hamad's trial is in session, giving the impression that the trial has commenced. In fact, the proceedings that began in September were only a preliminary inquiry (equivalent to a grand jury hearing in the US) which is being held to determine only whether there is sufficient evidence to proceed
218
Tanzania
to trial in the High Court. The failure of the State Department to mention the strong anti-Union sentiment in Zanzibar and Pemba also prevents the reader from understanding the government's attempts to manipulate the judiciary. In fact, the government is seen by many to be intentionally delaying the trial to avoid inflaming separatist sentiment since the trial represents a powerful focus for such sentiments.
In mentioning the outcome of the case of demonstrators who were arrested in May 1988, the State Department failed to mention, either last year or this year, that the defendants were denied access to the counsel of their choice. Their request to be represented by Wolfango Dourado was denied. Not only is Dourado qualified to practice on Zanzibar, but he was also the former Attorney-General of the very government that now denies him a licence to practice as a private practitioner in the same jurisdiction. The denial of the license is widely believed to be due to Mr. Dourado's outspoken views. Subsequent counsel, Hamidu Ali Mbwelezini, was approached by the police and told to drop the case. He later accepted a government job on the mainland forcing the defendants to eventually retain counsel from Dar-es-Salaam.
For the State Department to end the section dealing with fair trial by saying that "according to knowledgeable observers, there were no political prisoners at the end of 1989," as well as omitting to mention the misuse of the criminal legal process, is completely misleading.
The report correctly commends the Tanzanian government's liberal policy towards refugees. In the past, Tanzania has liberally granted refuge to thousands of Burundis. However, the State Department should have explained that the situation of the Burundi refugees currently awaiting deportation is an exception to its usual policy. These refugees belong to an apparently non-violent Burundi opposition organization, Palipehutu, and many have been living in Tanzania for several years (over 10 years in some cases). Their deportation order is widely believed to be related to a thaw in relations between Tanzania and Burundi and is intended as a goodwill-gesture on the part of the Tanzania.
The report also fails to discuss government harassment of the Barabaig people of central Tanzania. The Barabaig, a Protestant pastoralist people, have been subjected to arbitrary arrest, beating, impounding of their livestock and desecration of their sacred sites to
219
Tanzania
force them to abandon their ancestral lands in favor of the Tanzania Canada Wheat Project in the region. In July, Prime Minister Joseph Waroba invoked extraordinary powers conferred by 1973 legislation, and issued a government notice extinguishing customary land rights in Barabaig lands and granted title of the land to National Agricultural & Food Corporation. The Prime Minister's act was intended to pre-empt an application for compensation filed on behalf of the Barabaig by the Legal Aid Committee of the University of Dar-es-Salaam. The Legal Aid Committee contends that the Prime Minister's order is unconstitutional. The government has also charged some Barabaig pastoralists with criminal trespass. The report should have devoted some time to this complex issue, where the government has applied apparently extra-legal means to dispossess the Barabaig of their ancestral land, and in the process violated their basic rights.
The report is, however, as a whole improved. It adequately covers the human rights situation on the mainland. More attention needs to be given to events in Zanzibar throughout 1990 to be able to make a better assessment as to whether the government relaxes its suppression of opposing political views.
220
