 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state. In October and November, the Republic held its first multiparty
 general elections for President and Parliament in more than 30 years. The ruling
 party, Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM), continued to control the Union Government,
 winning 186 of the 232 seats in Parliament. The CCM presidential candidate, Ben-
 jamin Mkapa, won a four-way race with 61.8 percent of the vote. The islands of Zan-
 zibar are integrated into the United Republic's governmental and party structure,
 but the Zanzibar Government exercises considerable autonomy. The CCM won close-
 ly contested elections for the Zanzibar President and House of Representatives held
 in October. International observers noted serious discrepancies duringthe vote-
 counting process, calling into question the reelection of CM incumbent Dr. Salmin
 Amour Juma as Zanzibar's President.
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They are
 supported by a variety of citizens' anticrime groups and patrols known as
 "Sungusungu." The plice regularly committed human rights abuses.
 Agriculture provides 85 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea, and
 gemstones account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is small. Eco-
 nomic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization of agricultural policy,
 the privatization of state-owned enterprises, rescheduling of foreign debt payments,
 and freeing the currenc exchange rate, have helped stimulate economic growth;
 however, pr fiscal management, and high inflation constrained economic progss.
 The mutiparty presidential and parliamentary elections were an important evel-
 opment in the human rights situation. Although the ruling party retained signifi-
 cant advantages, new opposition parties were competitive in many races. However,
 human rights problems persisted, including elice beatings and mistreatment of
 suspects which sometimes resulted in death. Prison conditions remained harsh and
 life threatening. Arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention continued, and the ineffi-
 cient and corrupt judicial system did not provide expeditious and fair trials for
 many citizens. There were limitations on freedom of the press, freedom of associa-
 tion, and worker rights. Mob justice remained severe and widespread, as did dis-
 crimination and violence against women. Some abuse of children continued. Follow-
 ing a March 31 change to the Government's longstanding policy of offering asylum,
 the Government refused entry to or forcibly repatriated several hundred Rwandan
 and Burundi refugees.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings. At the end of 1994, prison officials in Bariadi were alleged to have beaten
 a prisoner to death shortly before he was due to be released. The officials covered
 up the death by telling the family that he had been transferred to another prison
 and did not confirm the man's death for several months afterward. No charges were
 fied in the case. In September six policemen in Mbeya were detained following the
 death of a suspected criminal in their custody. Credible observers estimate that po-
 lice are responsible for the deaths of as many as 10 prisoners per year. Most of
 these deaths are the result of police beatings of persons in detention.
 There were no developments in the January 1993 police killing of a member of
 the opposition party Civic United Front (CUP) on the island of Pemba. After a
 lengthy investigation, the policeman who fired the shots was charged with murder
 without intent but remained free. CUF leaders complained that the President and
 Attorney General of Zanzibar blocked the prosecution of the police officer. At year's
 end the trial was still pending.
 Incidents of mob justice against suspected criminals continued to claim dozens of
 lives. Throughout 1995 suspected thieves were stoned, beaten to death, or doused
 with gasoline and set on fire. On a single day in February, mobs in Dar es Salaam
 killed four suspected car thieves in two separate incidents. In September a mob in
 Arusha burned a suspected thief to death. Although police occasionally rescue sus-
 
 
 pects, there are no reports of individuals being arrested or prosecuted for engaging
 b justice. The widespread belief in witchcraft has led in some instances to kill-
 ing of alleged witches by their "victims" aggrieved relatives, or mobs. Government
 authorities condemned these practices, but took no active measures to prevent their
 ocurence and rarely prosecuted participants.
 On September 13, one man was killed in a scuffle between CCM and opposition
 National Convention for Construction and Reform-Maguezi (NCCR-Mageuzi) sup-
 porters in Singida. The victim was claimed by beth parties to be a memer, and no
 one was charged with the crime. In a separate incident in Arumer in September,
 a young NCCR supporter died in a clash between CCM and NCCR youth gangs. No
 one was arrested or charged.
 Harsh prison conditions led to the deaths of inmates (see Section 1.c.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment
 but the police regularly threatened, mistreated, and occasionally beat suspected
 criminals during and after their apprehension and interrogation. Although govern-
 ment officials usually condemned these practices, the Government seldom pros-
 ecuted officials for such abuses. The People's Militia Laws, as amended by Par-
 liament in 1989, bestowed quasi-legal status on the traditional Sungusungu neigh-
 borhood and village anticrime groups. In the past, these groups had been criticized
 for using excessive force with criminal suspects.
 Prison conditions remained harsh and life threatening. Government officials ac-
 knowleded that prisons are overcrowded and living conditions are poor. Prisons
 were designed to hold 21,000 prisoners, but the prison population was estimated at
 47,000. Serious diseases, such as dysentery, malaria, and cholera, are common and
 result in deaths. Convicted prisoners are not allowed to receive food from the out-
 side and are often moved to different prisons without notification to their families.
 Pretrial detainees are held together with those serving sentences but are allowed
 to receive food from the outside. There is no outside monitoring of prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Procedures Code, amended
 in 1985, requires that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a magistrate within
 24 hours. However, in practice, the police often fail to do so. The 1985 amendments
 also restricted the right to bail and imposed strict conditions on freedom of move-
 ment and association when bail is granted. Because of backlogs, an average case
 still takes 2 to 3 years or longer to come to trial, during which time pretrial detain-
 ees remain incarcerated under poor conditions. The code provides for a right to de-
 fense counsel. The Chief Justice assigns lawyers to indigent defendants charged
 with serious crimes such as murder, manslaughter, and armed robbery. There are
 only a few hundred practicing lawyers in Tanzania, and most indigent defendants
 charged with lesser crimes do not have legal counsel.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the President may order the arrest and in-
 definite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the public
 order or national security. This act was amended in 1985 to require the Government
 to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the reason for
 their detention. The detainee is also allowed to challenge the grounds for detention
 at 90-day intervals. Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in 1991 that
 the Preventive Detention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons not consid-
 ered dangerous to society, the Government has still not introduced corrective legisla-
 tion. The Preventive Detention Act was not used in 1995. The Government has addi-
 tional broad detention powers under the Regions and Regional Commissioners Act
 and the Area Commissioners Act of 1962. These acts permit regional and district
 commissioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons who may "disturb public
 tranquility.I
 Police continued to make arbitrary arrests, although less frequently than in the
 past. For example, the police occasionally arrest relatives of criminal suspects, hold-
 ing them in custody without charge for as long as several years in efforts to force
 the suspects to turn themselves in. Those relatives who manage to get their cases
 before a judge are usually set free, only to be immediately rearrested when they
 leave the courtroom. The Government took no legal action to correct these abuses.
 Police also detained CUF members when they attempted to campaign in rural areas.
 The editor and the publisher of two newspapers, Shaba and afiki, were detained
 on three separate occasions during the year after publishing letters critical of the
 Government. On one occasion, they were denied food and sleep for 2 days and de-
 nied access to their lawyer for 5 days (see Section 2.a.).
 Six Angolans, who had been detained after refusing offers of asylum, voluntarily
 returned to Angola in August.
 
 
 I
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the judiciary increasingly demonstrated its independence and willingness
 to challenge the Government. For example, in March the High Court ruled against
 the Attorney General and Ministry of Home Affairs in a high profile commercial dis-
 pute between two brothers regarding the misappropriation of funds. In the past sen-
 ior police or government officials pressured and sometimes reassigned judges who
 made unpopular rulings; no such incidents occured in 1995.
 However, the judicial bureaucracy is widely criticized as inefficient and corrupt
 bringing into question a defendant's ability to receive a fair and expeditious trial
 in all cases. There are reports of prisoners waiting several years for trial because
 they could not pay bribes to police and court officials. The majority of individuals
 held in the two major prisons in Dar es Salaam are awaiting trial. Although the
 Government initiated efforts as early as 1991 to highlight judicial corruption, it has
 made little progress in correcting the situation.
 The legal system is based on the British model with modifications to accommo-
 date customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Military courts do not try civilians
 and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal
 decisions to the High Court and Court of Appeal.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system, but re-
 tains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce, child custody,
 and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in
 Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the Court of Appeal of the
 United Republic of Tanzania.
 Criminal trials are open to the public and to the press; courts must give reasons
 on the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of
 apl al.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. In November the Government par-
 doned nine former military officers who were sentenced in 1985 to life imprisonment
 following their conviction for plotting the overthrow of the Government in 1983.
 f. Arbitray Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, which are generally provided for in
 the Constitution. The CCM has historically penetrated all levels of society through
 local cells, varying in size from single family homes to large apartment buildings
 and containing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials serve as 10-cell lead-
 ers with authority to resolve problems at the grassroots level and to report to au-
 thorities any suspicious behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night
 patrol service in the neighborhood. In 1993, elections were held for new grassroots
 leaders to replace the CCM 10-cell leaders in nonparty business. In fact, few voters
 participated in these elections which were boycotted by the opposition, and the 10-
 cell leaders retained nearly all of their power and influence.
 CCM membership is voluntary and is estimated at 2 to 3 million card holders.
 While in the past, COM membership had been necessary for advancement in politi-
 cal and other areas, the importance of such membership is waning.
 The Criminal Procedures Act of 1985 authorizes police officials (including the ci-
 vilian anticrime units) to issue search warrants; however, the act also authorizes
 searches of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice, warrants are rarely requested, and police and other security
 services search private homes and business establishments at will. The security
 services reportedly monitor telephones and correspondence of some citizens and se-
 lected foreign residents.
 Compulsory participation in local anticrime groups known as Sungusungu contin-
 ued in some areas and waned in others.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Opposition political party members and others openly criticize the
 Government and ruling party in public forums. However, the Government on occa-
 sion attempted to pressure the media and journalists practice self-censorship.
 The press in Tanzania is, on the whole, lively and outspoken. There are over 50
 privateiy owned newspapers and periodicals some of which are owned or influenced
 by political parties, both CCM and opposition. The Government continued to pres-
 sure newspapers to kill or ameliorate unfavorable stories throughout the year, and
 the media continued to practice self-censorship because of fear of Government re-
 prisals. There is no official censorship.
 In February the Government filed sedition charges against the editor and two
 publishers of the private Swahili daily Majira for an article which embarrassed the
 Government over the purchase of radar equipment. Legal proceedings were continu-
 
 
 269
 ing at the end of 1995, but Majira continued to publish similar articles. On two sep-
 arate occasions in May and July, the editor and publisher of the biweekly Shaba
 were detained following the publication of letters from unamed army and police offi-
 cers criticizing the Government. They were charged with violating the Official Se-
 reeAt November bth men again were detained following their publishing in
 the Rafiki newspaper letters criticizing the Government's management of the elec-
 tions. The Government subsequently banned Rafiki; Shaba continues to publish, and
 the trial of the editor and publisher is still pending (see Section 1.d.). At year's end,
 a seditious libel case against another newspaper, the Express, had not been brought
 to court and the Express continued to publish.
 The Government sought to maintain some control over the private media by es-
 tablishing a code of conduct for journalists and a Media Council. Led by the Tanza-
 nian chapter of the Media Council for Southern Africa and the newly formed Asso-
 ciation of Journalists and Media Workers, journalists forced the Government to
 agree to a voluntary code of ethics and Media Council instead. At year's end full
 registration of this Media Council was pending government approval.
 Generally, the official media-radio, television, and press-largely reflect official
 positions following guidance from the Ministry of Information. Senior officials often
 write editorials. (lovernment-cntrolled Radio Tanzania, broadcasting in Swahili
 and English, reaches the largest audience throughout most of the mainland. Private
 radio and television stations broadcast in Dares Salaam and in a few other urban
 areas.
 The private television station Dar es Salaam Television (DTV) was fined and
 threatened with closure for reporting a CUF victory in the election for President of
 Zanzibar (see Section 3) and an erroneous report of the death of the Prime Minister.
 Staff members of DTV said that they believe the fines were retribution for political
 reporting, and the station has stopped reporting controversial news.
 Opposition access to the government-owned radio station, which had been limited
 to a single weekly program before the election campaign, improved during the 2-
 month period before the elections, and political news was reported in a more bal-
 anced manner. On September 19, the our presidential candidates participated in
 an unprecedented publi debate on an equalfooting. The debate, which was spon-
 sored by a private newspapr, was broadcast over government-owned radio and pri-
 vate television. The CCM had considerable advantages over opposition parties, in
 part because of it own daily Swahili-language newspaper (see Section 3).
 On Zanzibar, radio and television are controlled by the Government, which also
 practices a restrictive policy with regard to print media. Private mainland news-
 papers are widely available, and residents of Zanzibar can receive mainland tele-
 isin. Government-owned radio and television on Zanzibar was biased in favor of
 the CCM.
 Academic freedom exists in theory and largely in practice, particularly at the uni-
 versity level. Academics were increasingly outspoken in their criticism of the Gov-
 erunent and suggestions for reform.
 b. Freedom      Y eacef  Assemb y and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and citizens generally enjoyed the
 right to discuss freely political alternatives. However, the Constitution and other
 legal acts limit these rights and stipulate that citizens cannot run for public office
 unless they are members of a registered political party.
 Political parties must give police 48 hours' advance notice of rallies. Police have
 the authority to deny permission on public safety or security grounds, or if the per-
 mit seker belongs to an unregistered organization or political party. Opposition
 parties were     m most cases to hold rallies. Police were usually present and occa-
 sionaly ordered people to disperse for crowd control. Police used tear gas a few
 times at opposition political rallies, although it was unclear whether it was used to
 disrupt the rallies or in response to crowdprovocation. On Zanzibar the opposition
 CUP party was not allowed to hold rallies throughout the islands until 2 months
 before the elections. Following the elections, in which the ruling 0CM party claimed
 victory, local government officials prohibited any assembly of CUF supporters or the
 use of CUP slogans.
 In order to ensure public safety, regulations require nonpolitical organizations
 sekin to stage a rally to have the permission of either the District or Regional
 Commissioner.
 The Registrar of Political Parties has sole authority to approve or deny the reg-
 istration of any political party and is responsible for enforcing strict regulations on
 registered or provisionally registered parties. The electoral law prohibits independ-
 ent candidates; requires all standing Members of Parliament to resign if they join
 another party; qurees all political parties to support the union with Zanzibar, and
 forbids parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious affiliation. Parties granted pro-
 
 
 visional registration may hold public meetings and recruit members. They have 6
 months to submit lists of at least 200 members in 10 of the country's 25 regions,
 including 2 regions in Zanzibar, in order to secure full registration and to be eligible
 to field candidates for election. Nonregistered parties are prohibited from holding
 meetings, recruitinKg members, or fielding candidates.
 The most prominent unregistered party was Reverend Christopher Mtikila's
 Democratic Party, which advocates the disolution of the union and the expulsion
 of minorities from the mainland. In 1993 Mtikila was charged with sedition, breach
 of the peace, and using abusive language against the COM and the Government fol-
 lowing a rally;, the charges were dropped in November. Despite his political party's
 lack of government recognition, Mtia was able to pubicize his views through his
 legally registered church and through o ng lawsuits against the Government.
 Under the Societies Ordinance,  e M   stry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. Citizens formed several nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) in
 the last few years to address the concerns of families, the disabled, women, and chil-
 dren. A number of professional, business, legal, and medical associations exist, but
 they have only begn to address political topics. The Government continued to with-
 hold registration rom a group called Defenders of Human Rights in Tanzania (see
 Section 4). Opposition leaders complain that the Zanzibar Government is even more
 restrictive in registering societies than the union Government.
 c. Freedom of-Reliin.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this right in practice, subject to measures it claims
 are necessary to ensure public order and safety. Missionaries are allowed to enter
 the country freely to proselytize, and citizens are allowed to go abroad for pilgrim-
 ages and other religious practices.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Immigration, and
 Repatriation.-Short-term domestic travel is not restricted, but citizens must follow
 national employment directives stipulating the nature of employment and location
 of the residence. The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires local gov-
 ernments to ensure that every resident within their area of jurisdiction engages in
 productive and lawful employment. Those not employed are subject to transfer to
 another area where employment is available. These laws are also used as a pretext
 for police to solicit bribes and intimidate urban residents. In December 1994, the
 Dar es Salaam City Council rounded up 395 beggars and returned them to their
 home areas. Many returned to Dares Salaam within a few weeks.
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain, mostly due to bureaucratic
 inefficiency; and authorities subject those planning to travel or emigrate to close
 scrutiny. Citizens who leave the country without permission are subject to prosecu-
 tion upon their return.
 Mainlanders are required to show identification to travel to Zanzibar, and are not
 allowed to wori or own land on the islands.
 Tanzania had maintained a generous open border policy with regard to refugees
 from neighboring countries who sought political asylum. However, on March 31, the
 Government closed its border with Rwanda and Burundi following the influx of
 more than 600,000 refugees from Rwanda in 1994. New refugees continued to at-
 tempt to enter Tanzania, and several hundred were forcibly returned to both Rwan-
 da and Burundi. Soldiers, deployed along the border to keep the refugees out, looted
 and physically abused refugees they forced back across the border. On August 17,
 soldiers entered the Kitali Hill refugee camp and rounded up approximately 400 ref-
 ugees from the camp's reception center and forced 149 of them across the border
 into Burundi.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 For the first time in more than 30 years, Tanzanians exercised their right to
 change their government through national elections for president and parliament
 which were held between October 29 and November 19. A multiparty political sys-
 tem had been in place since 1992. The CCM retained control of the presidency and
 Parliament, winning 186 out of 232 parliamentary seats and 61.8 percent of the
 presidential vote on the mainland. The CCM retained huge advantages over opposi
 tion parties in membership and access to resources including its own daily Swai'-
 language newspaper (see Section 2.a.). The Government also employed tactics to re-
 strict or delay activities of opposition parties during the campaign. Despite these
 problems, opposition candidates made credible challenges in many districts and for
 president. Voting was completed without violence or major disruption, although two
 people were killed in incidents that may have been campaign related.
 After widespread problems with the distribution of ballots on election day, the
 Government nullified the elections in seven Dar es Salaam constituencies and held
 
 
 new elections in these constituencies on November 19. Opposition parties demanded
 that the elections be nullified nationwide and boycotted the rerun elections in Dar
 Es Salaam. Most international and local observers, while noting the problems with
 the distribution of ballots, expressed overall satisfaction with the conduct of the
 elections.
 The Constitution of Zanzibar allows citizens the right to change peacefully their
 government; however, observers raised serious doubts about the accuracy of the out-
 come of the presidential election on Zanzibar. This contest between CCM incumbent
 Dr. Salim Amour Juma and Seif Sharif Hamad of the opposition CUF was particu-
 larly close and contentious. CCM intimidated and harassed the opposition, and did
 not allow opposition rallies until 2 months prior to elections. Government-owned
 radio and teilevision on Zanzibar were biased in favor of CCM (see Section 2.a.).
 Also voter registration was limited to individuals who had maintained the same
 residence for 5 years, which disenfranchised many voters. CUF members were also
 detained by police when they attempted to campaign in rural areas.
 On election day, voting was completed without significant problems. However,
 after the election, observers were denied access to the tabulation of votes from the
 Oling stations. After 4 days, the Zanzibar Electoral Commission (ZEC), appointed
 gyte gAmour government, announced that Amour had defeated Hamad by 1,565
 votes out of a total of 328,977. Totals tabulated by CUF showed a similarly narrow
 victory for Hamad. After efforts by the international community to reconcile discrep-
 ancies in the vote counting, observers concluded that the official results may have
 been inaccurate. Although these discrepancies were brought to the attention of
 Union President Mwinyi, he took no action before Dr. Amour was inaugurated as
 President of Zanzibar for a new 5-year term.
 Following the announcement of the CCM victory, there were credible reports that
 government security forces and CCM gangs harassed and intimidated CUF mem-
 bers on bth of the two main Zanzibar islands, Pemba and Ugunja. Because CUP
 won all 20 Zanzibar seats in Pemba, Pembans living on Ugunja were regarded as
 CUF supporters and as a result were harassed. CUF members accused police of de-
 taining dozens of its members including several local leaders. Some CUF supporters
 on Ugunja felt threatened and reportedly moved their families to Pemba or the
 mainland.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. However, in practice few women are politically active. Eight of 232 elected
 members of the Union Parliament are women. An additional 37 women from beth
 the CCM and opposition parties were appointed to Parliament to seats reserved for
 women. Three of the Cabinet's 23 ministers are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government has obstructed the formation of local human rights groups. Per-
 sons seeking to register human rights NGO's, such as the Defenders of Human
 Rights in Tanzania, complained that the Ministry of Home Affairs continued to
 delay action on their application (see Section 2.b.).
 Government officials have said that visits by international human rights groups
 would be welcome, including those for the purposes of visiting prisons.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, religion, or lifestyle. Discrimination based on sex, age, or dis-
 ability is not specifically prohibited by law but is publicly discouraged in official
 statements.
 Women.-Violence against women remained widespread. Legal remedies exist, but
 in practice are difficult to obtain. Traditional customs subordinating women re-
 mained strong in beth urban and rural areas, and often local magistrates upheld
 such practices. It is accepted for a husband to treat his wife as he wishes, andwife
 beating occurs at all levels of society. Cultural, family, and social pressure prevent
 many women from reporting abuses to authorities. Government officials frequently
 make public statements decrying such abuses, but rarely take action against per-
 petrators.
 Although the Government advocates equal rights for women in the workplace, it
 does not ensure these rights in practice. In the public sector which employs 80 per-
 cent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict women's access to some jobs
 and hours of employment. While progress on women's rights has been mre notice-
 able in urban areas, strong traditional norms still divide laber along gender lines
 and place women in a subordinate position. Discrimination against women is most
 
 
 272
 acute in the countryside where women are relegated to farming and raising chil-
 dren, with almost no opportunity for wage employment.
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there and in many parts of the mainland face discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Gov-
 ernment and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage
 Act provide for certain inheritance and property rights or women, application of
 customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions
 of the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inherit-
 ance claims, primarily in rural areas. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under
 the age of 21 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment.
 Several NGO's provide counseling and education programs on women's rights is-
 sues, particularly sexual harassment and molestation.
 Children.--Government funding of programs for children's welfare remained min-
 uscule. The Government made some constructive efforts to address children's wel-
 fare, including working closely with churches and NGO's to assess the well-being
 of orphans and neglected children.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health. Although the Govern-
 ment officially discourags FGM, it is still performed at an early age in approxi-
 mately 20 of the countrs 130 main ethnic groups. Government officials have called
 for changes in customs which adversely affect women, but no legislation has been
 introduced which would specifically restrict the practice of female circumcision.
 However, some local government officials began to combat the practice. On July 11,
 parents near Dodoma were fined by local government officials after their daughters
 went to a local health center with excessive bleeding following circumcision. Semi-
 nars sponsored by various governmental and nongovernmental organizations are
 regularly held in an attempt to educate the public on the dangers of these and other
 traditional practices. Health authorities believe the practice is declining, but other
 sources maintain it is on the rise, especially in central Tanzania.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government does not mandate access to public
 buildings, transportation, or government services for people with disabilities. Al-
 though there is no official discrimination against the disabled, in practice the phys-
 ically disabled are effectively restricted in their access to education, employment,
 and provision of other state services due to physical barriers. The Government pro-
 vides only limited funding to special facilities and programs.
 Religious Minorities.-The Muslim community claims to be disadvantaged in
 terms of its representation in the civil service and government and in state-owned
 business, in part because both colonial and past pst-independence administrations
 refused to recognize the credentials of traditional Muslim schools. As a result, there
 is widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived advantages enjoyed by Chris-
 tians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of what they perceive as undue favor-
 itism accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scholarships by former Presi-
 dent Mwinyi, who is a Muslim. Some leaders in both camps appear to be playing
 up religious tensions. In fact, there does not at present appear to be any serious
 problem of discrimination due to religion in access to employment or educational op-
 portunities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-In the past, the Government discriminated
 against the Barabaig and other nomadic people in northern Tanzania. These ethnic
 groups continued to complain of government discrimination, because of efforts to
 make them adopt a more modern lifestyle and to restrict their access to land that
 was turned into large government wheat farms. In August and September, an esti-
 mated 20 people were killed in Ngorongoro district in ethnic clashes between
 Maasai and Sonjo tribesmen. The Government deployed riot police to the area to
 quell the disturbances.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about
 50,000, a result of considerable antipathy by many African Tanzanians. There are,
 however, no laws or official policies which discriminate against them. As the Gov-
 ernment places greater emphasis on market oriented policies and privatization, pub-
 lic concern regarding the Asian community's economic role has increased. This has
 led to demands for policies of "indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not
 increase the Asian community's economic predominance at the expense of the coun-
 try's African population.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both the Constitution and the 1955 Trade Union Or-
 dinance refer to the right of association of workers. Nevertheless, workers do not
 have the right to form or join organizations of their own choice. The Organization
 
 
 273
 of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU) Act of 1991 addresses all labor union issues, and
 the OI1TU is effectively the only trade union organization in Tanzania. In August
 the OTTU Congress adopted a new constitution and renamed itself the Tanzania
 Federation of Trade Unions (TFTU) which, pending government ratification, is to
 be made up of 11 independent trade unions. The new constitution provides for the
 President to retain the power to disband TFTU unions, although union leaders
 began efforts to delete the provision. The individual unions will have the right to
 leave the TFTU and to collect their own dues, 5 percent of which will be contributed
 to the federation. The OTTU leadership assumed the leadership positions of the
 TFTU. Only 1 of the 11 new independent unions, the Tanzanian Teachers Union,
 is presently fully registered. The O1  represented 60 percent of workers in indus-
 try and government, but it had little influence on labor poicy. Overall, roughly 25
 percent of Tanzania's 2 million wage earners are organized. All workers, including
 those classified as "essential" service workers, are permitted to join unions, but es-
 sential workers are not permitted to strike.
 There are no laws prohibiting retribution against legal strikers. However, workers
 have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted mediation and
 conciliation procedures leading ultinately to the Industrial Court, which receives di-
 rection from the Minister of Labor and Youth Development. If the OTTU is not sat-
 isfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it can then conduct a legal strike.
 These procedures can prolong a dispute by months without resolving it.
 Pending a resolution, frustrated workers have staged impromptu, illegal, wildcat
 strikes and walkouts.
 The OTTU limited its international affiliation to regional and pan Africanist trade
 union organizations. The TFTU has joined the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limited to the private sector. Wages for employees of the Govern-
 ment and state-owned organizations, which account of the bulk of the salaried labor
 force, are administratively set by the Government.
 Although the OTTU negotiated on behalf of most private sector employees with
 the Association of Tanzanian Employers, ollective agreements must be submitted
 to the Industrial Court for approval. The International Labor Organization (ILO)
 has observed that these prvisions are not in conformity with ILO Convention 98
 on Collective Bargaining and the Right to Organize. Tanzania's Security of Employ-
 ment Act of 1964 prohibits discriminatory activities by an employer against union
 members. Employers found guilty of antiunion activities are legally required to rein-
 state workers.
 There are no export processing zones (EPZ's) on the mainland, but three new
 EPZ's on Zanzibar. Work conditions in the EPZ's are comparable to those in other
 Tanzanian work places. Labor law protections applyto EPZ workers.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. However, as in the past, the ILO observed that provisions of various laws are
 incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor. Specifically, the
 Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983 requires that every local government au-
 thority ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school engage
 in productive or other lawful employment. In some rural areas, ordinary villagers
 are still obligated to work in the village communal gardens or small construction
 projects such as repairing roads.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-By law, children under the age of
 12 years are prohibited from working in the formal wage sector in both urban and
 rural areas. However, this provision does not apply to children working on family
 farms or herding domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 can
 be employed for daily wage and on a day-to-day basis, but must have parental per-
 mission and return to the residence of their guardian at night.
 The minimum age for entry into work of a contractual nature in approved occupa-
 tions is set at 15 years. The law prohibits a young person from employment in any
 occupation which is injurious to health or which is otherwise unsuitable. Young per-
 sons between the ages of 12 and 15 may be employed in industrial work but only
 between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., with some exceptions allowed. The Ministry
 of Labor and Youth Development is responsible for enforcement. The effectiveness
 of government enforcement has reportedly declined with increased privatization. Ap-
 proximately 3,000 to 5,000 children engage in seasonal employment on sisal, tea,
 tobacco, and coffee plantations. Work on sisal plantations is particularly hazardous
 and detrimental to children. On one sisal plantation, children made up 30 percent
 of the work force; only half of the children had completed primary school. They had
 a high incidence of skin and respiratory problems, were not provided protective
 clothing, and lacked adequate nourishment and lodging. Another 1,500 to 3,000 chil-
 
 
 274
 dren work in unregulated gemstone mines. In the informal sector, children assist
 their parents in unregulated piece work manufacturing. In the last decade, the per-
 centage of children enrolled in primary school has dropped from over 80 percent to
 lesats an 6  eent.
 e. Accptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ-
 ment in the formal sector. The OTI'U often negotiated higher minimum wages with
 individual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. The legal
 minimum wage is $30 (17,500 Tanzanian shillings) per month. Even when supple-
 mented with various benefits such as housing, transport allowances, and food sub-
 sidies, the minimum rate may not always be sufficient to provide an adeate living
 for a worker and family, and workers must depend on the extended family or a sec-
 ond or third job. Despite the minimum wage, many workers, especially in the infor-
 mal sector, are pald less.
 There is no stsndard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44t- to 48-hour
 workweek . In general, women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
 Several laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safety
 factory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is now managed
 by the Ministry of Labor and Youth Development. Its effectiveness, however, is
 minimal.
 OITU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is effective in
 the formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. Workers can take
 an employer to court through their O LTEJ branch if their working conditions do not
 comply with the Ministry of Labor's health and environmental standards. Workers
 making such complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. Enforcement of labor
 standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
