 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to formally
 become a multiparty state; however, in practice the ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 party (CCM) continued to control the Government. A party-chosen elite headed by
 Ali Hassan Mwinyi, who became President in 1985 and party chairman in August
 1990, following the retirement of former party chairman and president Julius K.
 Nyerere, provides political direction for the party and the Government. Mwinyi was
 reelected to a second 5-year term as President of the Republic in October 1990. The
 CCM lays down fundamental political and economic policies and monitors their im-
 plementation, including steps toward national multiparty elections now scheduled
 or 1995. The islands of Zanzibar and Pemba are integrated into the United Repub-
 lic's governmental and party structure, but the Zanzibar government exercises a
 considerable degree of autonomy. The political transition has raised questions about
 the future viability of the union (see Section 3).
 
 
 270
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining internal security. They are
 supported by the Tanzanian People's Defense Force (TDPF), with some 30,000 per-
 sonnel, by paramilitary forces, and by a large citizens' militia. While the armed
 forces traditionally have not been a source of human rights abuses, police routinely
 beat and on occasion torture suspects during interrogations. The Government has
 granted quasi-legal status to citizens' patrols to counter lawlessness, especially
 crime in the urban areas and cattle rustling in the rural areas, and these groups
 also committed abuses in 1992. Tanzania's total military expenditures for 1989, the
 last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a
 detailed analysis, were $110 million. The Government has started to implement a
 comprehensive plan to restructure the military and reduce it by one-third over the
 next 2 years.
 One of the world's poorest countries, Tanzania also has one of the highest rates
 of population growth. Its overwhelmingly agricultural economy has long suffered
 from inefficient economic policies. However, reforms undertaken since 1986, includ-
 ing liberalization of agricultural policy, rescheduling of foreign debt payments, and
 sharp devaluations of the currency, have stimulated economic growth, estimated at
 4 percent in 1992. During 1992 the Government began to allow farmers in certain
 sectors to sell their crops directly to private buyers. Nevertheless, continuing state
 support for a bloated bureaucracy and wasteful and inefficient state-owned organi-
 zations have diverted scarce resources from health and education programs, with a
 disproportionate impact on children's welfare. A new Ministry of Women, Children,
 and Social Welfare, created in late 1991, addresses these and related concerns.
 Human rights in Tanzania remained restricted, despite recent CCM-controlled
 litical reforms legalizing opposition parties and despite the incorporation of a ill
 of rights in the Cnstitution in the mid-1980's, providing, among other things, for
 freedom of movement, speech, religion, and association. Of particular concern were
 reports of torture, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detention, and corruption of the
 legal system. The Government continued to restrict the right of assembly and
 speech by leaders of unregistered political parties and detained and prosecuted
 members of the Democratic Party. Nevertheless, more than 20 new political parties
 qualified for provisional registration during 1992, gaining the right to hold public
 meetings and recruit members. The CCM Government also permitted open criticism
 in independent newspapers and public meetings on official corruption and political
 mismanagement.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The degree of the Government's
 complicity in the May 1991 death of Musa Membar, a Tanzanian dissident, and the
 August 1990 death of Burundi exile leader Remy Gahutu remained unclear at the
 close of 1992. There were no investigations into these incidents during the year.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment,
 and government officials condemn these practices whenever cases are made public.
 Police, however, routinely threaten and beat suspected criminals immediately after
 their apprehension in order to obtain quick confessions. Further beatings and tor-
 ture continue if the suspect does not confess. Officials are seldom if ever tried and
 punished for such abuses.
 The people's militia laws, as amended by Parliament in 1989, bestow quasi-legal
 status on traditional village and neighborhood anticrime groups, called Sungusungu
 and Wasalama. The press in 1992 reported numerous cases of beatings and theft
 by Sungusungu patrols. The widespread belief in witchcraft has also led to the kill-
 ing of alleged witches by mobs or aggrieved relatives of witchcraft "victims." Pros-
 ecution of such cases is rare. Mob violence also remains a problem. In September
 Dar es Salaam residents, outraged by a series of robberies and muggings, beat to
 death five young men believed to be members of street gangs. No one was arrested
 in the killings.
 Prison conditions are substantially worse than Tanzania's depressed economic
 conditions warrant. Many prisoners are forced to do hard labor with inadequate food
 and no medical care. Twice during t 992, overcrowded and unsanitary facilities were
 swept by epidemics of cholera and meningitis, resulting in a number of deaths.
 In previous years, African National Congress (ANC) security personnel tortured
 and mistreated detainees who had defected from the ANC or who were alleged to
 be South African government spies at refugee camps maintained in Tanzania with
 the approval of the Tanzanian Government. In 1992 most of the South African ex-
 
 
 271
 
 iles and refugees were repatriated, and several ANC camps were closed. Neverthe.
 less, former detainees who returned to South Africa claimed that the ANC continued
 to hold prisoners at its remaining facilities in Tanzania. Thus far, there have been
 no free and independent inspection of ANC camps in Tanzania or at other ANC
 camps in Africa.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Procedure Code, amended
 in 1985, requires that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a magistrate within
 24 hours and be permitted the right to defense counsel These amendments, how-
 ever, also restricted the right to bail, reduced the number of bailable offenses, lim-
 ited judges' discretion in granting bail, and imposed strict conditions on freedom of
 movement and association when bail is granted. Despite a landmark ruling by the
 Court of Appeal in 1991 that under the Constitution the Preventive Detention Act
 could not be used to deny bail to persons not considered dangerous to society, the
 Government did not introduce corrective legislation in 1992.
 Under the Preventive Detention Act, the-President of Tanzania, may order the ar-
 rest and indefinite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the
 public order or national security. The Act was amended in 1985 to require the Gov-
 ernment to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the rea-
 son for their detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the grounds for
 detention at 90-day intervals.
 Arbitrary arrest in criminal cases is also common. For example, police routinely
 arrest innocent relatives of criminal suspects holding them in custod  without
 charge for as long as several years in efforts to force the suspects to turn themselves
 in. Such relatives who manage to get their case before a judge are usually set free,
 only to be immediately rearrested when they leave the courtroom. Judges appear
 helpless to correct these abuses. Local lawyers estimate the number of such cases
 at several hundred.
 The Government has additional broad detention powers under the Regions and
 Regional Commissioners Act and the Area Commissioners Act of 1962. These Acts
 permit regional and district commissioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons
 who may "disturb public tranquillity." These powers are frequently abused, being
 used to detain political "troublemakers" citizens who question authority, or those
 who resist forced contributions to the ruling party.
 * In 1992 the Government used its legal powers to harass and intimidate political
 opponents, notably members of the unregistered Democratic Party. Its leader,
 human rights activist Christopher Mtikila, was first detained in February, allegedly
 for distributing a false statement regarding student deaths at the University of Dar
 Es Salaam in 1990. In August Mtikfla and three of his followers were found guilty
 of holding an illegal meeting disobeying a police order, and using abusive language.
 They were sentenced to jail terms of 9 months. The convictions and sentences were
 overturned on appeal by the High Court, which, in a landmark ruling, found that
 the arrests had been uncalled for, the trial unfair, and the sentences disproportion-
 ate. The High Court Justice observed that current laws regarding speech and as-
 sembly must be interpreted in light of the political reforms now taking place. While
 opposition members have been harassed by security officials, none had been de-
 taed under the Preventive Detention Act.
 There were no known cases of political detainees or prisoners held at year's end.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.- Justice in Tanzania is widely criticized as ineffi-
 cient, corrupt, and subject to political interference, thus bringing into question the
 defendant's ability to receive a fair public trial. The legal system is based on the
 British model, with modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public and the press; courts must give
 reasons on the record for holding secret proceedings. Criminal defendants have the
 right of appeal. Military courts dii not try civilians, and there are no security courts.
 Defendants in civil and military courts may appeal decisions to the High Court and
 the Court of Appeal. Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal
 system, but retains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce,
 child custody, and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are
 heard only in Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the Court of Ap-
 peal of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 While the judiciary is onstitutionally mandated to operate indep eently from
 the executive branch, the Government exerts influence in many cases. For example,
 judTes who render decisions unpopular with senior police or government officials are
 subject to pressure or may be transferred and reassignued. Government officials also
 routinely ignore judicial rulings.
 A  rding to members of the legal community, including judicial officers, the legal
 system is corrunted throuah bribery, and nolitical interference is common. There are
 
 
 272
 reports of prisoners who could not pay bribes to police and lower court officials wait-
 ing 10 years for trial. Despite the 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure
 Code, an average case still takes 2 to 3 years or longer to come to trial, with the
 defendant remaining incarcerated under abysmal conditions. The Government and
 Parliament have not made serious efforts to eliminate judicial corruption, although
 in 1991 High Court Justice Moses Mwakibete was dismissed for corrupt practices.
 In 1992 the most celebrated case remained that of former Zanzibar Chief Minister
 Seif Sharif Hamad. Released from detention on November 20, 1991, Hamad, accord-
 ing to bail restrictions, was forbidden to hold or attend meetings or to leave Zanzi-
 bar without permission. These restrictions were lifted in October as the result of an
 appeal, freeing Hamad to travel abroad and engage in political activities. Numerous
 hearings held on this case in 1992 questioned the competency of the presiding court
 and the legality of the charges, but no verdict had been rendered by year's enc.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though CCM party membership has been voluntary (an estimated 3 million Tanza-
 nians are CCM members), the party structure impacts on the private lives of all citi-
 zens. The CCM has party cadres at all levels of society. Individual cells vary in size
 from single-family homes to large apartment buildings and may contain from 10 to
 200 persons. Unpaid "10-cell" leaders are the party officials responsible for resolving
 problems at the grassroots level and reporting to authorities any suspicious behav-
 ior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night patrol service within their
 neighborhoods. Tentatively, steps to disassociate the 10-cell function from the party
 began late in the year.
 The Criminal Procedure Act of 1985 authorizes police officials (including members
 of the people's militia) to issue search warrants; however, the Act also authorizes
 searches of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice, warrants are rarely requested, and police and other security
 services search private homes and business establishments at will. Security services
 monitor the telephones of many citizens, such as journalists and academics, and
 scrutinize correspondence. The security services also attempt to monitor closely the
 activities of foreign residents.
 Compulsory service of urban men in traditional defense groups known as
 Sungusungu and Wasalama continued in 1992; previously, these groups operated
 only in rural areas as associations of local villagers formed to combat cattle rustlers
 and other criminals. In the countryside, peasant farmers are still required to join
 agricultural cooperative societies controlled by the rulingarty.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of undesirable or destitute persons from
 one area to their prior place of residence or origin if no work is found for them (see
 Sections 2.d. and 6.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for
 under the Constitution, and there was increased exercise of these rights in 1992
 with the establishment of new political parties. However, these rights are still re-
 stricted in practice with substantial government and party control of the media, in-
 cluding in Zanzibar. The Swahili-language daily newspaper, Uhuru, which has a
 daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by the CCM party. The Newspaper Act allows
 government seizure without a warrant of any publication and withdrawal of the i-
 cens to publish at any time. However, the Government has not used this power
 in the 4 years since it began licensing independent newspapers. in addition, the
 Ministry of Information has thus far not a pproved two applications for private news-
 papers to begin daily publication; one of these applications has been pending for 2
 years.
 The single most important. medium, radio, remained firmly under government
 control, with access for the nascent political parties restricted. The Government had
 not formulated a public policy on access to government-controlled media by political
 parties or nongovernmental organizationsby the end of the year.
 With the introduction of opposition political parties in mid-1992, criticisms of the
 Government and ruling CCM party began to appear in the government-owned
 media as well as in press conferences and statements by opposition leaders.
 Private newspapers contained political articles severely critical of the Government
 and party and provided coverage of statements by the new political party leaders
 and other outspoken dissidents.
 The official media reflect the CCM's ideological stance, publicizing and defending
 the Government's programs based upon extensive guidance from the Ministry of In-
 formation. Editorials are often written by senior government officials. There is no
 formal censorship, but journalists, even in the new, more liberal atmosphere, still
 
 
 exercise considerable self-censorship in criticizing government policies or officials. In
 August a prominent announcer with radio Tanzania, Ben Kiko, was banned from
 covering sessions of Parliament, allegedly for questioning the conduct of parliamen-
 tary proceedin  in the fquent absence of a quorum. Earlier plane to form a press
 council, ostensly to handle complaints against the press and-to uphold standards
 of professionalism in journalism, were dormant in 1992.
 Visiting foreign journalists must register with and obtain a permit from the Gov-
 ernment, which can be a time-consuming process. The importation of foreign publi-
 cations is permitted.
 Academic freedom exists in theory, but is restricted in practice. Most academics
 are employed in government-run institutions and have hesitated to broach sensitive
 subjects in their classrooms and publications. In April the High Court ruled that
 248 students at the Institute of Development Management at Morogoro were ex-
 plled lle~a~ly in September 1991 for boycotting classes and ordered that they be
 given a fair hearing and reinstatement if found innocent.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although Tanzanians enjoyed
 an unprecedented opportunity in 1992 to discuss freely political alternatives, the
 Government continued to restrict freedom of assembly and association. Permits
 must be obtained from the Government for any public meeting. While the authori-
 ties generally approved requests by legal opposition parties for permits to hold
 meetings, there were enough  exceptions to draw complaints from opposition leaders
 several of which appeared to be well founded. The Government arrested Reverend
 Christopher Mtikila, leader of the unregistered Democratic Party, in July on various
 charges, including for allegedly holding an illegal meeting (see S ion I.d.). In 1992
 the Government did not pursue the prosecution of cases involving illegal assembly
 by_government opponents in 1991.
 The registrar of political parties has sole authority for approving or deny   the
 registration of any political party and is responsible for enforcing strict  glaions
 on registered or provisionally registered parties. Electoral amenmnts approved in
 May prohibit independent candidates, require standing Members of Parament to
 resign if they join another political party, require all political parties to support the
 union with Zanzibar, and forbid parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious affili-
 ation. Parties granted provisional registration are allowed 6 months to submit lists
 of at least 200 members from 10 of the country's 25 regions, including 2 regions of
 the islands, in order to secure full registration and to be eliible to field candidates
 for election. Nonregistered parties are prohibited from holding meetings, recruiting
 members, or fielding candidates.
 In November the Government dismissed, suspended, or forced to resign more than
 70 school teachers on the island of Pemba because of their affiliation with opposition
 political parties. Government officials claimed that the teachers had used their of-
 fices for partisan political purposes contrary to revised civil service regulations, but
 those affected received no due process or opportunity to rebut the accusations.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. A number of professional, business, legal, and medical associations
 exist but have only begun to address political topics. Several nongovernmental orga-
 nizations formed within the last 2 years to address the concerns of families, women,
 and children. Candidates for office in major sports clubs and cooperatives are
 screened by the a propriate ministry, which also supervises their elections.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and is respected in practice. Missionaries are allowed to enter the country freely to
 proselytize, and Tanzanians are allowed to go abroad forpilgrimages and other reli-
 gious purposes. Since 1988 the Government has allowed the Jehovah's Witnesses,
 who were banned in Tanzania for many years, to hold services, to register as an
 organization, and to proselytize.
 In May the union Government banned religious preaching outside of buildin  Of
 worship in response to public denunciations of other faiths by certain preachers.
 While the ban was lifted in June the Zanzibar government reinstituted it in Decem-
 ber because of concerns that religious meetings were being used for political pur-
 poses. The ban did not target any specific religious group, but in mid-December a
 public demonstration by Muslims on Zanzibar was dispersed by police with tear gas,
 and a number of protesters were arrested.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for travel be-
 tween Zanzibar and the mainland short-term travel generally is not restricted with-
 in Tanzania, but citizens must follow national employment directives stipulating the
 nature of employment and location of residence. For years city dwellers unable to
 show proof of employment during police checks have been forced to return to rural
 areas as the Government has sought to control increasing pressure on urban re-
 
 
 274
 sources. Despite official policy (and constitutional guarantees) of freedom of move-
 ment and settlement, in some rural areas party officials still force small farmers to
 live and work in collective (ujamaa) villages. The Human Resources Deployment Act
 of 1983.requires lcal  overnments to ensure that every resident within their areas
 of jurisdiction engages in productive and lawful employment. Those not so employed
 are subject to transfer to another area where employment is available. In November
 police officials in Dar es Salaam and Mwanza rounded up over 1,000 jobless persons
 and returned them to their home villages.
 Passports for foreign travel can be difficult to obtain. Exiled opposition figure
 Oscar Kabona was e       da pasport to return to Tanzania based on the Govern-
 ment's claim that his parents were not born in Tanzania. The British Government
 issued him a travel document in September to facilitate his return to Tanzania. The
 authorities require citizens to obtain central bank and tax office clearances in order
 to buy airline tickets and subject those planning to travel or emigrate to intense
 scrutiny. Tanzanians who leave the country without authorization are subject to
 prosecution on their return. The Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the
 courts to try Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. Although it is
 legally possible for citizenship to be revoked, there have been no reports that this
 has been done in recent years. Parliament passed a bill in 1986 which required the
 registration and identification of everyone over the age of 10 who resides in Tanza-
 nia, apparently in an effort to control foreign businessmen.
 With some exceptions, Tanzania generally has a liberal policy towards refugees
 and displaced persons. At the end of 1992 there were over 215000 refugees in Tan-
 zania, with a majority from Burundi and large groups from wanda and Mozam-
 bique. The Minister of Home Affairs ordered the arrest of Joseph Karumba and
 other Burundi refugees for involvement in political activity, but local police officials
 allowed them to return to their homes in the refugee settlements after q.estioning.
 Press.-reports also indicate that some refugees were told they must either adopt
 Tanzanian citizenship or face involuntary repatriation. Beginning in 1991 and con-
 tinuing through 1992 as many as 20,000 Burundian refugees voluntarily repatri-
 ated from Tanzania. kenyans are denied access to asylum procedures in Tanzania.
 Most of the South African refugees in Tanzania under the auspices of the African
 National Congress and the Pan African Congress were voluntarily repatriated in
 1992 (see Section 1.c.).
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was officially introduced in 1992 after 28 years of
 one-party rule. Nevertheless pending local elections scheduled for 1993 and na-
 tional elections in 1995, the Ciama Cha Mapinduzi party effectively retains control
 of all government and parliamentary functions. The CCM is carefully controlling the
 pace of change. Late in the year, the Government introduced amendments to the
 Constitution that allow for the impeachment of the President and votes of no con-
 fidence in the Prime Minister.
 By the end of the year, there were oVer 20 provisionally registered political par-
 ties, with the main potential opposition to the CCM found in James Mapalala's Civic
 United Front (CUF), Chief Abdullah Fundikira's Union for Multiparty Democracy
 (UMD), Edwin Mtei's Party for Democracy and Development (CHADEMA) and
 Mabere Marando's National Conference for Construction and Reform (NCCR-
 MAGEUZI). The growing political discussion has brought into the open strong
 antiunion sentiment in Zanzibar and Pemba. In October the government of Zanzibar
 stated that it would closely regulate the activities of provisionally registered parties
 and ordered the closure of the CUF offices on Pemba, an end to the display of party
 flags, and the distribution of CUF membership cards.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no local groups devoted solely to monitoring human rights abuses, but
 several local legal associatidhs have expressed interest in forming one. The Govern-
 ment continues to resent outside inquiries into alleged violations of human rights.
 The Government did permit representatives of Amnesty International and the New
 York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights to visit Tanzania in 1991 for dis-
 cussions, including the case of former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Sharif Hamad.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution does not permit discrimination based on nationality, tribe, ori-
 gin, political affiliation, color, religion or lifestyle. However, the Barabaig people of
 central Tanzania have been subject for many years to government discrimination.
 The Barabaig and their attorneys maintain that the Government has illegally dis-
 
 
 275
 possessed them of their traditional lands in order to implement a government-run
 gricultural project. The court case contesting ownership of the land continued in
 the High Court in 1992. The Barabaig have als accuse project employees of beat-
 ing them, killing their cattle, and despoiling tribal graves and religious sites. A
 proximately 100 Bambaig were arrested in 1992 on charges of trespassing w hie
 taking their cattle to watering holes via narrowly defined authorized routes.
 As a consequence of colonial administration which refused to recognize the tradi-
 tional mosque schools, there are significant disadvantages for the Muslim commu-
 nity in educational achievement, prominence in civil service and government, and
 in business success, with resulting widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived
 unar advantages enjoyed by Christians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of
 what they perceive as undue favoritism accorded to Mduslims in"appointments, jobs,
 and scholarship by the President, who is a Muslim. Some leaders in both camps
 appear to be playing up imbalances, which reflect past historical circumstances
 rather then deliberate dscrimination. In fact, there does not at present appear to
 be any serious problem of discrimination on account of religion in access to employ-
 ment or educational opportunities. Muslim parents, however, especially in rural
 areas, often do not send their daughters to school because of a traditional belief that
 education is unnecessary or even detrimental for women.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about
 40 000 (plus 4,000 in Zanzibar). A business-oriented minority in a society histori-
 cally committed to socialist policies and remaining both culturally and economically
 exclusive, the Asians are regarded with considerable antipathy by many African
 Tanzanians, in part because of the Asian community's disproportionate influence in
 key sectors of the economy. Despite this, there are no laws or official policies dis-
 criminating against them. As the Government places greater emphasis on market-
 oriented economic policies and privatization, concerns regarding Asian economic
 dominance have increased. This has led to demands for policies of "indigenization"
 to ensure that privatization does not increase Asian economic predominance at the
 expense of the African population.
 Both party and government constitutions endorse equality in the workplace. Nev-
 ertheless, strong traditional norms still divide labor along sexual lines and place
 women in a subordinate position. For example, women face widespread discrimina-
 tion in access to educational opportunities and in the countryside they are relegated
 largely to farming and raising children. FPemale students who become pregnant are
 dismissed from school. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under the age of 21
 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment.
 Progress on women's rights has been more noticeable in urban areas, where tradi-
 tional values are weaker but even there and in the public sector, which employs
 80 percent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict their access to some
 jobs or their hours of employment. According to a 1986 estimate, women constituted
 less than 14 percent of the wage emplo   nt sector, and in 1992 most women were
 still concentrated in lower salaried civil service positions such as clerks, secretaries,
 and telephone operators. A manpower survey showed that women occupied only 20.1
 percent of the small percentage of available high and midlevel positions andhave
 little access to decisionmaking positions.
 The overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there and in many parts of the country face discriminatory restrictions
 on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Government
 and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage Act pro-
 vide for certain inheritance and property rights for women application of cus-
 tomary Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions of
 the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inheritance
 claims, primarily in rural areas.
 Violence against women is widespread. Legal remedies exist, but in practice are
 difficult to obtain. Credible allegations were raised early in the year of widespread
 rape and sexual abuse of females in national service training camps; however, gov-
 ernment officials claimed these reports were exaggerated. Traditional customs sub-
 ordinating women remain strong in both urban an rural areas and often local mag-
 istrates uphold them. The husband has a free hand to treat his wife as he wishes,
 and wife beating occurs at all levels of society. In 1992 Minister of Home Affairs
 Augustine Mrema ordered police officers to arrest wifebeaters, but the number of
 such arrests was negligible.
 Although officially discouraged by the Government, female genital mutilation (cir-
 cumcision) is still performed in approximately 20 of the country's 130 mainland eth-
 nic groups. Government officials have called for changes in customs which adversely
 affect women, but no legislation has been introduced which would specifically re-
 strict the practice of female circumcision. Seminars soinsored by various uovern-
 
 
 276
 mental and nongovernmental organizations are regularly held in an attempt to edu-
 cate the public on the dangers of these and other traditional practices. Health au-
 thorities state the practice is declining, but nongovernmental sources maintain it is
 on the rise, especially in central Tanzania.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers do not have the right to form or oin organi-
 zations of their own choice. The right of association is still limited to one labor union
 organization, the Organization of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU), to which all
 unionized workers belong. A subgrouping of teachers (Chakiwata) began in 1992 to
 demand the right to form their own trade union apart from the OTFU. The OTTU
 is midway through a projected 3-year restructuring period which will culminate in
 union general elections in 1994. The purpose of the restructuring is to enable union
 workers to elect new leaders who have not been "prequalified" by the ruling party
 and to reshape the organization as an umbrella organization presiding over a fed-
 eration of independent unions: The initial steps taken thus far have been to make
 the OFrU legally separate from the ruling party. However, the new labor law which
 accomplished this also mandated that all union labor must be under the OTTU and
 permits the President to disband any member union of the OTU at his discretion.
 While the OTTu is no longer considered to be a mass organization of the CCM
 party, it has pledged continued affiliation to the CCM, and most of its officials are
 current or former CCM officers. The OTTU like its predecessor, JUWATA, rep-
 resents a pproximately 60 percent of the workers in industry and government, but
 it has little influence on labor policy.
 Workers have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted medi-
 ation and conciliation procedures leading ultimately to the Industrial Court. The In-
 dustrial Court receives direction from the Minister of Labor and Youth Develop-
 ment. If the OITU is not satisfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it can
 then conduct a legal strike. These procedures can prolong a dispute for months
 without resolving it. Pending a resolution, frustrated workers often stage im-
 promptu wildcat strikes and walkouts.
 Although most strikes are in effect illegal (there were no legal strikes in 1992),
 there were several wildcat strikes, notably in the health and textile sectors. The
 only report of government action against striking workers occurred in February,
 when 76 doctors and 8 pharmacists at the Muhimbili Medical Center were fired over
 a week-long strike. The were  instated a few days later.
 The OTTU continued JUWATA's policy of limiting its international affiliations to
 regional and pan-African trade union organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.---Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limited to the private sector. Wages for employees of the govern-
 ment and state-wned organizations, which account for the bulk of the salaried
 labor force, are set by the Government; the OTFU does not bargain collectively on
 behalf of government employees.
 Although the OTTU may negotiate on behalf of most private sector employees
 with the Association of Tanzania Employers, collective agrements must be submit-
 ted to the Industrial Court for apprval.The International Labor Organization (ILO)
 has observed that these provisions are not in conformity with ILO Convention 98
 on collective bargaining and the right to organize.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 25 of the Constitution pro-
 hibits forced labor. However, again in 1992 the ILO observed that provisions of var-
 ious Tanzanian laws are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced
 labor. Specifically, the Human Resources Deployment Act (1983) requires every local
 government authority to ensure that able-bdied persons over 15 years of age not
 in school engage in productive or other lawful empotnt. In November police offi-
 cials in liares Salaam and Mwanza rounded up over 1,000 beggar and street peo-
 ple and returned them to their home   hes Many regional and district authorities
 pass laws requiring farmernto plant speciled cash and food crops and to keep mini-
 mum acreages under cultivation. Penalties for violating these requirements include
 fhnes and imprisonment. In September the authorities arrested 378 persons in
 Kisarawe district for faiing to clear their cashewnut farms.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-By law, children under the age of
 15 are prohibited from working, but this provision applies only to the formal wage
 sector in both urban and rural areas and not to chidren worling on f   oy farms
 or herding domestic livestock. Persons between the ages of 15 and 18 may be em-
 ployed, provided the work is safe and not injurious to health, but they are not al-
 lowed to work between 6p.m. and 6a.m. Enforcement by the Ministry of Labor and
 Youth Development in the formal wage sector is good, hut sporadic to nonexistent
 
 
 in the rapidly growing informal sector. Children are often kept out of school to help
 on the farm or to assist overburdened mothers with younger siblings, or because
 their parents cannot afford the school fees.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ.
 ment in the formal sector which was increased in July. However, the OT1iU often
 negotiates higher minimum wages with individual employers, depending on the fi-
 nancial status of the business. A worker paid at the minimum rate, even when sup-
 plemented with various benefits such as ousing and transport allowances and food
 subsidies, cannot provide an adequate standard of living for a family.
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government employees. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 40-hour
 workweek. In general, women may not t employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.
 Several laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safety
 factory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is now managed
 by the Mimst    of Labor and Youth Development. Its effectiveness, however, is
 minimal. OTrUofiias have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is fairly
 effective in the formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed. En-
 forcement of labor standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
