 TANZANIA
 Tanzania is a one-party socialist state. President
 Julius Nyerere has been a vocal advocate for human
 rights abroad. He has consistently called for majority
 rule in southern Africa with guarantees for minority
 rights. At the same time he has been one of the few
 African leaders to condemn the regime of Uganda's Idi
 Amin. An avowed socialist at home and abroad, he is
 a vigorous participant in the North-South dialogue and
 has frequently called for greater resource transfers
 from the economically developed countries to the less-
 developed nations.
 However, Tanzania tends to ignore, or at best to
 justify in the interests of state security, most
 domestic violations of human rights. Government
 leaders usually describe detention laws as a necessary
 evil, and government ideology subordinates the rights
 of the individual to the needs of the state.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture has been used on occasion to extract information,
 but it is not a standard police practice. According
 to Tanzanian law, a person accused of a crime may
 confess only to a magistrate, and confessions obtained
 from an accused in any other manner must be restated
 before a magistrate. In recent years the Government
 has sought to restrain investigative officials who
 used torture and punish violators.  Two ministers and
 several other officials were forced to resign in
 January, 1977 on the grounds that police within their
 jurisdiction (but without their knowledge) had tortured
 suspects. In mid-1978 two police officers were con-
 victed of having tortured a suspect in their custody.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 (178)
 
 
 Prisons are seriously overcrowded and often have
 inadequate facilities. In February Tanzania granted
 an amnesty on humanitarian grounds to more than 7,000
 convicted prisoners. The death penalty has rarely
 been implemented.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 National security laws empower the Government to
 detain indefinitely without trial or public hearing
 any individuals considered dangerous to the safety,
 good order or interest of the country. Precise
 figures on the number of detainees are unavailable.
 During 1978, 26 detainees held for domestic political
 reasons were released. This was followed by the
 release of twenty detainees held on behalf of southern
 African liberation movements and thirteen detainees
 held for their part in the Zanzibar coup attempt.
 Amnesty International estimates that 100 to 200 persons
 are held under the Preventive Detention Act, but all
 are alleged by the Tanzanian Government to be criminal
 offenders.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Prosecution and the threat of prosecution are used to
 harass opponents of government policies. Ocpasionally
 such cases are kept pending for long periods. However,
 in non-political cases the right to a fair, public
 trial is respected.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There have been instances of arbitrary search of homes
 of political opponents, but this is not a common
 occurrence.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The highest priority of Tanzanian socialism is the
 improvement of living standards for the entire popula-
 
 
 180
 tion, not just a few. The Government's determination
 to improve living standards is reflected in the rise
 of adult education enrollment from 100,000 to 5,000,000
 during the period 1966-1976. The number of pupils in
 primary schools almost doubled from 825,000 to 1,532,000
 between 1967-1975. The vast majority of these increases
 occurred in the rural areas where the poorest of the
 poor live. In 1977 total government expenditure on
 education accounted for almost 6.6 percent of the
 government development program and 21 percent of
 government expenditure. Government commitment and
 progress in rural development and greater urban-rural
 equity are illustrated by an increase from fifteen
 percent to fifty percent over the 1971-76 period in
 the share of the health budget devoted to rural clinics
 and health centers. The fiscal year 1977/1978 devel-
 opmental budget projections totalled approximately $480
 million. Over forty percent of the budget was allocated
 to directly productive sectors (agriculture and industry),
 30.5 percent to economic infrastructure (water, power,
 communications) and 28.75 percent to social infra-
 structure (health, education).
 The Government has moved people from sparsely populated
 small villages to rural centers where better housing,
 health care, and education can be provided. This
 forced movement has caused some suffering, but the
 Government has tempered its practices, and the goal of
 better basic services for all citizens remains central
 to its policy.
 Petty corruption appears to be relatively common, involving
 some party as well as government officials, but does
 not divert significant resources from the poorest
 people.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Tanzania carefully observes freedom of religion, but
 other civil and political liberties ate largely sub-
 ordinated to the attempt to achieve socialist goals
 
 
 181
 and national "self-reliance." Political assembly is
 authorized only when the purpose is consistent with
 party and government policies. Circulation of foreign
 books and magazines is permitted, but local media and
 educational institutions present a single point of
 view on major policy questions. Public dissent from
 basic policies and ideology is not permitted outside
 the framework of the competition for views within the
 ruling party. There is, however, criticism in "Letters
 to the Editor" columns and elsewhere on shortcomings
 in the implementation of policy, e.g., bureaucratic
 inefficiencies.
 The Tanzanian Government subscribes to the principle
 of equal rights for women. In the present cabinet two
 ministers are women, one Regional Commissioner (e.quiva-
 lent to a Governor) is a woman, and recently the first
 Tanzanian woman was appointed Ambassador. The Foreign
 Ministry has a woman official equivalent in rank to
 Assistant Secretary of State. The role of women in
 the Party is influential (five on the Central Committee)
 although not in proportion to their numbers. The
 Government's policy of promoting the equality of women
 must overcome historical and religious traditions of
 much of the population.
 The Union of Tanzania Workers VUWATA) is the sole
 legal trade union in the country. It is essentially
 controlled by the Government; President Nyerere appoints
 the Secretary General of JUWATA and his deputy. How-
 ever, JUWATA carries on active and vigorous negotiations
 with employers, both government and private, in such
 areas as working conditions and grievances.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restrictions on internal travel, although
 occasionally the urban employed are forcefully relocated
 to agricultural employment. Passports for foreign
 travel are issued only when the Government is satisfied
 that the purpose of travel is not detrimental to
 national interests. Emigration is not obstructed by
 government regulation.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 
 
 In Tanzania's one-party socialist system, opposition
 parties are not permitted. Freedom to participate in
 the political process is limited to activity within
 the official party organization. Slightly more than
 half of Parliament is directly elected by universal
 suffrage. The remaining members are ex officio,
 appointed by the President, or elected indirectly by
 Parliament. Candidates for Parliament or elected
 party office must be approved by senior party officials.
 Membership in the party is restricted to adherents of
 Tanzania's official ideological orientation.
 4. Governmental Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violation of Human Rights
 Representatives of the International Committee of the
 Red Cross visited Tanzania in 1978. The subsequent
 release of detainees and the commutation of the remain-
 ing death sentences in the Zanzibar treason case in
 1978 indicate that Tanzania is not insensitive to the
 scrutiny of such organizations. The Department of
 State is not aware of any recent requests by other
 non-governmental organizations to investigate the human
 rights situation in Tanzania.
 
 
