 TANZANIA
 Tanzania is a socialist state with a legal and parliamentary sys-
 tem originally patterned on the British model. Zanzibar enjoys a
 considerable degree of autonomy, and its legal system differs in
 some important respects from that of the mainland. The one polit-
 ical party exercises a pervasive influence from the national down
 to the neighborhood levels. No legal opposition is permitted.
 Within this system, there is universal adult suffrage, and there
 are elements of democratic practice. Incumbents of seats in
 parliament have frequently been voted out of office. In practice,
 the offices of president and party chairman have been held with
 only a brief interlude since independence in 1961 by one man,
 Julius Nyerere, who has run unopposed in four elections.
 Tanzania is a poor country, largely dependent on foreign aid for
 development. The overriding objective stated by the Government is
 to secure the well-being of the largely rural population through
 socialist economic policies and political education. The ever-
 worsening state of the economy has led to a significant increase
 in the level of corruption throughout the public and private sec-
 tors, and the government and party-controlled press and the public
 are encouraged to criticize freely in this area. However, ques-
 tioning the basic premises of national policy can be done only in
 private or within the party framework. What the press reports
 and how it is treated are subject to strict control.
 Tanzania's national and party constitutions both guarantee equal
 rights to all citizens regardless of sex, race, ethnic group,
 religion, or status. Custom and tradition have operated in many
 cases against the Government's policy and efforts to ensure equal-
 ity. Torture is not sanctioned, and police officials have a number
 of times been successfully prosecuted and sentenced to stiff terms
 of imprisonment for torture and abuse of prisoners. Forced labor
 by convicted felons and compulsory work on communal farms are still
 practiced, and there are a number of persons being held without
 trial on presidential order, largely for "economic sabotage."
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom
 from:
 a. Killing
 There is no indication of killings for political motives.
 There are regular reports of thieves being beaten or stoned by
 mobs, and stories of the murder of suspected witches. The
 police are often ineffective in controlling violence in these
 cases. Clove smuggling is a capital offense in Zanzibar, although
 there is no record of such a sentence having been carried out.
 b. Disappearance
 Arrests under the Preventive Detention Act are discussed in
 Section (e). There is no indication of abduction by official or
 quasi-official security groups. The Government is lax about
 notifying relatives and consular representatives of arrests,
 partly because of poor communications and partly because many
 upcountry police officials are not aware of their responsibil-
 ities.
 c. Torture
 There have been reports of incidents of torture, abuse, and bru-
 tality by individual police, security, and prison officers, but
 
 
 320
 the practice is not condoned by the Government. In 1980 a number
 of senior police and security officers were sentenced to prison
 sentences ranging from five to eight years in a case involving the
 death of several suspects under torture in the course of an inves-
 tigation. The trials were fully covered in the press, and two
 similar allegations reported in 1982 were promptly investigated.
 In one case nine officers were put on trial for the death of a
 suspect under interrogation, but were found not guilty. Such
 incidents appear to be random rather than systematic, and have
 declined in number since the 1980 convictions. Reports of rough
 treatment of prisoners, rather than torture, are more common, and
 have been substantiated from time to time by reliable diplomatic
 sources.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Tanzanian prisons are crowded and dirty, and dietary and health
 standards are inadequate. Amnesty International reports that in
 November 1981 over 20 prisoners in Molo Prison were hospitalized
 with severe eye complaints as a result of nutritional deficien-
 cies; two of these were permanently blinded. Conditions in the
 prisons appear to reflect the country's poverty, rather than
 intentional degradation of prisoners. There is no evidence of
 discrimination against particular classes of prisoners, although
 there are recurrent rumors of maltreatment of prisoners of
 "Asian," that is, Indian and Pakistani, origin. Forced labor,
 usually agricultural, is required of convicted felons. In
 September 1981 five prisoners awaiting trial refused to work,
 since they had not been convicted, and were admitted to hospital
 after a week's denial of food and water by prison authorities.
 The initial report on local radio was withdrawn by the government
 news agency, which refused to discuss the matter with foreign
 reporters.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Under the Preventive Detention Act of 1962, police and security
 officers can, with a written order from the president, arrest and
 detain indefinitely any person considered dangerous to public
 order or national security. Such detainees have no recourse to the
 judicial system once the authorities present a valid detention
 order to a magistrate. There have been cases where the detainees
 have been freed when the authorities could not produce the order.
 Under the Act, a committee was established to oversee the treat-
 ment of detainees; the committee reportedly meets only sporad-
 ically. The Act further requires that the detainee be informed of
 the reasons for detention within fifteen days of the arrest, to
 give him or her an opportunity to appeal in writing to the presi-
 dent. This is rarely done. Two prominent businessmen involved in
 a major corruption scandal have been held in detention since
 January 1981. One is reported to be seriously ill. One of the
 two appealed for release to the high court in September 1981 on
 the grounds that he was not informed of the reasons for his deten-
 tion until eight months after his arrest; the court turned down
 the appeal because the presidential detention order, issued the
 day after the arrest, followed correct legal procedures.
 Reliable figures on the numbers of detainees are unavailable.
 Estimates vary from 100 to 1500. A majority are being held for
 economic offenses (corruption and black marketeering), poaching
 and cattle-stealing, and detainees are normally held for two to
 three years without trial. It appears that the Government has
 chosen to use the Preventive Detention Act in some instances
 rather than press criminal-charges because of frustration with the
 workings of the court system. There are perhaps five former
 
 
 321
 members of "national liberation" organizations being detained and
 fifteen Ugandan prisoners of war are still in prison. There has
 been at least one case of a person held on criminal charges who
 was released on court order and promptly rearrested under the
 Preventive Detention Act. Prominent members of the Tanzanian
 legal profession and judiciary publicly called this year for
 review and possible repeal of the Act, which they felt was being
 overused and was a clear threat to the civil liberties guaranteed
 by the Constitution.
 The law requires that a person arrested on criminal charges
 appear before a magistrate within twenty-four hours to be charged;
 the prosecution may ask that the accused be remanded for fourteen
 days without bail, and may request extensions of the remand. In
 August 1982 the Tanzania Legal Corporation won the release on bail
 of seven persons accused of theft of public funds. They had been
 held uncharged since May. It is common for suspects to be held up
 to a month without being charged. One man was awarded substantial
 damages this year for wrongful detention for sixteen months. He
 had been detained and charged three times on trumped-up charges by
 a police officer holding a personal grudge against him.
 In April 1981 ten Zanzibaris detained under the Act for an alleged
 plot to overthrow the Government were released; the remaining six
 were released in October 1981. The Government of Zanzibar recent-
 ly announced an intensified crusade against corruption, and plans
 to form uniformed "youth brigades" to seek out individual black
 marketeers, And search shops for contraband without a warrant.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The mainland legal system is based on the British colonial model,
 with modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public, and the more
 sensational are covered by the press. While an independent
 judiciary is constitutionally mandated, some members of the legal
 community, including judicial officers, have complained that the
 legal system is being corrupted through professional inducements
 and illegal monetary payments to officers of the courts. Although
 the allegations remain largely undocumented, there is at least one
 confirmed report of a magistrate demanding a bribe to issue a
 court order. There has been no suggestion that the Court of
 Appeals and the High Court are corrupt. Judges are appointed
 by the Executive with the advice of the Chief Justice. Parliament
 can pass retroactive legislation undermining court decisions where
 decrees passed have not yet been executed; there have been no
 reports that this has been done. In all serious cases on the
 mainland (treason, murder, and manslaughter) public counsel is
 available to defendants. The Tanzania Law Society offers free
 assistance, subject to a means test. Tanzanian lawyers have
 protested a Government proposal to, in effect, nationalize the
 legal profession,-arguing that such a move would deny litigants
 the right to choose counsel freely. The proposal is still under
 consideration.
 There is no evidence of political pressure being brought to bear
 on the judiciary, although there have been a few reports of minor
 Government harassment of attorneys in controversial cases, and
 individual Government employees are said to have on occasion used
 their office to attempt to influence decisions. The High Court
 has asked magistrates to report any such attempts. Military
 courts do not try civilians, and there are no security courts.
 Defendants in both civil and military courts may appeal decisions
 to the High Court.
 
 
 322
 The legal system on Zanzibar (which has considerable autonomy) is
 entirely different. The state presents a case, acting both as
 prosecution and defense. In most cases Zanzibaris assume that
 once the state has opted to bring charges against an individual
 the verdict is a foregone conclusion.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 A magistrate's warrant is required for entry into private resi-
 dences in most cases, but provisions are made for police to search
 without a warrant in urgent cases, and this often occurs. There
 are frequent allegations of forced entry, search, and harassment
 of persons suspected of economic crimes. In one case in 1982
 armed Tanzanian militia accompanied members of a South African
 liberation group in search of a Sikh temple. It was suspected
 that two foreign tourists, possibly harbored by the temple, were
 spying on the liberation group. There is no evidence of bugging
 or similar violations by Government authorities.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are limited in practice. The mainland Government
 owns one English-language daily newspaper, the National Press
 Agency and the radio on the mainland. The.Zanzibar Government also
 operates independently a radio and a TV station. The Swahili-
 language daily paper is owned by the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM),
 Tanzania's sole political party. There is bne private fortnightly
 paper which covers largely religious news. The official media, as
 organs of the state, usually present a single point of view on
 important policy matters, and do not criticize the overall social-
 ist doctrine or foreign policy. The Government has encouraged
 increasingly free criticism by the media of corruption and mis-
 management, and several stories have resulted in the dismissal of
 senior officials. Both papers publish frank letters to the editor
 from the public, which are often highly critical of abuses of the
 system. The press and TV on Zanzibar have committies which re-
 view material provided by foreign sources for political content.
 Such material is on occasion printed and labelled as paid political
 advertising. There is no daily supervision of the media; editorial
 policy is set by the Government or party and clearly understood.
 There are occasional editorials provided by the president's office.
 Tanzanian citizens show no inhibitions over expressing criticisms
 of the system in private conversations, and there is little appar-
 ent attempt at control of such criticism. Although academic freedom
 of enquiry is officially guaranteed, in practice most academicians,
 relying on the Government-run educational system for their liveli-
 hood, are limited in their exploration and treatment of sensitive
 subjects. Commercial import of books and periodicals is limited by
 the shortage of foreign exchange, and most Tanzanians cannot
 afford to buy those that are available. Material written by civil
 servants must have Government approval before publication. A
 highly critical pamphlet printed by a church-owned press was
 widely distributed in 1981 and was reviewed, albeit negatively,
 in the official newspapers.* Distributors of anti-Government
 pamphlets were threatened with prosecution earlier this year in
 Zanzibar. There is no confirmation that anyone was actually
 charged.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These freedoms are also sometimes constrained. All legal politi-
 cal gatherings are organized by the party or its sub-groups. In
 1978 a large number of students at the University of Dar es Salaam
 
 
 323
 were expelled for participation in a peaceful demonstration
 against Government policies; most were later reinstated. There
 have been-no demonstrations at the University since. Most stu-
 dents are afraid to jeopardize their futures by public criticism
 of policy. In late 1981 a number of students at the Institute of
 Development Management were suspended for taking part in a demon-
 stration. -The student-union was dissolved by.the..Government, and
 three student leaders were expelled.
 There is one labor union, which is run by the Government; no
 other unions may operate. Strikes are prohibited by law. All
 businesses and Government offices with more than a few employees
 are required to have a union chapter, and at the local level the
 union is charged with promoting employee welfare. It has little
 influence on 'labor policy. Few professional associations exist,
 and those that do are carefully non-political.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) remains concerned about
 forced labor in prisons and several ordinances requiring work by
 adults in communal agriculture and development projects. At the
 request of the Government, in April 1982 the ILO submitted speci-
 fic proposals for amending this legislation which is under study
 and may lead to changes in 1983. In March 1982, 141 villagers
 were taken to court for failure to work on the village communal
 farm; most were fined or given short jail sentences. The ideolog-
 ical basis for the Tanzanian state is such that the requirement
 for contribution to group projects is unlikely to change.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Tanzania is an essentially secular society which permits complete
 freedom of religion. The population of the mainland is approxi-
 mately'half Christian, half Muslim, sometimes intermixed with
 traditional animist practices, with considerable regional varia-
 tion in degree. Zanzibar is almost entirely Muslim. There appear
 to be no advantages or disadvantages attached to membership in any
 faith on the mainland. While there has been a degree of contro-
 versy in Zanzibar over state support of certain mosques, Zanzibaris
 are generally free to practice their faith without interference.
 The Ibadhis, who are very few in number and almost identical in
 belief with the majority Sunni sect, are not permitted to have
 their own mosques but are expected to worship in the same build-
 ings as other Zanzibari Muslims. It is not known whether there
 are other restrictions on Ibadhi religious printing or courts.
 Some non-Muslim Zanzibaris perceive an element of discrimination
 in favor of Muslims with respect to advancement within the isle's
 Government.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from requirements for travel documentation between Zanzibar
 and the mainland, the Government places no restriction on travel
 within the country nor are there any formal limitations on freedom
 of residence. Zanzibaris are required to get party clearance as
 well as travel documents to leave the island. Police roadblocks
 to prevent smuggling are common, particularly in border and
 grain-producing areas. City dwellers are stopped regularly by
 police who check for proof of employment. Beggars and the unem-
 ployed are forced to return to the countryside, in an effort to
 control increasing pressure on urban resources and to prop
 up declining levels of agricultural production. Sixty refugees
 were removed from Dar es Salaam to a camp upcountry under police
 escort last year. Under the "Villagization Program" during the
 1970s six million peasants were compelled, in some cases by force,
 
 
 324
 to move to consolidated villages and required to contribute labor
 to communal farms. Although the Government continues to return
 beggars and unemployed persons to their homes and there are regu-
 lations limiting the movement of peasants from their villages, in
 practice the restrictions are loosely enforced and ineffective.
 Both herders and agriculturalists move over wide areas of the
 country without much interference.
 There are no restrictions on repatriation. The recently enacted
 Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try
 Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country. There are no
 indications yet as to in what sorts of cases the Act will be used.
 Passports are required for foreign travel and can be difficult to
 obtain. Travellers must obtain tax clearances and approval from
 the central bank to buy tickets. Although the Government claims
 that restrictions are aimed solely at conserving limited foreign
 exchange, the requirement for detailed information on sponsors
 abwoad in cases where tickets are prepaid indicates an intent to
 monitor the increasing transfer of assets out of the country and
 an effort to identify individuals involved in illicit currency
 transactions. Emigration is theoretically free; in practice,
 those planning to emigrate are subject to intense scrutiny by
 police and tax authorities, in some cases to the level of harass-
 ment. Although it is legally possible for citizenship to be
 revoked, there have been no reports recently that this has been
 done. Tanzania has an excellent record in regard to refugees.
 There is a refugee population of about 190,000, of whom approxi-
 mately 75 percent are from Burundi, the rest mainly from Zaire.
 Some 30,000 Rwandans were naturalized in 1980, and the same offer
 of citizenship is expected to be made to the Burundians within the
 next year or two. In general the same services and rights avail-
 able to citizens are offered to refugees insofar as local re-
 sources permit. South African refugees who entered Tanzania as
 members of "liberation groups" are in a different category; those
 who resign from their organizations are refused work and residence
 permits, and several have been imprisoned.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political activity is forbidden except within the CCM, the single,
 ruling party of Tanzania. The party is omnipresent. President
 Nyerere controls the party structure and bureaucracy, and is the
 dominant force in the country. Advancement within the Government
 and admission to university are at least partially dependent on
 good standing in the party. There are no overt opposition groups.
 It is an offense under the penal,code to excite disaffection
 against the Government. One-half of the parliament is chosen in
 elections that are free only in a limited sense. The rest is
 appointed by the Government and the various "mass organizations"
 associated with the CCM. Any citizen is free to enter the primary
 contests. The National Executive Committee of the CCM chooses two
 candidates from a list provided by each constituency to compete in
 the general election. Following recent changes to the party
 constitution, candidates will be rank-ordered on the ballot
 according to their party record. Party membership, and hence
 active participation in the political process, is not open to
 anyone engaged in private business or associated with "the
 practices of capitalism or feudalism;" this includes landlords and
 directors and shareholders of private companies. The restriction
 is not uniformly applied, but serves as a mechanism of control
 over party members. The business community consists largely of
 Asians, and is generally not part of the party structure.
 Voters can and do register dissatisfaction by sending incumbents
 down to defeat. Tanzanian voters, in response to worsening eco-
 
 
 325
 nomic conditions and seeming government inability to effectuate
 change, voted out of office over half of the 84 members of parlia-
 ment who stood for election in 1980. Previous parliaments have
 largely rubberstamped legislation prepared by the ministries; this
 year the new parliament redrafted several major pieces of legisla-
 tion, and the finance bill was passed on a roll-call vote of 56 to
 54 only after considerable debate and reworking. Julius Nyerere
 has run unopposed in the four elections since independence. While
 voters have the option of voting "no" by secret ballot or staying
 at home, local party officials do bring pressure to bear in elec-
 tions to ensure a high turnout. There have been frequent allega-
 tions of election fixing and intimidation of village leaders both
 on the mainland and on Zanzibar. In an effort to break down ethnic
 and linguistic distinctions, the election code requires that cam-
 paigns be conducted only in Swahili, and prohibits references to
 ethnic and regional origin. An appeal process is available to
 candidates who feel that the code has been violated, and a number
 of appeals have been successful. The results of one election in
 which the incumbent had conducted a campaign of sexist and ethnic
 slurs against his opponent were overturned by the High Court;
 there were clear indications in the case that the ballot box
 had been stuffed.
 Women have been encouraged to take an active role in politics and
 government. Using its powers of direct appointment, the Govern-
 ment has ensured that about 20 percent of the membership of
 village councils is female. In mid-1982 there were two women
 cabinet ministers and four women on the thirty-member Central
 Committee of the CCM. Traditional attitudes towards women have
 acted against their representation in the system in proportion
 to their numbers.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged violations of
 Human Rights
 Tanzania is a party to the two UN covenants on human rights, and
 has signed the OAU Convention on Human Rights, but has not yet
 ratified the latter. The ILO has a number Tof times raised the
 issue of forced labor with the Tanzanian Government. Amnesty
 International's 1982 report noted Amnesty's continuing concern
 about detention under the Preventive Detention Act. Some of the
 detainees about whom Amnesty has in the past inquired have been
 set free. Counsel for defendants in controversial cases are said
 to have on occasion experienced some minor harassment, such as
 deliberately conspicuous surveillance and crude attempts at com-
 promise. Individuals can appeal to the Permanent Commisdion of
 Enquiry, established in 1965 as a balance to the possibility of
 abuse of power in a one-party state, for investigation of viola-
 tions; last year several missionaries who had called for an in-
 vestigation into illegal confiscation of Masai cattle by local
 authorities were.arrested and questioned, but released unharmed.
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Tanzania is among the poorest countries of the world, with a 1981
 per capita Gross National Product (GNP) of $300.00. More than
 90 percent of the population of 19.9 million are peasant farmers
 living in rural areas. The official population growth rate was
 3.3, percent-in 1980; the current Government estimate is 3.4 per-
 cent. Unemployment and.underemployment are causing serious social
 -problems in the cities.
 There are no reliable figures available for the percentage of
 the population livingbelow the absolute poverty level; last
 
 
 326
 year's figures (10 percent of the urban population and 60 percent
 of the rural population) appear very low for the city dwellers,
 who are much more dependent on earned wages than the rural popula-
 tion. Estimates of the minimum needed to support a family of four
 vary from 50 percent to 150 percent above the statutory minimum
 wage. About $500 million is budgeted for development programs
 in 1982/3, some 26 percent of the total budget. $400 million
 of this figure is in the form of foreign aid grants and loans.
 Social services, while limited, are available to all. Although
 secondary and higher education are theoretically open to all
 citizens on the basis of merit, in practice tradition and social
 attitudes have seriously limited the participation of women beyond
 the primary school level. The Government actively encourages and
 recruits those women who make it through the system, and continues
 to make genuine efforts to increase female enrollment in secondary
 schools and institutions of higher education. Concessions to
 customary and Islamic law have perpetuated discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property by women in many
 parts of the country. Although the practice is declining, female
 circumcision is still performed by some 20 of the country's 200
 ethnic groups, and there has been no attempt by the Government to
 abolish the practice. The Asian community, estimated at 50,000,
 is both culturally exclusive and a business-oriented minority in a
 socialist society. Although Government policy is one of equal
 rights for all citizens, reports of harassment and discrimination
 against the Asians by individual Government officials are wide-
 spread. The Asian community bore the brunt of the 1971 nationali-
 zation of private property, in many cases with inadequate or no
 compensation.
 The economy overall has suffered from worldwide inflation, rising
 energy costs, declining prices for export crops and a drop in pro-
 duction in the export sector as well as a decrease in the output
 of manufactured products, primarily due to an inability to finance
 imports of raw materials and spare parts. Government pricing
 policies, designed to keep consumer prices low, have contributed
 to a decrease in the growth of cash crops by producers, and the
 spread of an increasingly active alternate economy. Three years
 of drought have curtailed harvests, and severe food shortages
 have been prevented only with assistance from grain-surplus coun-
 tries, including the United States. The Government has undertaken
 ambitious programs in maternal and child care and public education
 in nutrition.
 The Government has also continued efforts to expand education
 and health facilities, and has recently expanded plans for pro-
 grams for the elderly. Since the institution of free and com-
 pulsory primary education for all in 1977, virtually all children
 of primary school age are enrolled. There has been criticism of
 the quality of education which the children are receiving, and of
 the severely limited number of places in secondary schools and
 university. Adult education is available and encouraged. Statis-
 tics on the effects of the 1977 Act on the literacy rate are not
 yet available; according to the most recent information adult
 literacy stands at 66 percent. The Government places a high
 priority on medical care, and dispensaries, clinics, and hospitals
 have been opened throughout the country. There are serious
 shortages of trained medical personnel, supplies, and drugs, and,
 although a genuine effort is being made to improve standards,
 health care is still inadequate for the needs of the population.
 Community health programs designed to provide safe drinking water,
 adequate sanitation and the eradication of disease-bearing pests
 have also been established, although malaria, bilharzia, cholera,
 .and various enteric diseases are still prevalent. Infant deaths
 
 
 327
 from measles are common. Since independence in 1961, life expect-
 ancy has risen from 42 to 51.6 years. Infant mortality stands at
 185 per thousand live births. Malnutrition and the resulting
 lack of resistance to disease are a major factor in infant deaths.
 Thirty-nine percent of the population now has access to clean
 water, roughly six times the percentage at the time of independence.
 
 
 328
 U..VkRStA  -LOANS ANO SRANT- QLIATIOJS SNO LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - M!LLIONS CF 3OLL4RS)
 CO4JTRT; TANZANIA
 1?0     1931     1932
 I.:CL'N. ASJ1ST.-TOTLL.       251. 2   37.?     19.6
 LDANS ..............        7.3     19.3      5.0
 G 1 1rTS .............     17.7     17.9     14.6
 A.AI&  .................       14.,     21.1     10.6
 LUAN  ... ........ . .O             11.      0.0
 GRANTS .............       14.?       .Z    10.6
 (SEC.SUP.ASSIST.)  ...O               0.0      0.0
 Utuo:. %gJ UeACc               10.3     14.3      7.6
 LOANI...  . .  ...         7.5      7.5      5.0
 G RANTS ......2.......      2.5      7.3      2.6
 TITLZ  I-TOTAL ..........       7.5      7.5      5.0
 :EPAY.  IN  i-L0ANS .....      7.5      7.5      5.0
 PAY. IN 'O . CUR? .            0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITL2  fI-TUTAL .........       2.5      7.3      2.6
 ,.P.ELIEI..0    4 r.            .    4.5      0.9
 VJL.RELI   ANC.Y ....          1.9      2.7      1.7
 C.OTH R EOWN. ASSIST...       3.3      0.7      1.4
 LCAN:. ...............       .0      5.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   0.3      0.7      1.4
 PEACt  CORPS ......       0.3      0.7      1.4
 NARCOTICS ........        0.3      9.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       3.0      3.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TCTAL...         0.3      0.0      0.0
 LOANA .......... ......    0.3      0.0      0.0
 GqANTS ................    0.0      3.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 S.CR-CIT SALES-NS ....        .0.0     1.0      0.0
 C.INTL ML.:D.TRNG ....        0.3      0.0      0.0
 u.TRAN-:XALSS STOCK...         Q.0      0.0      0.0
 E.CT1ER  GRANT ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON.   MIL...        25.2     37.2     19.6
 LOANS. . ............. . ....  7.5  19.3    5.0
 GRANTS ................   17.7     17.9     14.6
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      1.7      0.0
 EX-IM  dANK  LOANS .......      0.0      1.7      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE IROM iNTERNATICNAL AGENCIES
 19dO     191     1952     1946-52
 TOTAL ...........  145.9   14.4     22.0   1374.0
 16RD               0.0      0.0      3.0    317.2
 IF                .0.0      0.0      0.0      7.2
 IDA              134.5      0.0      0.0    572.3
 1OE                D.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AO                ).0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOS               9.7     13.L      8.6     75.6
 UNOP               4.7      0.6      0.3     55.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     13.4     41.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      5.0
 
 
 329
