 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania, formed in 1964 when mainland
 Tanganyika united with the newly independent island of
 Zanzibar, is a one-party state. The party, the Chama Cha
 Mapinduzi (CCM), and the Government claim to be democratic
 institutions, but in reality political direction comes from a
 party-chosen elite, not from the people. Julius K. Nyerere
 served as President and chairman of the party almost
 continuously from the independence of Tanganyika in 1961 until
 1985. In 1985 Nyerere voluntarily retired from the Presidency
 and sanctioned the election of Ali Hassan Mwinyi, the former
 President of Zanzibar and First Vice President of Tanzania.
 Nyerere, however, retains the chairmanship of the CCM. The
 party attempts to control activity at all levels of society
 through its system of 10-family cells. Zanzibar (which
 includes the island of Pemba) is ruled by the CCM but
 exercises a considerable degree of autonomy.
 The Tanzanian People's Defense Forces number more than 30,000
 personnel. Additional paramilitary forces consist of a police
 marine unit, a police field force, and a large citizens'
 militia. The Government has tolerated vigilante forces in
 rural areas to counter lawlessness, especially cattle rustling.
 Vigilante groups committed human rights violations in 1988,
 notably in killing elderly women suspected of witchcraft.
 Tanzania is one of the world's poorest countries. Its
 population of 23 million, growing at a high rate between 3.3
 and 3.6 percent per year, has an annual per capita gross
 domestic product of approximately $240. In 1986 the
 Government instituted a 3-year Economic Recovery Program
 (ERP), which involved a new agreement with the International
 Monetary Fund (IMF), increased prices paid to farmers for
 their crops, rescheduled foreign debt payments, and increased
 donor support, particularly from the World Bank. This reform
 effort stimulated growth rates of 3.4 percent in 1986, 3.8
 percent in 1987, and an estimated 4 percent in 1988. In 1988
 donors announced continued support for the ERP but largely
 linked new assistance to a follow-on agreement with the IMF.
 In 1988 a bill of rights, which had been added to the national
 Constitution in 1985, went into effect. It provides, inter
 alia, for freedom of movement, speech, religion, and
 association. Despite this progress, the Government in practice
 still severely restricts these rights, and it also tightly
 circumscribes all political activity outside the one party.
 Two persons who were detained in October 1986 for founding a
 second political party remained in internal exile at the end
 of the year. Political and religious tensions surfaced in
 Zanzibar in 1988. Two persons were killed in May when island
 security forces tried to control a large Muslim demonstration.
 This demonstration had been touched off by the call of the
 chairperson of the Union of Tanzanian Women for changes in
 Islamic law to permit increased rights for women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 
 
 369
 TANZANIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Tanzanian Government opposes torture as a matter of
 policy, but it is occasionally used on an unauthorized basis
 by police and prison authorities, mainly in the form of
 beatings. This occurs typically either at the time of
 apprehension, when a suspect is first taken to a police
 station, or during the subsequent criminal investigation.
 Police have shot and killed fleeing suspects. The use of such
 force has been severely criticized by the government press,
 and police officials have been sentenced to lengthy terms of
 imprisonment for abuses of suspects and prisoners.
 Nevertheless, police brutality remains prevalent.
 Tanzania's prisons are generally unsanitary, and in 1988 there
 were reports of prisoners dying from preventable, diseases in
 prisons in the north. Appalling prison conditions are more a
 function of Tanzania's considerable poverty than a deliberate
 government policy to subject prisoners to inhumane conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The 1985 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code, requiring
 that a person arrested for a crime, other than a security
 charge under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a
 magistrate within 24 hours, raised public consciousness
 concerning legal rights at the time of arrest. However, the
 new Criminal Procedure Code amendments also restricted the
 right to bail, reduced the number of bailable offenses, limited
 judges' discretion in granting bail, and imposed strict
 conditions on freedom of movement and association when bail is
 granted. The legal community in Zanzibar believes that the
 amendments to the Criminal Procedure Code do not apply to
 Zanzibar, and Zanzibar retains the old, less restrictive
 system of the right to bail in all cases except murder and
 treason. Zanzibar has a different and autonomous legal
 system, and only in the Court of Appeals is there a link to
 the Tanzanian court system.
 The Preventive Detention Act allows, upon a written order from
 the President, the arrest and indefinite detention without
 bail of any person considered dangerous to the public order or
 national security. In 1985 the Act was amended to require
 that detainees be released within 15 days of their detention
 or informed of the reason for their detention. In addition, a
 detainee is allowed to challenge the grounds for his detention
 at 90-day intervals.
 In July 1987, two persons who had been detained under the
 Preventive Detention Act for advocating a multiparty system in
 October 1986 were sent into "internal exile"'on remote islands.
 These cases of "internal exile" were the first reported long-
 term detentions under President Mwinyi and were carried out
 under the Deportation Ordinance, which allows citizens to be
 restricted to specific areas for security reasons.
 In May, after a large, noisy demonstration in Zanzibar town
 that resulted in two deaths, a number of demonstrators
 (estimates exceed 100) were detained, including a journalist.
 
 
 370
 TANZANIA
 Most were quickly released, but some were detained for up to 1
 month (see Section 5).
 The Economic and Organized Crime Control Act of 1984, which
 replaced the Economic Sabotage Act of 1983, was modified in
 1986 to allow bail, representation by attorneys, and appeal
 for persons accused of economic crimes. The Act is still used
 in some major drug and corruption cases. Only the High Court
 has jurisdiction. Arrests continue, but because these cases
 are heard in special sessions within the court system, it is
 difficult to determine the number of arrests for economic
 crimes in 1988.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Tanzania's legal system is based on the British model, with
 modifications to accommodate customary and Islamic law in
 civil cases. Criminal trials are open to the public and the
 press. The court must give its reasons on the record for
 holding proceedings in camera. Criminal defendants have the
 right of appeal. Military courts do not try civilians, and
 there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and
 military courts may appeal decisions to the High Court. Lower
 court magistrates are appointed by the Chief Justice of the
 Court of Appeals on the recommendations of two judicial
 service commissions. Judges of the High Court and the Court
 of Appeals are appointed by the President after consultation
 with the Chief Justice.
 While an independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated,
 and in practice operates independently from the executive
 branch,-the Government exerts influence over the judiciary in
 some cases. Members of the legal community, including
 judicial officers, have complained that the legal system is
 being corrupted through bribery. Police and lower court
 officials are often bribed to delay the process of
 investigation and trials. Although the 1985 amendments to the
 Criminal Procedure Code were supposed to lessen court
 congestion, in 1988 an average case still took from 2 to 3
 years to come to trial. In 1988 the Ministry of Justice was
 preparing a new law which would reduce the number of witnesses
 who must be called to testify in trials. The Chief Justice
 was quoted as saying this law would be an effort to reduce the
 time required to hear cases and reduce expenses for calling
 unnecessary witnesses.
 The Government provides legal counsel to those charged with
 treason and murder. In Dar es Salaam, the Legal Aid Committee
 of the Tanganyika Law Society and the Legal Aid Committee of
 the Faculty of Law at the University of Dar es Salaam offer
 legal services to indigents, but their resources are limited.
 Under the Detention Act of 1983, political prisoners have the
 right to be represented by a defense attorney.
 Under the 1984 Zanzibar Constitution, the people's courts,
 which did not provide defendants the right of legal
 representation, were abolished. Zanzibar's court system now
 parallels the mainland's legal system, but retains Islamic
 courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce, child
 custody, and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar
 constitutional issues are heard only in Zanzibar's courts.
 All other cases may be appealed to the Court of Appeals of the
 United Republic of Tanzania.
 
 
 371
 TANZANIA
 The Government insists there are no political prisoners,
 although the two persons sent into "internal exile" for
 advocating a multiparty system could be regarded as political
 prisoners.
 Mob justice sometimes occurs in both cities and rural areas,
 and, in 1988, mobs killed suspected bandits and maimed others.
 The Sungu Sungu and Wasalama, traditional defense groups in
 the wide-open spaces of north central Tanzania, were encouraged
 by both government and party officials to help eliminate cattle
 rustling in areas too remote for the police. These vigilante
 groups often execute alleged rustlers-; they also turn on
 villagers accused of witchcraft. Both the Government and the
 party have sent officials to the region to instill discipline,
 but these efforts are not likely to succeed as long as a
 regular police presence is beyond government resources.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although party membership is voluntary, the Government uses
 the party structure to intervene in the private lives of its
 citizens. The Chama Cha Mapinduzi has party cadres at all
 levels of society. Individual cells vary in size from single
 family homes to large apartment buildings, and may contain
 from 10 to several hundred persons. Unpaid "10-cell" leaders
 are the party officials responsible for resolving problems at
 the grassroots level and reporting any suspicious behavior or
 event within their neighborhoods to authorities.
 Various ordinances allow the removal of undesirable or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of
 residence or origin if no work is found for them.
 Correspondence is monitored.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for under the
 Constitution but is limited in practice. Tanzanian citizens
 show few inhibitions about criticizing the political system in
 private conversations but are cautious in public statements.
 The mainland Government owns the only English-language daily
 newspaper, the national press agency, and the mainland radio
 facility. The Zanzibar Government operates radio and
 television stations. The Swahili-language newspaper, which
 has a daily circulation of 100,000, is owned by the party.
 The Newspaper Act, which allows government seizure of any
 publication without a warrant and withdrawal of the license to
 publish at any time, makes the launching of a private newspaper
 or magazine difficult. Despite this obstacle, a new, privately
 owned business weekly newspaper was launched in November.
 There is a bi-weekly Catholic newspaper with a circulation of
 120,000 which covers largely religious news. Two new privately
 published magazines appeared in 1988. One focuses on women's
 issues.
 The official media, as organs of the State, purvey party and
 government propaganda and usually present the Government's
 point of view on important policy matters. They do not
 criticize the premises of the Government's domestic or foreign
 policies. The Government encourages the media to publish
 articles and letters to the editor criticizing corruption,
 
 
 372
 TANZANIA
 mismanagement, and "economic sabotage" in the government
 ministries and state-owned corporations. In the wake of the
 May demonstrations on Zanzibar, a local correspondent for the
 British Broadcasting Corporation was one of the persons
 detained. Subsequently, the Zanzibar Government proposed new
 restrictions on the press in September which would allow the
 President of Zanzibar to prohibit the importation of any
 publication considered inimical to the interests of the people
 of Zanzibar.
 Visiting foreign reporters are required to register with the
 Government and obtain a government permit. They are then
 allowed considerable freedom, including access to government
 and party leaders. However, permits and visas can be difficult
 to obtain, frequently only after official intervention at a
 high level. A non-Tanzanian resident who tried to report on
 Tanzania worked for Reuters for 6 months in Dar es Salaam
 before the Government refused to renew his visa in early 1988.
 Academic freedom is officially guaranteed, but in practice
 most academicians, relying on the government-run educational
 system for their livelihood, limit their exploration of
 sensitive subjects. Under the Films and Stage Plays Act,
 films may be censored. The importation of foreign
 publications is not prohibited on the mainland, but it is
 limited by the acute shortage of foreign exchange.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Given the nature of Tanzania's one-party system, the freedoms
 of public assembly and association are limited. Permits must
 be obtained through the Government for any public meeting,
 political or otherwise. Student organizations are party
 controlled, and students are inhibited from public criticism
 by concern that their future employment prospects may be
 jeopardized. A number of professional business, legal, and
 medical associations exist, but they are careful to
 concentrate on nonpolitical topics. Under the societies
 ordinance, all associations must be registered with and
 approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Candidates for
 office in major sports clubs and cooperatives are screened by
 the appropriate government ministry, which also supervises
 their elections. No organizations which would compete with
 party organizations are approved.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The population of the mainland is roughly 35 percent
 Christian, 30 percent Muslim, and 35 percent adherents of
 traditional religions. Zanzibar is overwhelmingly Muslim.
 Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution and
 respected in practice throughout the country, although the
 Jehovah's Witnesses were banned for several years.
 Missionaries are allowed to enter the country freely to
 proselytize, including in Zanzibar, but Iranian-backed Muslim
 proselytizers have been forced to desist from an
 anti-Christian campaign started in 1987. Tanzanians are
 allowed to go abroad for pilgrimage and other religious
 purposes. In contrast to Zanzibar, there appear to be no
 social or political advantages or disadvantages attached to
 membership in any given faith on the mainland. The May riot
 
 
 373
 TANZANIA
 on Zanzibar pointed to political and religious tensions within
 the country, including over the rights of women.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for
 travel between Zanzibar and the mainland, short-term travel
 generally is not restricted within Tanzania, but citizens must
 follow national employment directives stipulating the nature
 of employment and location of residence. For years city
 dwellers unable to show proof of employment during police
 checks have been forced to-return to rural areas in an effort
 by the Government to control increasing pressure on urban
 resources-and reverse declining levels of agricultural
 production. The Human Resources Deployment Act of 1983
 requires local governments to ensure that every resident
 within their areas of jurisdiction engages in productive or
 other lawful employment. Those not so employed are subject to
 transfer to another area where employment is available. The
 Government remains concerned with the continiing migration of
 young people to the cities rather than working in agriculture
 in the rural areas. However, in contrast to earlier years,
 there were no massive roundups of unemployed urban youths
 under the Act in 1988.
 Passports are required for foreign travel and can be difficult
 to obtain. Tax clearances and approval from the Central Bank
 are required in order to buy airline tickets. The Foreign
 Exchange Act prohibits taking foreign currency out of the
 country (although allowed on Zanzibar for business purposes),
 and those accused under the Act must surrender their passports.
 In practice, those planning to travel or emigrate are subject
 to intense scrutiny by police and tax authorities. Tanzanians
 who leave the country without authorization are subject to
 prosecution on their return. In 1988 Tanzanian immigration
 authorities continued their increased border post surveillance
 and their requirement that all citizens departing Tanzania
 present travel documents detailing the purpose of their
 journey. This requirement was aimed at the large number of
 unemployed youths who leave the country illegally. To
 discourage stowaways, the Government tightened passport
 requirements for youths, compiled a public list of stowaways,
 and imposed fines, jail sentences, and the costs of
 repatriationon those who returned. The Extraterritorial
 Jurisdiction Act empowers the courts to try Tanzanians who
 commit offenses outside the country. Although it is legally
 possible for citizenship to be revoked, there have been no
 reports that this has been done in recent years.
 In late 1986, Parliament passed a bill for the registration
 and identification of persons resident in Tanzania. The
 purpose of the bill was to ensure the rights of citizens over
 noncitizens and to help the Government obtain reports on
 citizens outside the country. Khe bill required registration
 of everyone over the age of 10 who resides in Tanzania and
 appears to be an attempt to control foreign businessmen.
 Tanzania generally has a liberal policy towards refugees and
 displaced persons. As of January 1988, there were about
 266,000 refugees and displaced persons in Tanzania as compared
 to the 220,000 estimated by the end of 1986. The new figure
 is a result of an influx of about 72,000 refugees from
 Mozambique and a downward revision of the previous total
 following a mid-1987 census.
 
 
 374
 TANZANIA
 Tanzania accepts refugees from almost all countries. Only
 South Africans who have left their liberation movements and
 Kenyans associated with the opposition in Kenya are required
 to find resettlement elsewhere. The United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees is presently attempting to resettle
 48 South Africans and 19 Kenyans who have not been granted
 asylum in Tanzania. Some of the South African refugees have
 been seeking resettlement for as long as 7 years.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political activity is forbidden except within the one legal
 party, the CCM. Therefore, as a practical matter, the
 Tanzanian people cannot remove the party in power or change
 the one-party system. Ex-President Julius Nyerere continues
 to direct the affairs of the party through its Central
 Committee. There are no overt opposition groups. Two
 advocates of a multiparty system who distributed leaflets on
 the subject were detained in October 1986 under the Preventive
 Detention Act, and they remain in internal exile.
 All candidates for Parliament must be party members. When the
 party strips a Member of Parliament of party membership, the
 member loses his or her seat in Parliament. This happened in
 1988 to seven prominent Zanzibaris, including former Zanzibar
 Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad, who were members of
 Zanzibar's House of Representatives (see below).
 In 1985, under the amended Constitution, voters were allowed
 to choose between two party-selected candidates for 75 percent,
 or 169, of the 244 seats in the Union Parliament. The
 remaining 25 percent are composed of members appointed by the
 Government and the various mass organizations associatea with
 the party. The one-party system does not permit political
 participation through the open nomination of multiple
 candidates. Voters register dissatisfaction by voting
 incumbent Members of Parliament out of office. While
 membership in the party is voluntary, overzealous CCM
 functionaries have been known to require proof of membership
 for the receipt of basic government services or employment.
 This practice has been publicly deplored by Nyerere.
 Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives, and the
 majority of the members were directly elected from a party-
 selected slate for the first time in 1985. Under the
 Constitution, the House of Representatives consists of 50
 elected members, 10 members nominated by the President of
 Zanzibar, 5 regional commissioners, 5 seats reserved for
 women, and 5 representatives from the party's mass
 organizations
 There was considerable political and religious tension within
 Zanzibar in 1988. Zanzibari President Idris Abdul Wakil
 dismissed Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad in January and
 took control of the militia. He claimed that there was a plot
 to overthrow his Government, dissolve the union of Zanzibar
 with the mainland, and return Zanzibar and its sister island,
 Pemba, to Arab rule. Following the large demonstration in
 Zanzibar on May 13, in which security forces killed two persons
 and injured dozens, the National Executive Committee of the CCM
 expelled the seven prominent Zanzibaris and accused them of
 disrupting the union between Tanzania and the twin islands of
 Zanzibar and Pemba.
 
 
 375
 TANZANIA
 Women are encouraged to take an active role in politics. The
 Government has appointed women to 20 percent of the membership
 of village councils. There are 2 female cabinet ministers and
 there is 1 woman on the 20-member Central Committee of the
 party. The Constitution reserves 15 seats in the Union
 Parliament for women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government resents enquiries concerning human rights
 abuses. The Director of Public Prosecutions responded to
 Amnesty International's (AI) 1987 inquiry about two prisoners
 in detention, although AI reported that the information proved
 incorrect. There were no outside investigations of human
 rights violations in Tanzania in 1988. There is an AI chapter
 in Tanzania, and the local legal aid committee is concerned
 with human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Official government policy is one of promoting equal rights
 for all citizens. The African population (over 22 million)
 consists of more than 130 ethnic groups, of which only the
 Sukuma has more than 1 million members. All ethnic groups
 have their own language, but the national language is
 Kiswahili, a Bantu-based tongue with strong Arabic influences.
 Attention has been drawn to the plight of the indigenous people
 who live in the north of the country around Lake Eyasi.
 Traditional hunters and gatherers, the Hadzabe population has
 been reduced from 2,000 to 250 in the last few years owing to
 the lack of food, water, and she'lter. Similarly, the Barabeig,
 who are pastoralists from the same region, have been forced
 out as their grazing land was turned into huge wheat farms.
 They are migrating south under pressure and beginning to
 collide with the resident population of the Mbeya region.
 Although the Government is studying these problems, it has no
 plans to reverse the impending extinction of the Hadzabe,
 known as the "forgotten people of Lake Eyasi." The question
 of the Barabeig in Mbeya was raised in Parliament in July.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past
 decade to about 40,000 (plus 4,000 on Zanzibar). It is both
 culturally and economically exclusive, a business-oriented
 minority in a society committed to Socialist policies. Its
 future in Tanzania is uncertain, but Asian entrepreneurs are
 being encouraged to invest in areas previously reserved for
 the public sector, including large-scale agriculture.
 The Government has made progress in its efforts to ensure
 equality for women, especially in urban areas where traditional'.
 values have a weaker hold on the population. The Marriage Act
 provides that women's domestic services are a marital asset to
 be considered in divorce settlements. However, in practice
 women are seriously limited by tradition and social attitudes,
 even among the educated. For example, female students at the
 University of Dar es Salaam are subjected to the "punch,"
 written signs posted by male students which humiliate and
 degrade women who refuse their sexual advances or otherwise
 act too independently. For most of Tanzania's ethnic groups,
 women's role has been and remains that of mother and field
 laborer, and women are discriminated against in educational
 
 
 376
 TANZANIA
 opportunities and still underrepresented in government, the
 professions, and in skilled occupations. Social limitations
 on the roles women play are generally more pervasive on
 Zanzibar than on the mainland. Women in many parts of the
 country continue to suffer from discriminatory restrictions on
 inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions
 to customary and Islamic law. Although the practice is
 declining, female circumcision is still performed within
 approximately 20 of the country's 120 mainland ethnic groups.
 The Union of Tanzanian Women (UTW), a wing of the party, is
 dedicated to the eradication of inequality for women in all
 spheres of society. A major Muslim demonstration on Zanzibar
 occurred on May 13, after Sofia Kawawa, chairperson of the
 UTW, publicly suggested that Islamic laws on polygamy and
 inheritance should be amended to provide women with equal
 rights.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is limited to one labor union
 organization, Juwata, which is an organ of the party. In
 Tanzania's single-union system, all unions must belong to
 Juwata, and no independent unions are legally recognized. All
 businesses and government offices with more than a few
 employees are required to have a Juwata chapter. Juwata
 represents about 60 percent of the workers in industry and
 government, but it has limited influence on labor policy.
 Tanzanian workers are not required to join Juwata.
 While it has never done so, Juwata can call for a closed shop
 in any industry where 50 percent of the workers or more are
 Juwata members. The union does collect dues from all
 workers--members or not--when the employer agrees. This is
 the case now for government employees and workers in most
 state-owned corporations.
 Tanzanian workers have the right to strike, and strikes do
 occur. There is a process of appeals in labor disputes that
 leads finally to the Permanent Labor Tribunal, which receives
 direction from the Minister for Labor and Manpower Development.
 If the union is not satisfied with the Tribunal's decision, a
 strike is then legal. The employees of the state-owned
 Tanzania- Zambia Highway Corporation went on strike in early
 1988 after following this process.
 While Juwata is still a party organ, it has developed a degree
 of independence in the last 2 years. Previously, the Secretary
 General of the union was selected by the party. In 1988 Juwata
 began a new process of membership elections of leaders from the
 grassroots level, and a new Secretary-General will be elected
 by the members in May 1989. As a matter of policy, Juwata
 participates in meetings of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), to which Tanzania belongs, and limits its
 international affiliations to regional organizations, such as
 the Organization of African Trade Union Unity and the newly
 formed East African National Trade Unions Consultative
 Council. The trend towards greater independence from the
 Government is reflected in Juwata's new positive relationship
 with the American Federation of Labor/Congress of Industrial
 Organizations's African-American Labor Center.
 
 
 377
 TANZANIA
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Collective bargaining is limited to the private sector. Wages
 for government employees are set by the Government, and Juwata
 does not bargain collectively on behalf of government
 employees. At the local level, Juwata promotes employee
 welfare by filing grievances against employers, usually
 involving pay disputes. The practical limitations on the
 right to bargain collectively are reflections of Juwata's
 situation as the organ of the party in a one-party state.
 These same limitations apply to the question of the
 Government's role in union affairs. Union rights are
 incorporated into law--specifically the Security of Employment
 Act. The law is enforced, but the line between the Government
 and the government union can be difiicult to discern.
 Grievances which cannot be settled in the workplace are taken
 to the Permanent Labor Tribunal. The ILO Committee of Experts
 has observed that the current provisions requiring tne
 Permanent Labor Tribunal to approve collective agreements are
 not in conformity with ILO Convention 98. The Committee has
 noted that "the information supplied by the Government reveals
 that the collective bargaining process has been improved in
 practice" and that the Government has stated its readiness to
 revise these provisions. Labor laws are applied uniformly
 throughout the country. There are no export processing zones
 in Tanzania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 For a number of years the ILO Committee of Experts has
 observed that provisions of various Tanzanian laws (i.e.,
 Local Goveinment--District Authorities--Act, 1982; Employment
 Ordinance; Human Resources Deployment Act, 1983; Ward
 Development Committees Act, 1969; Resettlement of Offenders
 Act, 1969; Newspaper Act, 1976; Penal Code; Merchant Shipping
 Act, 1967; and Permanent Labour Tribunal Act, 1967) are
 incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 or 105 on forced labor.
 The Human Resources Deployment Act, for example, requires
 every local government authority to insure that able-bodied
 persons over 15 years of age engage in productive or other
 lawful employment. In the past, this has led to massive
 police sweeps in Dar es Salaam's streets to round up persons
 who had no evidence of employment. The legislation has been
 interpreted more leniently recently (street vendors are now
 regarded as "gainfully employed"), and there were no massive
 roundups of urban unemployed in 1988. The Committee of
 Experts has called on the Government to amend the laws
 described above so as to bring them into conformity with the
 ILO conventions; but, despite the Government's expressions of
 good intent, this has not yet been accomplished.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Section 77 of the Employment Ordinance prohibits children
 under the age of 15 from working. This provision applies only
 to the formal wage sector in both urban and rural areas and
 not to children working on family farms or herding domestic
 livestock. A young person between the ages of 15 and 18 may
 be employed provided the work is safe and not injurious to
 health, and young people are not allowed to work between 6
 p.m. and 6 a.m.
 
 
 378
 TANZANIA
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Tanzanian workers work a 40-hour, 6-day week. In general,
 women cannot be employed between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Several
 laws regulate safety in the workplace, including the Factories
 Ordinance, the Accidental and Occupational Diseases
 Notification Ordinance, and the Workmen's Compensation
 Ordinance. In 1986 the ILO and the Ministry of Labor and
 Manpower Development completed a project establishing an
 occupational health and safety factory inspection system.
 Employers in Tanzania are required to have liability
 insurance. According to Juwata, inspections are made and
 safety regulations are enforced.
 The minimum wage for government workers on the mainland was
 raised to $16.33 a month in the July budget presentation.
 Juwata then negotiated with the Association of Tanzania
 Employers and obtained a similar monthly minimum wage for
 nongovernment employees. This amount is not sufficient for a
 worker to sustain an adequate standard of living. Housing and
 transport allowances, food subsidies, and other benefits help,
 but government salaries at all levels are very low. Current
 economic conditions, a large civil service, and a government
 very short of resources all militate against a sharp rise in
 the minimum wage. There is no legal discrimination in wages
 on the basis of sex, but in practice discrimination occurs.
 Enforcement of these laws anl regulations can be erratic in a
 society where corruption has become a major problem and the
 functioning of government machinery is flawed. The vast
 majority of Tanzanians are subsistence farmers and are not
 affected by current government labor regulations and
 safeguards.
 
 
 379
