 TANZANIA
 The Tanzanian credo of governance and the leaders who
 shaped and implement it are philosophical descendants of
 the British humanist and socialist movements. They
 believe that the paramount objective of the state is to
 secure the basic economic and social well-being of the
 masses. While they do not trample on political rights,
 neither do they encourage the sort of political interplay
 which characterizes Western democracies. The government
 and, increasingly, the country's sole political party
 control the substance and tone of public debate on
 political issues. In many respects, however, Tanzanian
 society remains open. Through readers' letters to the
 press, parliamentary debates and personal encounters in
 the hundreds of bars and coffee houses throughout the
 country, the leadership is made aware of the people's
 concerns and complaints. While there have been docu-
 mented cases of violations of human rights in the past,
 there is evidence that such abuses have, over the past
 few years, declined in number and severity. Tanzanian
 leaders from the President on down have publicly and
 often committed themselves to ensuring fair, equal and
 humane treatment to the citizenry. Those few officials
 who breach these commitments are excoiated in the press,
 prosecuted in proceedings open to the public and widely
 reported by the media and, if found guilty, given stiff
 prison sentences.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 The Tanzanian government does not permit the use of
 torture by its police, security and prison officials,
 though there are reports that low-level -enforcement
 officers sometimes abuse detainees. Where there have
 been instances of torture, the victims are entitled to,
 and in some instances have exercised, the right to file
 criminal assault suits against alleged tormenters. In
 June 1980, six former police and security officers were
 sentenced to seven-year jail terms for having tortured a
 suspect in 1976. The fact that allegations of police
 brutality appear in the press from time to time is
 evidence that such practices are frowned upon officially.
 Disciplinary actions have been taken against police and
 security officials who have abused their positions- By
 law, a confession must be heard by a magistrate, and one
 obtained in any other way must be restated in court.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Tanzanian prisons are overcrowded and dietary and health
 standards are inadequate. These shortcomings reflect the
 general underdevelopment of the country as a whole and do
 not constitute a conscious attempt by the government to
 punish wrongdoers by depriving them of basic necessities.
 There is no evidence of discrimination against detainees
 on the bases of sex, social class, ethnic origin or
 religion.
 
 
 279
 c.   Disappearances
 The government does not always notify relatives or, in
 the cases of foreigners, consular representatives of
 arrests. In Tanzania communications are so poor that
 such notifications are difficult if not sometimes
 impossible. It is also likely that few police officials
 in the countryside even know of their obligations in this
 regard. There have been no reported cases of "permanent
 disappearance".
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Under the Preventive Detention Act of 1962, police and
 security officials can, with a written order from the
 President of the Republic, arrest and detain indefinitely
 any individual deemed dangerous to public order or national
 security. Such detainees have no recourse to the judicial
 system once the authorities produce a valid detention
 order before a magistrate. There have been cases, however,
 where officials could not or would not produce the
 required presidential order, and the courts have freed
 the detainees.
 There is no reliable estimate on the number of persons
 presently detained under the act. As of September 1980,
 at least sixteen Zanzibaris were in jail, without
 having been formally charged for allegedly attempting to
 oust the Zanzibar president (who is also the Vice Presi-
 dent of Taniania). Under the Act, a committee was
 established to oversee the interests and treatment of
 detainees. The committee, however, reportedly functions
 only sporadically.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal trials are open to the public and the more egre-
 gious cases receive wide play in the media. While an
 independent judiciary is constitutionally mandated,
 sources in the legal community, including some in the
 judiciary itself, have complained that the legal system
 is being corrupted through professional inducements and
 illegal monetary payments to officers of the courts. As
 1980 ended, such irregularities had not been documented.
 In all serious cases (defined as treason, murder and
 manslaughter) defendants are provided counsel. The
 Tanzania Law Association offers free assistance in other
 types of cases. Tanzanian lawyers have protested a
 government proposal which would, in effect, nationalize
 the legal profession. The legal profession argues that
 among other things such a move would deny litigants the
 right to choose legal counsel freely. The proposal has
 been postponed.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Search warrants are legally required in Tanzania. There
 are unverified reports that homes of suspected opponents
 of the government were subject to illegal searches in
 1980.
 
 
 280
 2.   Government   Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Tanzania is among the poorest countries in the world
 with an estimated per capita annual income of less than
 t$250.    The government continued in 1980 to pursue an
 egalitarian, socialist model of development aimed at
 expanding public services to meet the basic needs of
 Tanzania's largely rural population. About $800 million
 is budgeted for development programs in 1981,some 38
 percent of the total budget.
 The economy overall has suffered the strains of worldwide
 inflation, the rise in energy costs, unstable prices and
 declining production in the export sector, and decreases
 in the output of manufactured products, due mainly to an
 inability to finance imports of raw materials and spare
 parts. Tanzania has been affected by serious drought
 this past year. Severe shortages have been averted only
 by timely assistance from grain-surplus countries,
 including the United States. The government is committed
 to improving the dietary standards of the population and
 has undertaken, often with foreign assistancei ambitious
 programs in mother and child feeding and public education
 in nutrition.
 The government has also continued efforts to expand educa-
 tion and health facilities. Nearly 3.5 million pupils
 are attending schools and another 42,000 are enrolled in
 government-run secondary institutions. Adult education
 programs have been organized and are major factors in
 Tanzania's relatively high (60-70 percent) literacy rate.
 Medical care is accorded high priority by the government
 and, though programs suffer shortages of resources and
 trained personnel, basic health standards are improving,
 particularly in the countryside. Government health
 efforts concentrated on the provision of basic health
 services through village level dispensaries. Community
 health programs designed to provide safe drinking water,
 adequate sanitation and to eradicate disease-bearing
 pests are also important, though malaria, bilharzia,
 cholera and various enteritic diseases are still prevalent.
 Population data collected in 1978 showed a growth rate of
 about three percent yearly. Life expectancy is reckoned
 to be about 47 years and the infant mortality rate is
 estimated at 150 per 1,000 live births. Ninety percent
 of Tanzania's population lives in rural areas. In urban
 centers, such as Dar es Salaam, unemployment and under-
 employment are serious, though no figures are available to
 demonstrate the magnitudes of these problems.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Public criticism of Tanzania's commit'ment to socialist
 methods and goals continued to be discouraged strongly
 but complaints about specific government actions
 
 
 281
 frequently appear in letters to local newspapers.
 Private criticism is free with little apparent attempt by
 the government or party to limit it. Inducements to
 conform are economic and social in nature and, in recent
 years at least, do not include physical coercion. The
 government exercises de facto control over the media,
 which present a single point of view on important policy
 matters. Foreign books and periodicals do circulate but
 few Tanzanians can afford them. Although freedom of
 inquiry is officially guaranteed, most academicians, who
 depend on the government-run education system for their
 livelihoods, are cautious in their selection and treat-
 ment of socio-political topics.
 All legal political gatherings are organized by the
 country's sole political party, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 (revolutionary party, or CCH). The government controls
 union activity through its umbrella labor federation, and
 strikes are prohibited by law. Few professional associa-
 tions exist and those that do are careful to stay clear
 of political entanglements.
 Tanzania observes complete freedom of religion. The
 majority of those persons claiming membership in an
 organized religion are Christian but a significant
 minority, about thirty percent, are adherents of Islam.
 There appear to be no advantages or disadvantages associ-
 ated with membership in any faith or sect.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The government places no restriction on travel within
 the country, nor are there any formal limitations on
 the freedom of residence. Through economic inducements
 and efforts to improve life in the countryside, the
 government does try to discourage flight to urban areas.
 The "villagization program," under which ruralites were
 compelled, sometimes physically, to move to permanent
 settlements, was completed in 1978. Some six million
 people were moved under this program. Some residents
 of new villages have since chosen to return to their
 original lands, apparently without government attempts
 to interfere.
 Tanzania does not infringe upon the right of voluntary
 repatriation. Passports are required for foreign travel
 and, reportedly, are difficult to obtain, but government
 policy in this regard is dictated more by a desire to
 husband scarce foreign exchange than a policy of limiting
 travel per se. Emigration is not otherwise restricted.
 Tanzania is presently home to about 160,000 refugees,
 75 percent of whom are from Burundi. There are also
 about 36,000 Rwandan refugees to whom Tanzania has
 offered citizenship. Some 13,000 Ugandans who resided in
 Tanzania have returned home since the downfall of Idi
 Amin. With support from the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and several private voluntary organ-
 izations, the government has given these people a standard
 of living at least comparable to that enjoyed by Tanzani-
 ans. There is no evidence of discrimination against
 women or other groups in the implementation of government
 policies on refugees, travel or emigration.
 
 
 282
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political activity is permissible only within the apparatus
 of the CCM. There are no overt opposition groups.
 One-half of the parliament is elected under a system of
 universal adult suffrage. The remainder is appointed by
 the government and by various mass organizations associ-
 ated with the CCM. While any citizen is free to enter
 the primary contests, the national executive committee
 of the CCM chooses the two candidates for each constitu-
 ency who will compete in the general election. Voters
 frequently register their dissatisfaction with the Nins"
 by sending incumbents down to defeat. Tanzanian voters
 threw out of office nearly half of the 84 members of
 parliament who stood for election in 1980. The turnover
 in parliamentary seats may reflect popular disenchantment
 with current economic conditions, and with the government's
 inability, so far, to bring about changes for the better.
 The President of the Republic is also directly elected
 although, in the four elections since independence, Julius
 Nyerere has been the only candidate for the post.
 Women have been encouraged to take an increasingly
 active role in politics and government. Using its powers
 of direct appointment, the government has seen to it
 that about 20 percent of the membership of village
 councils is female. There are two female members of the
 cabinet and four women on the thirty-member central
 committee of the CCM. Women still are under-represented
 in proportion to their numbers at all levels of the
 system, for traditions, customs and attitudes which
 discriminate against women remain strong.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of-Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 Tanzania has not been asked to accede to an investigation
 by any recognized human rights organization.
 
 
 283
 UoS.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: TANZANIA
 1978     1979     1980
 -----      -------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTALe..         25.2     24.0     25.2
 LOANS......o......          6.2      0.0      7.5
 GRANTS.............         19.0     24.0     17.7
 A.AID ....     ....,*.        17.2     21.4     14.9
 LOANS...........,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..........         17.2     21.4     14.9
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.) .           0.0      0.0      010
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEo.o..            8.0      2.4     10.0
 LOANSo........    .         6.2      0.0      7.5
 GRANTS.............          1.8      2.4      2.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL.......            6.2      0.0      T.5
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS ....          6.2      0.0      7.5
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR...o           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ......           1.8      2.4      2.5
 E*RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      1.2      0.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....           1.8      1.2      1.9-
 CoOTHER ECON. ASSISTo..          0.0      002      0.3
 LOANS..o..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTSe............          0.0      0.2      0.3
 CONTR. TO IFI.o,           0.0      0.0      000
 PEACE.CORPS.oo,,           0.0      0.2      0.3
 OTHER ...........          0.0      0.0      000
 II.MIL. ASSiST-TOTAL,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS* .. ... 9o.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.........Ta...         0.0      0.0      00
 A.MAP GRANTS   T. a..         00      0.0      00
 B.CREDIT SAL-ES-FMSoooo         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIo.ED.TRNG,,,           000      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS.9tOCKee.          000      000      00
 E.OTHER GRANTS ....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL ..         25.2     24.0     25.2
 LOANS.oi..* ......           6.2      0,0      7.5
 GRANTS- ............       19.0     24o.     17.7
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS..........         13.8      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         13.8      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ----------------------------------- --------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980      1946-80
 --------------- i-----------------m------m---------
 TOTAL........    13.0    .180.6    148.9   1029.5
 IBRD              40.0     66.0       0.0    318.2
 IFC                1.8       1.5      0.0      7.2
 IDA               88.S     76.5'    134.5    563.3
 IDB                0.0       0.0     "0.0      0.0
 ADB                0,0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFD8               5.8       8.5      9.7     53.2
 UNDP               6.2      10.8      4,7     55.1
 OTHER-UN           o.7      12,3      0.0     2T5
 EEC                 0.0      5.0      0.0      5.0
 
 
 284
