 TANZANIA
 The United Republic of Tanzania amended its Constitution in 1992 to become a
 multiparty state; however, pending national elections scheduled for 1995, the ruling
 Chama Cha Mapinduzi Party (CCM) continued to control the Government. Presi-
 dent Mwinyi was reelected to a final 5-year term as President of the Republic in
 October 1990. The Government lays down fundamental political policies and mon-
 itors their implementation, including steps toward national multiparty elections
 scheduled for 1995. The islands of Zanzibar are integrated into the United Repub-
 lic's governmental and party structure, but the Zanzibar government exercises a
 considerable degree of autonomy. There has been growing debate about the viability
 of the current Union structure (see Section 3).
 The police have primary responsibility for maintaining law and order. They are
 supported by a variety of citizens' anticrime patrols known as "Sungusungu" in
 ur an areas and "Wasalama" in rural zones. The police occasionally beat suspects
 during interrogations. Likewise, there have been instances when the citizens'
 anticrime groups have used excessive measures while carrying out their tasks.
 Agriculture provides 90 percent of employment. Cotton, coffee, sisal, tea, and
 gemstones account for most export earnings. The industrial sector is one of the
 smallest in Africa. Economic reforms undertaken since 1986, including liberalization
 of agricultural policy, the beginning of privatization of state-owned enterprises, re-
 scheduling of foreign debt payments, and the freeing of the currency exchange rate,
 
 
 have helped stimulate economic growth--estimated at 3 to 4 percent in 1993-for
 the seventh straight year.
 While the Government permitted the registration of 11 new political parties and
 allowed increased freedom of speech andpress, it continued to restrict human
 rights. Moreover, the Government attempted to control the pace and direction of po-
 litical change, purportedly to ensure social stability. In the process it used short-
 term detentions of some political opponents, engaged in several intrusive actions
 against the independent press, sometimes interfered with the right of peaceful as-
 sembly, and continued to impinge on the citizens' right of privacy and free move-
 ment. Although the government held no known political detainees or prisoners at
 year's end, it had not rectified a variety of problems in the judicial system which,
 in their totality, amounted to the denial of expeditious justice and faii trial for
 many citizens. During the year, religious tensions heightened with the public ap-
 pearance of Muslim fundamentalism. Discrimination and violence against women
 remain severe and widespread, and offenders were not usually prosecuted.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There was one extrajudicial killing
 in 1993. On January 31, following a confrontation on the island of Pemba over the
 removal of a flag of the opposition party Civic United Front (CUF), a local policeman
 shot and killed one party member and injured another. Investigating what was
 widely viewed as an unfortunate local incident, a police commission recommended
 the policeman be charged with murder without intent and with causing injury to
 another person. CUF leaders filed separate charges against another policeman in-
 volved. Both cases were still pending in the courts at the end of the year.
 Spontaneous mob "justice" for suspected criminals also remained a common prac-
 tice throughout the country. For example, in May a mob in Dar es Salaam killed
 three armed men and injured a fourth following a gas station robbery. No one was
 arrested.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 The Constitution prohibits the use of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment,
 and government officials condemn these practices whenever cases become public. In
 practice, however, the police occasionally threaten and mistreat suspected criminals
 during and after their apprehension. Officials are seldom tried for such abuses when
 they occur.
 The People's Militia Laws, as amended by Parliament in 1989, bestow quasi-legal
 status on the traditional Sungusungu and Wasalama village and neighborhood
 anticrime groups. The press in April reported that eight members of a Sungusungu
 patrol in Mwanza were imprisoned for beating a teacher accused of misuse of school
 property. The widespread belief in witchcraft has led, in a few instances, to the kill-
 ing of alleged witches by their "victims," aggrieved relatives, or mobs. While govern-
 ment authorities attempt to discourage such practices, they rarely prosecute partici-
 pants.
 Although there is no independent monitoring, prison conditions generally reflect
 Tanzania s depressed economic conditions. There has been little improvement over
 the past year. Government-furnished food and medical care are limited in quantity
 and quality, leading to outbreaks of serious diseases such as cholera and malaria
 that have reportedly led to some deaths. On the other hand, prisoners' families usu-
 all may visit and attend to feeding and health care needs.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Criminal Procedure Code, amended
 in 1985, requires that a person arrested for a crime, other than a national security
 offense under the Preventive Detention Act, be charged before a magistrate within
 24 hours and be permitted the right to defense counsel. These amendments also re-
 stricted the right to bail, reduced the number of bailable offenses, limited judges'
 discretion in granting bail, and imposed strict conditions on freedom of movement
 and association when bail is granted. An average case still takes 2 to 3 years or
 Ion er to come to trial, with the defendant incarcerated under poor conditions.
 inder the Preventive Detention Act, the President of Tanzania may order the ar-
 rest and indefinite detention without bail of any person considered dangerous to the
 public order or national security. The act was amended in 1985 to require the Gov-
 ernment to release detainees within 15 days of detention or inform them of the rea-
 son for their detention. The detainee was also allowed to challenge the grounds for
 detention at 90-day intervals. Despite a landmark ruling by the Court of Appeal in
 1991 that the Preventive Detention Act could not be used to deny bail to persons
 
 
 293
 not considered dangerous to society, the Government has still not introduced correc-
 tive legislation.
 Arbitrary arrest in criminal cases occurs. For example, police occasionally arrest
 innocent relatives of criminal suspects, holding them in custody without charge for
 as long as several years in efforts to force the suspects to turn themselves in. Such
 relatives who manage to get their case before a judge are usually set free, only to
 be immediately rearrestec when they leave the courtroom. The legal community ap-
 pears helpless to correct these abuses. Local lawyers estimate the number of such
 cases at several hundred.
 The Government has additional broad detention powers under the Regions and
 Regional Commissioners Act and the Area Commissioners Act of 1962. These acts
 permit regional and district commissioners to arrest and detain for 48 hours persons
 who may "disturb public tranquility. " There are credible reports that these powers
 continued to be abused to detain political "troublemakers," citizens who question au-
 thority, or those who resist forced contributions to the ruling party.
 In 1993 the Government sometimes used its legal powers to harass and intimidate
 political opponents. The authorities arrested opposition speakers who were particu-
 rly critical of the Government during public rallies for using "abusive" language.
 After a few hours or days in jail, the Government routinely dropped charges. In
 June the Government arrested three members of the unregistered Democratic Party
 and charged them with inciting Muhimbili Medical Center nurses to demonstrate
 for payment of benefits. It also arrested and charged five others with unlawful as-
 sembly and assaulting a police officer. While members of opposition parties have
 been harassed by security officials, none was detained under the Preventive Deten-
 tion Act in 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7Trial.-Weaknesses in the judicial system and govern-
 ment interference have the effect of denying expeditious and fair justice to many
 citizens (see below).
 The legal system in Tanzania is based on the British model, with modifications
 to accommodate customary and Islamic law in civil cases. Criminal trials are open
 to the public and the press; courts must give reasons on the record for holding secret
 proceedings. Criminal defendants have the right of appeal. Military courts do not
 try civilians, and there are no security courts. Defendants in civil and military
 courts may appeal decisions to the High Court and the Court of Appeal.
 Zanzibar's court system generally parallels the mainland's legal system but re-
 tains Islamic courts to handle Muslim family cases such as divorce, child custody,
 and inheritance. Cases concerning Zanzibar constitutional issues are heard only in
 Zanzibar's courts. All other cases may be appealed to the Court of Appeal of the
 United Republic of Tanzania.
 While the judiciary is constitutionally mandated to operate independently from
 the executive branch, the Government can influence cases. For example, judges who
 render decisions unpopular with senior police or government officials may be subject
 to pressures or may be transferred and reassigned. Government officials also some-
 times ignore judicial rulings.
 In addition to this interference, the judicial bureaucracy is widely criticized as in-
 efficient and corrupt, brining into question the defendants' ability to receive a fair
 and expeditious trial in a  cases. There are reports of prisoners, who could not pay
 bribes to police and court officials, waiting several years for trial. Although the Gov-
 ernment initiated efforts as early as 1991 to highlight judicial corruption, there has
 been little evident progress in correcting this situation.
 The Court of Appeal dismissed the celebrated case of former Zanzibar Chief Min-
 ister Seif Sharif Hamad. He had been released from detention on November 20,
 1991, and allowed in late 1992 to travel abroad and engage in political activities.
 There were no known cases of political detainees or prisoners held at year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 State continued to interfere with these rights, although the Government began to
 disassociate the intrusive, neighborhood watch "10-cell" function from the CCM
 Party. The CCM has historically penetrated all levels of society through local cells,
 varying in size from single-family homes to large apartment buildings and contain-
 ing from 10 to 200 persons. Unpaid party officials served as 10-cell leaders with au-
 thurity to resolve problems at the grassroots level and to report to authorities any
 suspicious behavior, event, or noncompliance with compulsory night patrol service
 in the neighborhood. In 1993 the 10-cell function continued in some areas but was
 weakened in others as leadership was transferred to individuals elected in recent
 "grassroots elections." The CCM was withdrawn from most public establishments,
 and the military was forbidden to belong to any political organization.
 CCM membership is voluntary and is estimated at approximately 3 million card-
 holders. While in the past CCM membership had been necessary for advancement
 
 
 294
 in political and other areas, the importance of such membership is beginning to
 wane.
 The Criminal Procedure Act of 1985 authorizes police officials (including the civil-
 ian anticrime units) to issue search warrants; owever, the act also authorizes
 searches of persons and premises without a warrant if necessary to prevent the loss
 or destruction of evidence connected with an offense or if circumstances are serious
 and urgent. In practice, warrants are rarely requested, and the police and others
 search private homes and business establishments at will. Reportedly, the security
 services monitor the telephones and correspondence of some citizens and of selected
 foreign residents.
 Compulsory participation in local civilian anticrime groups continued in 1993 in
 some areas."Historically, these groups have operated only in rural areas to combat
 cattle rustling and other criminal activity. Peasant farmers are no longer required
 to join agricultural cooperative societies controlled by the ruling CCM party. The
 1992 Cooperative Act eliminated government interference in cooperative formation,
 and cooperatives now serve economic rather than political ends. Members elect their
 own officers. Various ordinances allow the authorities to remove "undesirable" or
 destitute persons from one area to their prior place of residence or origin if employ-
 ment is not available for them (see Sections 2.d. and 6.c.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for
 under the Constitution. Political activists openly criticized the Government and rul-
 ing party in public forums, although there were a few incidents in which vociferous
 opponents were briefly detained, in some cases allegedly for using "abusive" lan-
 guage (see Section 2.d.). While police were often seen at political rallies, their pres-
 ence was principally for crowd-control purposes.
 The single most important medium, radio, remained under government control,
 with access for the nascent political parties restricted to one or two weekly pro-
 grams. On occasion, the Government refused opposition political parties permission
 to announce public meetings or purchase advertisement time on the radio. The Gov-
 ernment had not formulated a public policy on access to government-controlled
 media by political parties or nongovernmental organizations by the end of the year,
 although political party leaders and Radio Tanzania officials discussed the issue in
 July. During 1993 the Government laid the groundwork for a reorganization of r.dio
 and the licensing of private radio and television stations, culminating in the inau-
 guration of the National Broadcasting Commission on November 15.
 Daily papers available at the end of 1993 were the CCM-owned Swahili-language
 Uhuru (circulation 80,000)- the government English-lan age Daily News (circula-
 tion 50,000); and a third, the private Swahili-langnage Majira with an initial print-
 ing run of 50,000 copies. A large number of other English- and Swahili-language pri-
 vate newspapers and magazines appeared regularly. These newspapers were also
 available in Zanzibar, where the only local journal was a Ministry of Information
 bimonthly. The official media generally reflect the CCM's ideological line, publiciz-
 ing and defending the Government's programs with guidance from the Ministry of
 Information. Editorials are often written by senior government officials. Although
 there is no formal censorship, the official media still exercise considerable self-cen-
 sorship.
 Numerous foreign newspapers and magazines were widely available. Although the
 local newspapers and magazines varied widely in quality, about half formed the core
 of a serious, free, independent press. They have been largely critical of the Govern-
 ment and have given extensive coverage to opposition parties. The Government at-
 tempted to curb the critical independent press with relatively little success. The In-
 formation Ministry revoked the licenses of two newspapers in January, ostensibly
 for printing obscene articles. This action was broadly criticized as arbitrary, and the
 owners of one of the newspapers had an appeal pending in the courts at year's end.
 The Government also proposed legislation to establish a press council, ostensibly
 to handle complaints against the press and to uphold standards of professionalism
 in journalism. This bil[ was harshly criticized by the media, some academics, and
 parliamentarians as a thinly veiled attempt to control the newly independent media.
 The bill included provision for licensing journalists as well as a binding code of eth-
 ics. The negative response was so overwhelming that the Government withdrew the
 bill.
 Academic freedom exists in theory, although most academics are employed in gov-
 ernment institutions and hesitate to promote sensitive subjects in their classrooms.
 On the other hand, in publications and public appearances, they have been out-
 spoken and frank in their views, whether critical or supportive of government poli-
 cies.
 
 
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although Tanzanians enjoyed
 the right freely to discuss political alternatives, local government officials sometimes
 used existing laws to impede freedom of assembly and association. In order to pre-
 serve public order, the Government warned political opponents against employing
 "abusive" or "inciting" language at public rallies. Permits must be obtained from the
 Government for any public meeting. The responses to requests of o psition parties
 for permits to hold meetings were at times issued too late to publcie the rallies
 or too restrictive in terms of approved times and locations. Some requests were ex-
 plicitly denied.
 The registrar of political parties has sole authority for approving or denying the
 registration of any political party and is responsible for enforcing strict regulations
 on registered or provisionally registered parties. Electoral amenments approved in
 1992 prohibit independent candidates, require standing Members of Parliament to
 resign if the join another political party, require all political parties to support the
 Union with ianzibar, and forbid parties based on ethnic, regional, or religious afili-
 ation. Parties granted provisional registration may hold public meetings and recruit
 members. They have 6 months to submit lists of at least 200 members from 10 of
 the country's 25 regions, including 2 regions of the islands, in order to secure full
 registration and to be eligible to field candidates for election. Nonregistered parties
 are prohibited from holding meetings, recruiting members, or fielding candidates.
 The most prominent unregistered party was Reverend Christopher Mtikila's
 Democratic Party which advocates the expulsion from the mainland of minorities
 and the establishment of a Christian state. The authorities arrested Mtikila and
 four others in January and charged them with unlawful assembly, breach of the
 peace, sedition, and using abusive language against CCM leaders and the Govern-
 ment when a public rally in Dar es Salaam prom pted a riot. They were released
 on bail 2 weeks later and hearings continued throughout the year. In September the
 Government held Mtikila another 2 weeks and charged him with intimidation and
 sedition against the Government after he called for the expulsion of President
 Mwinyi and other Zanzibari leaders from the mainland and issued veiled threats
 against their safety. He has since been released.
 In May the entire undergraduate student body of Sokoine University was sus-
 pended after students barred university officials from entering the administration
 building in a protest over health and related services. All students were reinstated
 by the end of the year.
 Under the Societies Ordinance, the Ministry of Home Affairs must approve any
 new association. A number of professional, business, legal, and medical associations
 exist but have only begun to address political topics. Several nongovernmental oroa-
 nizations were formed within the last 2 years to address the concerns of families,
 women, and children.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Freedom of religion is provided for in the Constitution
 and is respected in practice, to the extent that public order and safety are not jeop-
 ardized. A rise in religious tension and violence (see Section 2.b. and below) did not
 impinge on freedom of worship, but raised public concerns for the future of religious
 tolerance. Missionaries are allowed to enter the country freely to proselytize, and
 Tanzanians are allowed to go abroad for pilgrimages and other religious purposes.
 Since 1988 the Governmenthas allowed the Jehovah's Witnesses, who were banned
 in Tanzania for many years, to hold services, to register as an organization, and to
 proselytize.
 In April the Government arrested 38 alleged Muslim fundamentalists and charged
 them with destroying several pork butcheries in Dar es Salaam. A subsequent dem-
 onstration during a court hearing led to the arrest of at least 12 Muslim sympathiz-
 ers for illegal assembly. The authorities charged two Muslim leaders, SheikhYahya
 Hussein and Sheikh Kassim Jumaa Khamis, with instigating the violence, and
 Kassim also faced charges of denigrating the beliefs of a religious group and two
 counts of sedition. They released Sheikh Kassim on bail and dropped charges
 against most of the accused in June. The Government also banned Balukta, the
 Koran Reading Association, for its alleged involvement in the incidents and arrested
 Sheikh Kassim in August, charging him with four additional counts of sedition. He
 was released on bail and awaited trial at year's end. In April the Government ex-
 pelled three Sudanese Muslim teachers from the country for allegedly inciting reli-
 gious hatred and urging the establishment of an Islamic state.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Apart from the Zanzibari requirement for documentation for travel be-
 tween Zanzibar and the mainland, short-term travel generally is not restricted with-
 in Tanzania, but citizens must follow national employment directives stipulating the
 nature of employment and location of residence. The Human Resources Deployment
 Act of 1983 requires local governments to ensure that every resident within their
 
 
 296
 areas of jurizdiction engages in productive and lawful employment. Those not so em-
 ployed are subject to transfer to another area where employment is available. For
 years city dwellers unable to show proof of employment during police checks have
 been forced to return to rural areas as the Government has sought to control in-
 creasing pressure on urban resources. In early 1993, the Dar es Salaam police
 shipped many of the city's beggars back to their home villages. In April Zanzibar
 President Salmin Amour ordered an alleged antigovernment activist to move to his
 ancestral village on the mainland.
 Mostly due to bureaucratic inefficiency, passports for foreign travel can be difficult
 to obtain. Former exiled opposition figure Oscar Kambona was finally issued a pass-
 port in August after an unusually long investigation into his claim to Tanzanian
 citizenship. The delay in his case appeared excessive and possibly was politically
 motivated. The authorities require citizens to obtain central bank and tax office
 clearances in order to buy airline tickets and subject those planning to travel or
 emigrate to intense scrutiny. Tanzanians who leave the country without authoriza-
 tion are subject to prosecution on their return. The Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Act
 empowers the courts to try Tanzanians who commit offenses outside the country.
 Although it is legally possible for citizenship to be revoked, there have been no re-
 ports that this has been done in recent years. Parliament passed a bill in 1986 that
 required the registration and identification of everyone over the age of 10 who re-
 sides in Tanzania, apparently in an effort to control foreign workers, but it has not
 been implemented.
 Tanzania has a liberal policy towards refugees and displaced persons. Following
 an attempted coup and ethnic conflict in Burundi in October, Tanzania received an
 influx of over 300,000 Burundian refugees. Tanzania also continued to host some
 292,000 refugees from earlier influxes from Burundi, Rwanda, and Mozambique. In
 1993, prior to the Burundi coup attempt, several thousand Burundian refugees vol-
 untarily repatriated.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 A multiparty political system was officially introduced in 1992 after 28 years of
 one-party rule. Pending local elections postponed until 1994 with the concurrence
 of the opposition parties and national elections in 1995, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi
 Party remains the sole party in the Government. In April all but one opposition
 party boycotted a parliamentary by-election in Zanzibar, ostensibly to protest the
 absence of further constitutional and legislative reforms they believed necessary for
 free and fair competition. However, most opposition parties have indicated that they
 will participate in two parliamentary by-elections in early 1994. In 1992 the Con-
 stitution was amended to allow for the impeachment of the President and votes of
 no confidence in the Prime Minister.
 By the end of the year, there were 11 newly registered political parties, with the
 main potential opposition to the CCM found in James Mapalala's Civic United
 Front, two factions of the Union for Multiparty Democracy headed by Christopher
 Kassanga Tumbo and Chief Abdullah Fundikira, Edwin Mtei's Party for Democracy
 and Development, and Mabere Marando's National Conference for Construction and
 Reform.
 Growing political discussion has brought to the surface open controversy over the
 issue of the Union between Zanzibar and the mainland, leading to mainland par-
 liamentarians engaging in an unprecedented questioning of government policy.
 Many mainlanders have resented Zanzibar's disproportionate representation and in-
 fluence in state institutions, heightened by Zanzibar's decision in late 1992 to join
 the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). Pressure from mainland par-
 liamentarians forced Zanzibar to withdraw from the OIC in August, and at the
 same time Parliament approved a motion calling for the establishment of a separate
 mainland government of Tanganyika. The Union Government agreed to solicit pub-
 lic opinion on possible modalities to establish a separate Tanganyika government
 and report its recommendations by April 1995. Other issues debated in the 1993
 budget session by Parliament broke new ground in their substance and tone.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics and gov-
 ernment. However, in practice the number remains small, largely due to cultural
 impediments to the schooling of women, as well as to the economic exigencies of
 raising large families and engaging in subsistence agriculture (see Section 5.a.). Fe-
 males comprise 28 of 248 members of the National Assembly and 3 of 25 cabinet
 members.
 
 
 297
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local groups devoted solely to monitoring human rights abuses began to form in
 1993 but had not established effective procedures to address specific cases of human
 rights abuse. While the Government continues to resent outside inquiries into al-
 leged violations of human rights, it has allowed visits by representatives of inter-
 national human rights groups in the past. In August the Government announced
 plans to hold tribunals or conferences throughout the country on human rights
 abuses, focusing specifically on abuses against women and children. The Tanzanian
 women's media association sponsored such a workshop in November.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on nationality, tribe, origin, polit-
 ical affiliation, color, religion, or lifestyle. Discrimination based on sex, age, or dis-
 ability is not specifically prohibited by law but is publicly discouraged in official
 statements.
 Women.-Both party and government constitutions endorse equality in the work-
 place. Nevertheless, strong traditional norms still divide labor along gender lines
 and place women in a subordinate position. For example women face widespread
 discrimination in access to educational opportunities, and in the countryside they
 are relegated largely to farming and raising children. Female students who become
 pregnant are dismissed from school. Under Zanzibari law, unmarried women under
 the age of 21 who become pregnant are subject to 2 years' imprisonment, although
 this has not been enforced for several years.
 Progress on women's rights has been more noticeable in urban areas, where tradi-
 tional values are weaker, but even there and in the public sector, which employs
 80 percent of the salaried labor force, certain statutes restrict their access to some
 jobs or their hours of employment. According to 1988 statistics, only 3 percent of
 economically active women are engaged in the wage and salary employment sector,
 and women are still concentrated in the traditional fields of nursing, teaching, cleri-
 cal and related jobs.
 T'he overall situation for women is even less favorable in heavily Muslim Zanzi-
 bar. Women there and in many parts of the mainland face discriminatory restric-
 tions on inheritance and ownership of property because of concessions by the Gov-
 ernment and courts to customary and Islamic law. While provisions of the Marriage
 Act provide for certain inheritance and property rights for women, application of
 customary, Islamic, or statutory law depends on the lifestyle and stated intentions
 of the male head of household. The courts have thus upheld discriminatory inherit-
 ance claims, primarily in rural areas.
 Violence against women is widespread. Legal remedies exist but in practice are
 difficult to obtain. Traditional customs subordinating women remain strong in both
 urban and rural areas, and often local magistrates uphold them. The husband has
 a free hand to treat his wife as he wishes, and wife-beating occurs at all levels of
 society. Cultural, family, and social pressure prevents many women from reporting
 abuses to authorities. Government officials frequently make public statements de-
 crying such abuses, but rarely is action taken against perpetrators. Several non-
 governmental organizations provide counseling and education programs on women's
 rights issues, particularly sexual harassment and molestation.
 Children.-Tanzania has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and
 has made a number of constructive efforts to address socioeconomic conditions that
 adversely affect children. For example, the Government has allotted a plot to erect
 an edifice to house street children near Dar es Salaam and has worked closely with
 churches and nongovernmental organizations to assess the well-being of orphans
 and neglected children. The ruling party's National Policy for Children and Young
 Persons Welfare has exerted continuing pressure for commitment of public policy
 to welfare and advocacy of children's rights. However government funding of pro-
 grams for children is only 2.3 percent of government development expenditure, and
 nongovernmental organizations that could support governmental efforts to provide
 services and protection to children are only just emerging.
 Although oflicially discouraged by the Government, female genital mutilation (cir-
 cumcision) is still performed at an early age in approximately 20 of the country's
 130 mainland ethnic groups. Government officials have called for changes in cus-
 toms which adversely affect -females, but no legislation has been introduced that
 would specifically restrict the practice of female circumcision. Seminars sponsored
 by various governmental and nongovernmental organizations are regularly held in
 an attempt to educate the public on the dangers of these and other traditional prac-
 
 
 298
 tices. Health authorities state the practice is declining, but nongovernmental
 sources maintain it is on the rise, especially in Central Tanzania.
 National /Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Barabaig people of Central Tanzania
 have been subject for many years to government discrimination. The Barabaig and
 their attorneys maintain that the Government has illegally dispossessed them of
 their traditional lands in order to implement a government-run agricultural project.
 A probe team established to investigate Barabaig complaints made over 30 rec-
 ommendations in May but supported continuation of the agricultural project that
 prompted the conflicts. The probe team confirmed cases of violence against the
 Barabaig and noted that several cases were still pending in court.
 The Asian community has declined by 50 percent in the past decade to about
 44,000. The Asians have been regarded with considerable antipathy by many Afri-
 can Tanzanians since they are a business-oriented minority in a recently Socialist
 society, since they have disproportionate influence in key sectors of the economy,
 and since they have remained culturally and economically exclusive. There are, how-
 ever, no laws or official policies discriminating against them. As the Government
 places greater emphasis on market-oriented economic policies and privatization, con-
 cerns regarding Asian economic dominance have increased. This has led to demands
 for policies of indigenization" to ensure that privatization does not increase Asian
 economic predominance at the expense of the African population. Several Asians
 were attacked, robbed, and injured in Dar es Salaam in April after Democratic
 Party leaders vociferously denounced nonindigenous businessmen during a public
 rally. There is a similar but smaller Arab community.
 Religious Minorities.-As a consequence of colonial and postindependence admin-
 istration, which refused to recognize the traditional mosque schools, there are sig-
 nificant disadvantages for the Muslim community in educational achievement,
 prominence in civil service and government, and in business success, with resulting
 widespread Muslim resentment of the perceived unfair advantages enjoyed by
 Christians. Christians, in turn, have been critical of what they perceive as undue
 favoritism  accorded to Muslims in appointments, jobs, and scholarships by the
 President, who is a Muslim. Some leaders in both camps appear to be playing up
 imbalances, which reflect past historical circumstances rather then deli berate dis-
 crimination. In fact, there does not at present appear to be any serious problem of
 discrimination on account of religion in access to employment or educational opor-
 tunities. Muslim parents, however, especially in rural areas, often do not send t eir
 daughters to school because of a traditional belief that education is unnecessary or
 even detrimental for women.
 People with Disabilities.-Physically disabled individuals are effectively restricted
 in access to education, employment, and provision of other state services due to
 hysical barriers, which are not legally prohibited, and limited funding for special
 acilities and programs.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers do not have the right to form or join organi-
 zations of their own choice. At the end of 1993, there was still onl one abor union
 organization, the Organization of Tanzania Trade Unions (OTTU), to which all
 unionized workers belong. A subgrouping of teachers (Chakiwata) negotiated an ar-
 rangement to operate independently of OTTU in 1993. And in November, the Tanza-
 nia Teacher's Union (known as CWT in Swahili) was registered. This union exists
 only on paper pending union elections in early 1994.
 The OTTU is nearing the end of a 3-year restructuring period which will cul-
 minate in union general elections in 1994. The purpose of the restructuring is to
 enable union workers to elect new leaders who have not been "prequalified" by the
 ruling party and to reshape the organization as an umbrella organization presiding
 over a federation of independent unions. The initial steps taken thus far have been
 to make the OTTU legally separate from the ruling party. However, the new Labor
 Law which accomplished this also mandated that all union labor must be under the
 OTTU and permits the President of Tanzania to disband any member union of the
 OTTU at his discretion.
 While the OTTU is no longer considered to be a mass organization of the CCM
 party, it has pledged continued affiliation to the CCM, and most of its officials are
 current or former CCM officers. The OTU, like its predecessor, JUWATA, rep-
 resents approximately 60 percent of the workers in industry and government, but
 it has little influence on labor policy. Overall, roughly 25 percent of Tanzania's 2
 million wage earners are organized. All workers, including those classified as "es-
 sential" service workers, are permitted to join OTTU, but "essential" workers are
 not permitted to strike.
 
 
 299
 Workers have the legal right to strike only after complicated and protracted medi-
 ation and conciliation procedures leading ultimately to the Industrial Court. The In-
 dustrial Court receives direction from the Minister of Labor and Youth Develop-
 ment. If the OTTU is not satisfied with the decision of the Industrial Court, it can
 then conduct a legal strike. These procedures can prolong a dispute for months
 without resolving it. Pending a resolution, frustrated workers often stage im-
 promptu wildcat strikes and walkouts. Although most strikes are in effect illegal
 there were no legal strikes in 1993), there were several wildcat strikes, notably in
 the railway sector, and a number of managers were locked out of company premises
 by workers over labor disputes. There are no laws prohibiting retribution against
 legal strikers. However, penalties are seldom, if ever, imposel against even iegal
 strikers, and there were no cases of retribution against strikin workers in 1993.
 The d TTU continued JUWATA's policy of limiting its international affiliations to
 rein ad pAfrican trade union organizations.
 Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law but limitd to the private sector. Wages for employees of the Govern-
 ment and state-owned organizations, which account for the bulk of the salaried
 labor force have routinely been set by the Government. However, the Ministry of
 Labor established a board to review and regulate wage rates which included rep-
 resentatives of the Government, trade unions, and employers' organizations.
 Although the OTTU may negotiate on behalf of most private sector employees
 with the Association of Tanzania Employers, collective agreements must be submit-
 ted to the Industrial Court for approval. The International Labor Organization (ILO)
 has observed that these provisions are not in conformity with 1LO Convention 98
 on collective bargaining and the right to organize. Tanzania's Security of Employ-
 ment Act of 1964 prohibits discriminatory activities by an employer against union
 members. Employers found guilty of antiunion activities are legally required to rein-
 state workers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 labor. However, again in 1993 the ILO observed that provisions of various Tanza-
 nian laws are incompatible with ILO Conventions 29 and 105 on forced labor. Spe-
 cifically, the Human Resources Deployment Act (1983) requires every local govern-
 ment authority to ensure that able-bodied persons over 15 years of age not in school
 engge in productive or other lawful employment. As in previous years, police offi-
 cials rounded up beggars and street people and returned them to their home vil-
 lages. In some rural areas, ordinary villagers are still obligated to work in the vil-
 lage's communal garden a set number of days per week. In one case, residents com-
 plained that the income from these plots was never distributed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-By law, children under the age of
 12 are prohibited from working, but this provision applies only to the formal wage
 sector in both urban and rural areas and not to children working on family farms
 or herding domestic livestock. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 can be em-
 ployed on a daily wage and on a day-to-day basis but must have parental permission
 and return to their residence at night.
 The minimum age for entry into work of a contractual nature in approved occupa-
 tions is set at the age of 15. It is prohibited for a child or young person to be em-
 ployed in any occupation that is injurious to health and that is dangerous or that
 is otherwise unsuitable. Young persons between the ages of 12 and 15 may be em-
 ployed in industrial work, but only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m., with
 some exceptions allowed.
 A 1992 ILO report stated that the problem of child labor in Tanzania is wide-
 spread and prevalent, with conditions in the plantation industry particularly det-
 rimental to children. According to the report, the existing legal framework regulat-
 ing the employment of children is not fully adequate and does not conform with
 international standards, nor are the enforcement machinery and the Ministry of
 Labor inspectorate equipped to deal with the problem. Government officials and
 nongovernmental organizations are aware of the growing problem but are limited
 in their responses by lack of resources and institutional capacity.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is a legal minimum wage for employ-
 ment in the formal sector. The OTrU often negotiates higher minimum wages with
 individual employers, depending on the financial status of the business. A worker
 earning the minimum wage, even when supplemented with various benefits such as
 housing, transportation allowances, and food subsidies, may not always be able to
 provide an adequate living for his family, and must depend on the extended family
 or a second or third job. The official minimum wage averages from $7 to $11 (3,500
 to 5,000 Tanzanian shillings) per month, but many workers, especially those in the
 informal sector, are paid less.
 
 
 300
 There is no standard legal workweek. However, a 5-day, 40-hour workweek is in
 effect for government workers. Most private employers retain a 6-day, 44- or 48-
 hour workweek. In general, women may not be employed between 10 p.m. and 6
 a.m. Several laws regulate safety in the workplace. An occupational health and safe-
 ty factory inspection system, set up with the assistance of the ILO, is now managed
 by the Ministry of Labor and Youth Development. Its effectiveness, however, is
 minimal. OTrU officials have claimed that enforcement of labor standards is fairly
 effective in the formal sector, but no verification studies have been performed.
 Workers can take an employer to court through their OTU branch if their working
 conditions do not comply with the Ministry of Labors health and environmental
 standards. Workers making such complaints have not lost their jobs as a result. En-
 forcement of labor standards is nonexistent in the informal sector.
