 UGANDA
 Since 1986 President Yoweri Museveni and his National Resistance Movement
 (NRM) have exercised authority through the National Resistance Council (NRC), an
 appointed Cabinet, and the National Resistance Army. Both the NRC and the Cabi-
 net include members of the three major political parties, the Democratic Party (DP),
 the Uganda People's Congress (UPC), and the Conservative Party (CP). Although he
 generally seeks consensus with key institutions and interest groups on important
 policy issues, the President dominates the Government and the transition process
 to constitutional government. Elections for a Constituent Assembly to debate and
 adopt a new constitution were scheduled for March 28, 1994, with general elections
 under the new constitution to be held by the end of 1994. The present Government's
 term expires on January 25, 1995.
 Under the President, the National Resistance Army (NRA) is the key security ap-
 paratus in Uganda. As part of his strategy to deal with insurgencies, Museveni ex-
 panded the army tenfold between 1986 und 1991, incorporating former rebels into
 the NRA; this eroded discipline within the ranks. In 1992, as the security situation
 stabi;ized the Government began demobilizing the armed forces, discharging over
 23,000 soidiers by the end of 1993. The professionalism of the police force continued
 to grow in 1993, although it remained severely underfunded ill-trained, poorly
 equipped, and often corrupt. The Army, alonq with home guards and local defense
 units, continued to perform police functions in rural areas. The Internal Security
 Organization (ISO) is responsible for intelligence and security. As armed
 insurgencies in northern and northeastern Uganda ended during the year, reports
 of human rights abuses by the NRA and the rebels declined significantly.
 The Ugandan economy remains primarily based in agriculture, with rural poverty
 a continuing problem. The economic growth rate averaged about 7 percent in 1993,
 with a negative inflation rate, both positive signs of the country's improving econ-
 omy. Coffee remains the chief export crop and foreign exchange earner, but efforts
 to diversify the economy continued to pay off in modest increases in tobacco, cotton,
 and tea exports. Foreign aid contributed 60 percent of government spending in 1993.
 In accordance with reforms supported by the International Monetary Fund, the civil
 service began a retrenchment in 1992, cutting the government payroll.
 Overall, the human rights situation in Uganda continued to improve in 1993.
 With the apparent end of major armed insurgencies, which had been responsible in
 the past for massive violations by both the NRA and the rebel forces, there were
 few reports of such violations, and by the end of the year the Government had re-
 leased almost all civilian and military prisoners taken during the campaigns. None-
 theless, the Government continued to bear responsibility for some serious human
 rights abuses. These included restrictions on or ganized political party activity, in-
 cluding breaking up peaceful political assembly, theh arassment of journalists
 through arrests on sedition charges, and occasional incidents of torture and beatings
 of prisoners. Discrimination, domestic violence, and rape against women continued.
 
 
 309
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There is no evidence that the Gov-
 ernment sanctioned political killings in 1993. There were, however, reports of
 extrajudicial killings. For example, on June 21, police and internal security officials
 arrested four intelligence officers accused of murdering two prisoners in Iganga dis-
 trict onJune 7. The case received considerable media attention. Two of the four ac-
 cused officers were released without charge; the other two were being held in
 Makindye military prison without charge at year's end.
 Rebel groups also engaged in extrajudicial killings. In March a group calling itself
 The Lord's Resistance Army abducted the former District Administrator (DA) of
 Nebbi and killed three others; the DA was released by the group on April 29. In
 April, a rebel group led by Charles Ogwang killed a Resistance Council official and
 a Local Defense Unit member in Kumi district. In November a group thought to be
 members of the Lakwena rebels ambushed and killed an assistant security officer
 and one home guard in Gulu district. Remnants of Uganda Patriotic Army rebels
 killed three people in Kumi district, also in November. It is not clear whether the
 above incidents were politically motivated or criminal acts of murder.
 In contrast to past years, there were no reports in 1993 that the NRA committed
 extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known government-sponsored disappearances
 in 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While isolated incidents of torture and beatings of prisoners by police and army offi-
 cials continue, there is no evidence of government-sanctioned torture. "Kandoya," a
 traditional local method of immobilizing prisoners by suspending them by their
 wrists and ankles which are tied behind their backs, was still reported. The practice
 is illegal, however, and military authorities have publicly expressed their condemna-
 tion of it. Increased military discipline combined with increased security in the
 country, open newspaper reporting of military misconduct, and the political will of
 the higher levels of the administration resulted in reducing the incidence of abuses
 ofersons under detention.
 Rhe International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) had access to all prisoners
 it requested to visit in prisons, police stations, military barracks and NRA detach-
 ments throughout Uganda. The NRA would not permit private ICRC inkrviews
 with soldiers who had not been sentenced. Diplomats from several countries were
 also allowed to visit civilian and military prisons.
 Uganda's prisons reportedly have one of the highest mortality rates in the world
 from diseases spread by unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and AIDS, a disease
 which is pandemic in Uganda. Prisoners do not have access to proper medical care
 nor adequate nutrition. The ICRC arranged for installation of a new water system
 for Luzira and successfully negotiated with the Government for families to be per-
 mitted to bring food to prisoners throughout Uganda, improving their nutrition. In
 1993 there were media reports of homosexual rape among the inmate population.
 Luzira prison, Uganda's largest with an intended capacity of 600, held about 1,200
 at the end of 1993, down from more than 2,000 at the beginning of 1992. The Foun-
 dation for Human Rights Initiatives in Uganda and Penal Reform International, an
 organization based in Britain, conducted a conference in August on penal justice and
 prison reform, including a visit by participants to Luzira.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although Ugandan law requires that a
 suspect must be charged within 24 hours of arrest and be brought to trial or consid-
 ered for bail within 240 days (480 days for a capital offense), government offiicials
 failed to enforce both requirements.
 The Government has a variety of legal means to detain indefinitely suspected op-
 ponents, including through broadly interpreted charges of treason that may be used
 to hold a suspect for 480 days before trial or consideration of an application for bail.
 The Public Order and Security Act of 1967 (The Detention Order) permits unlimited
 detention without charge, and remains a lever for the Government to use against
 opponents, but the Act has not been invoked by the NRM.
 The Government released most of the remaining civilians and rebel soldiers who
 had been detained in the various insurgency campaigns; at one time they numbered
 in the thousands. The Government or NRA usually held these persons on treason
 charges, often in military barracks, but rarely brought them to trial. Among those
 released in August were nine military officers who were arrested in 1990 for con-
 spiracy to overthrow the Government by force of arms. One of the nine released offi-
 cers plans to stand for the Constituent Assembly election.
 
 
 310
 With relative peace throughout the country, the Government detained fewer per-
 sons without charge than in past years. The Government did not formally charge
 anyone with treason in 1993. Ten suspected rebels were arrested during the year-
 those who were not released were charged with criminal offenses. Police arrested
 three journalists on charges of sedition for printing stories critical of government
 policy and officials (see Section 2.a.). At the end of the year, the Government held
 approximately 100 persons on state security grounds, with 14 new cases reported
 in 1993 as opposed to 423 new cases in 1992.
 The overnment does not use exile as a means of political control. A presidential
 amnesty for former rebels remains in effect and applies to opponents in exile. Those
 who return, however, may be prosecuted for criminal acts they may have committed.
 Ugandans continued to return from exile in 1993, including former president Tito
 0kello.    aos     s                                            rpeietTt
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Ugandan court system consists of mag-
 istrates' courts, the High Court, and a Supreme Court. There is also a military court
 system for hearing offenses against military personnel. The judicial system contains
 procedural safeguards modeled after British law, including the granting of bail and
 appeals to higher courts. However, the Government has circumscribed the right to
 a fair trial in recent years by its reliance on indefinite detention of its opponents,
 by an inadequate system of judicial administration, and by the reluctance of mili-
 tary authorities to respect civilian court orders. In one instance, for example, a mili-
 tary court refused to honor a civilian court's writ of habeas corpus. Trials in the
 military court system also lack important due process safeguards and do not meet
 international standards.
 A serious backlog of cases denies most defendants a speedy trial. Criminal cases
 can take 2 or more years to reach the courts. In rural areas, there is often no mag-
 istrate. There were no reports of the use of military field tribunals in remote areas
 as had occurred in previous years.
 The Ugandan Law Society operated legal aid clinics in Kampala and Jinja, with
 plans to open an additional clinic in Fort Portal, assisting free of charge more than
 100 people.
 The Ugandan judiciary is generally independent; the Government usually com-
 p lies withcourt decisions. In appointing the four members of the Judicial Service
 Commission which makes recommendations on High Court and Supreme Court ap-
 pointments, the President maintains considerable control over the judiciary. The
 Commission must concur in the dismissal of a magistrate. A jud  ma be removed
 only after a tribunal comprised of three judges finds that he is unabfe to perform
 the functions of his office."
 In June a Commission of Inquiry into the mismangagement of criminal cases,
 headed by a British High Court Justice, began public hearings, preceded by the sus-
 pension of the Director of Public Prosecution and another officer. At the end of the
 year, some state attorneys had also been suspended. The Commission will continue
 its hearings in 1994, with an expected completion date of March.
 Village resistance councils (RC's) have the authority to settle civil disputes, in-
 cluding those related to land ownership and payment of debts. The RC courts, typi-
 cally the only ones available to villagers, often exceed their authority by hearing
 criminal cases, including murder and rape. Legally the RC decisions may be ap -
 pealed in magistrates' courts. In practice this does not often happen because people
 are ignorant of their right to appeal or are limited by lack of finances. The Ugandan
 Law Society proposed to the Attorney General in 1992 that the village RC courts
 be replaed by a group of elected elders of impeccable character to be supervised
 by magistrates, thus separating the judicial and executive functions at the village
 level. The Government did not respond to the proposal.
 The military court system does not meet international standards for assuring a
 fair trial. Although the accused has the right to legal counsel, the defense attorney
 is often untrained and is usually assigned by the military command which also ap-
 points the prosecutor and the adjudicating officer. The sentence passed by a military
 court, which may invoke the death penalty, may be appealed to the High Command.
 The Government has never implemented a 1989 law permitting the establishment
 of special magistrates courts in areas of insurgency, but, like the Detention Order,
 the Government is not likely to revoke it.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government does not intrude on the privacy, family, or home of citizens on a wide
 scale, and there is no indication that it interfered with private correspondence in
 1993. However, although search warrants are legally required before private homes
 or offices may be entered, the police and the army in Kampala and Gulu violated
 this requirement. In February before the Pope's visit, the police conducted security
 searches without warrants. Police officials also reportedly conducted sweeps of vehi-
 
 
 311
 cles and pedestrians without warrants, searching for illegal weapons in cities
 throughout the country.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government restricts freedom of s eech by
 limiting political party activities and by arresting journalists for sedition. Three ar-
 rests of journalists in late 1993 had a temporary chilling effect on both the press
 and the opposition, although the journalists were released on bail and continued to
 publish articles critical of the Government and its human rights abuses. Despite re-
 strictions on party rallies and other public activities, open debate occurs in the
 NRC, in the media, and in public forums. Public figures openly criticize government
 policies, corruption, and human rights abuses.
 Fifteen newspapers and magazines cover a wide range of viewpoints. Despite
 other restrictions on political party activity, political parties publish newspapers to
 promote their views. The Government owns the New Vision, which has accurately
 reported on corruption in government and human rights abuses by the NRA. Among
 the main problems confronting Uganda print media are extremely tight operating
 budgets, limited access to information, and the absence of formal distribution chan-
 nels outside the capital. There are no foreign correspondents in Uganda.
 Unlike the regimes that preceded it, the NRM has not instituted formal censor-
 ship. However, the legal provisions for doing so remain on the books, and the Gov-
 ernment has used sedition charges to attack its press critics. Government actions
 against journalists have resulted in some self-censorship. A journalism bill called for
 the creation of a media council to monitor and discipline journalists. The bill was
 strongly criticized by members of the press; the journalists' union sponsored a semi-
 nar in November attacking the bill. The Government withdrew the bill for further
 revision and review.
 There were a number of government-initiated actions against the press. On Octo-
 ber 1, police arrested two journalists, the editor in chief of Uganda Confidential,
 Teddy Seezi Cheeye, and a subeditor of Shariat, on charges of sedition. On October
 25, police arrested the editor of Shariat on charges of publishing seditious stories.
 He was later released on bail; his case, and that of his subeditor, remained pending
 in the courts at year's end.
 In early December Kampala's Chief Magistrate dismissed charges of defamation
 and sedition against Uganda Confidential editor Cheeye dating from 1991 and 1992.
 On December 4, however, the Government added two new charges of sedition
 against Cheeye for an August issue of Uganda Confidential. The court scheduled the
 next hearing in this case against Cheeye for January 1994.
 Before his October 1 arrest, editor Cheeye had faced seven different law suits for
 publishing allegedly defamatory and seditious articles about the President, Cabinet
 ministers, and other prominent Ugandans. In March the president of the Uganda
 Journalists Association won about $3,000 (3 million Uganda shillings)in damages in
 one such case against Uganda Confidential.
 Uganda Television (UTV) and Radio Uganda are controlled by the Government.
 They disseminate NRM views, but also broadcast discussions of public policy that
 reflect a variety of opinion. Political party spokespersons have appeared on UTV and
 Radio Uganda, usually facing critical interviewers, but openly expressing their
 views.
 A considerable degree of academic freedom exists at Uganda's five public and
 three private universities, with no government interference in teaching, research, or
 publication. Professors appear to exercise caution rather than test the limits of their
 academic freedom. Students, however, have sponsored wide-ranging political debates
 in open forums on campus.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Associalion.-All associations in Uganda
 must register with the Government. Permits for public gatherings must be obtained
 from police authorities, who have and exercise the right to deny permits in the in-
 terest of public safety. Although political parties are not banned, political activity
 is restricted, and political rallies are not allowed. The police and district administra-
 tion officials broke up four meetings convened by UPC officials: A joint executive
 meeting for UPC leaders in Arua in February, and UPC meetings in Nebbi in
 March, and in Pallisa and Mbale in April.
 In May the mobilizers' group of the Democratic Party scheduled a rally in Kam-
 pala in defiance of the restrictions on party activities. A strong show of force by the
 police, unchallenged by the mobilizers, blocked the rally. The DP Mobilizers sched-
 uled a second rally for November 13. Police again presented a show of force and the
 organizers canceled the rally before it began.
 In December an unofficial UPC meeting at a funeral in Lira resulted in a con-
 frontation with the police; UPC officials disbanded the meeting to avoid violence.
 
 
 312
 Later in the month, police shot into the air when a a crowd of UPC supporters gath-
 ered to block the arrest of a UPC leader; several people were injured. The UPC has
 brought a case to court challenging the restrictions on public political party activity
 as unconstitutional since they violate the freedoms of speech and assembly in the
 current (1967) Constitution. On December 14, a High Court judge referred the case
 to a Constitutional Court, which will be constituted of three senior High Court
 judges.
 Professional associations operate without hindrance, as do international service
 aessociations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-There is no state religion in Uganda. Christianity, Islam,
 Hinduism, and African traditional religions are freely practiced. Conversion between
 religions is not obstructed. Foreign missionaries and other religious figures are gen-
 erally welcome in Uganda. There is no government control of religious publications,
 even those with an antigovernment bias. Religious leaders frequently speak out pub-
 licly on topics relating to their followers' welfare, addressing in particular human
 rights, security, and political issues.
 While it has not been uniformly enforced, the Government requires religious
 groups to register as nongovernmental organizations (NGO's). Registration has not
 curtailed activities by these groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-As security conditions continued to improve, freedom of movement in
 Uganda expanded greatly, although access to some areas remained restricted. The
 NRA required vehicles to travel in convoys on the route between Karuma and
 Pakwach in the northwest for several months in early 1993. Travel in the east, and
 particularly Karamoja in the northeast, remained difficult due to sporadic attacks
 y armed bandits.
 Ugandans are free to emigrate and to travel abroad. Uganda accommodates refu-
 gees from Sudan, Rwanda, Zaire, Somalia, and other countries. There were over
 250,000 registered, and a large number of unregistered refugees in Uganda in 1993.
 In August and September, new waves of Sudanese refugees began crossing the bor-
 der into northern Uganda fleeing war and insecurity. At the same time, the cease-
 fire and the August Peace Accord between the Rwandan Government and the Rwan-
 dan Patriotic Front brought the voluntary repatriation of thousands of Rwandan ref-
 ugees from Uganda.
 There were no instances of expulsion or forced repatriation of refugees in 1993.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens did not have this right in 1993. However, the constitutional commission
 presented the draft constitution to the President in December 1992, and the NRC
 passed the Constituent Assembly Statute in April 1993. The Statute established the
 composition and duties of the Assembly, which will debate and enact a new constitu-
 tion, and created an independent election commission tasked with laying the
 groundwork for and conducting elections. The Assembly has a mandate of 4 months,
 with one 3-month extension, to prepare a final constitution. The NRC is planning
 elections for President and Members of Parliament in 1994, following the enactment
 of this new constitution.
 The Constituent Assembly will have 288 members: 214 elected directly, 39 women
 elected within the RC's, 10 delegates for the army, 10 presidential appointees, 2 del-
 egates for each of the 4 established political parties, plus representatives for youth
 (4), labor (2), and the disabled (1).
 Until the new constitution is in place and elections are held, President Museveni,
 who was never elected and has never faced a vote of confidence, continues to hold
 power as Chief Executive, Minister of Defense, and Chairman of the National Re-
 sistance Council. Although he has avoided serious confrontations with major institu-
 tions and interest groups (including the parties), there are few meaningful checks
 and balances on his presidential power. Museveni has publicly stated his opposition
 to multiparty politics, but he also has said repeatedly that he will accept such a Sys-
 tem if it emerges from the deliberations on the new constitution. In July the NRC,
 at Museveni's urging, restored Uganda's four kingdoms in cultural terms only (with-
 out political power), a move which won him support from the 4 million Baganda.
 There are no restrictions in law on the participation of women in politics. Women
 hold positions of responsibility at all levels of the Government and within some of
 the political parties, one of which (the UPC) has a woman as its highest acting offi-
 cial. In the NRC, women hold 39 of the 264 positions; 4 of the 39 government min-
 isters, deputy ministers, and ministers of state are women.
 
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Of 10 nongovernmental human rights organizations, 4 actively monitor human
 rights cases: the Foundation for Human Rights Initiatives (FHRI), the Uganda
 Human Rights Activists the Ugandan Law Society, and the Ugandan chapter of the
 International Women's Lawyers Association (FIDA). In October FHRI published the
 first edition of its journal, The Human Rights Defender. The Uganda Human Rights
 Activists publish a quarterly review of the human rights situation in the country
 and have moved toward an educational role in sponsoring seminars on human
 rights throughout the country. The Law Society focuses on human and legal rights
 and defending the independence of the judiciary. Members of the Society defen -
 litical figures indicted by the Government. FIDA concentrates on cases involving
 women and children. All of these groups operate without government interference.
 In February President Museveni directed that human rights subcommittees be set
 up in the RC's in eve  district to monitor local human rights violations. A Human
 Rights Desk was established in the Ministry of Justice to produce reports from these
 subcommittees. The desk has begun functioning but has not produced any retorts.
 The NRC created the Uganda Human Rights Commission to investigate abuses
 perpetrated before 1986. The Commission has heard public testimony from over
 1,000 witnesses. Its report is scheduled for release in March 1994.
 The Government allows access to international human rights monitoring groups,
 but few such groups came to Uganda in 1993. However, ministers, attorneys (includ-
 ing the President of the American Bar Association), parliamentarians, and journal-
 ists from a wide variety of countries came to Uganda to investigate the human
 rights situation.
 lnternationally published reports on Uganda's human rights are given broad pub-
 licity in the private and official media.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Traditional discrimination against women continues, especially in rural
 areas. "Customary" laws disadvantageous to women are still recognized in the areas
 of adoption, mamage, divorce, and devolution of property on death. Women may not
 own or inherit property or have custody of their children under customary law.
 Adultery by men is treated more leniently than adultery by women. Women cannot
 sponsor a foreign-born spouse or the children of such a union for Ugandan citizen-
 ship, whereas foreign women who marry Ugandans and the children of those mar-
 riages automatically receive Ugandan citizenship. Women do most of the agricul-
 tural work but own only 7 percent of the land.
 Domestic violence, including rape, is common, and there are ao laws to protect
 battered women apart from a general law on assault. Public and law enforcement
 officials view wife beating as a man's prerogative and rarely intervene in cases of
 domestic violence. There are an increasing number of public education projects
 which emphasize a woman's right to be free of sexual exploitation, but to date they
 have had little effect.
 The Government has made efforts to redress discrimination based on sex, includ-
 ing specific provisions in the draft constitution on women's rights and designating
 special women's seats in the Constituent Assembly that is to debate the constitu-
 tion. A Ministry of Women, Youth, and Culture was established in 1988, but it re-
 ceives the smallest budget of any ministry. The Ugandan branch of FIDA is cur-
 rently undertaking a 3-year research and law reform program focusing on women
 (1992-95). FIDA opened a legal aid clinic in Kampala in early 1992 and provides
 free legal advice to women. FIDA lawyers also provide information on Ugandan law
 to women in rural areas and carried out a project in writing wills to strengthen
 women's inheritance rights.
 Children.-The Government has severely limited budgetary resources devoted to
 child welfare; however, the Uganda National Programme of Action for Children in
 the 1990's outlined priorities for social services development for children and
 women. The 1993/94 budget report by the Ministry of Finance noted the importance
 of primary education; health programs such as infant immunization, malnutrition,
 and disease and diarrheal control for children; a sensitization campaign for the pub-
 lic about the rights of children; resettlement of children from orphaages, and con-
 tinued rehabilitation of children's custodial institutions.
 Child abuse continues to be a problem in Uganda. A 1990 law defined the age
 of a minor victim of defilement as 13. In 1993 the NRC amended the law to cover
 all minor children under 18. Accusations of defilement and prosecutions under the
 law occur, but convictions and punishment are rare. The press reports regularly on
 cases of defilement, with victims, mostly girls, of increasingly younger ages. Observ-
 
 
 314
 ers attribute the growing number of reports of child beating and molestation to the
 breakdown of the traditional village family structure and to stresses induced by eco-
 nomic problems, alcohol abuse, and social dislocations. A Ugandan chapter of the
 African Network for Prevention and Protection Against Child Abuse and Neglect
 formed in 1993 and began an educational campaign on the issue.
 Female genital mutilation (circumcision) is not widespread, but some communities
 in eastern Uganda subject young females to it. There is no law against the practice;
 the Government is working to stamp it out through education. An international
 seminar in September, including the Government and the World Health Organiza-
 tion among its sponsors, publicly condemned the practice.
 A large number of children have lost at least one parent to war or disease; the
 number of orphans is thought to exceed 1 million. These children migrate to towns
 and trading centers and may be treated roughly by police or employers. Corporal
 punishment is not condoned by the Government but is common in some schools.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Africans of about 40 ethnic groups constitute
 the vast majority of the population of Uganda, with tiny percentages of Asians and
 Europeans. Asians, expelled by former president Idi Amin in the early 1970's, are
 returning to Uganda under the current Government's policy of adjudicating claims
 to confiscated property. Ethnic divisions between Bantu-speaking peoples in the
 south and Nilotic speakers in the n-rth have been aggravated by civil conflict since
 Uganda's independence. However, only a few minority populations have truly suf-
 fered discrimination, such as the Bakonjo of the Ruwenzori Mountains, who were
 once slaves within the traditional kingdoms, and the Karamajong, independent cat-
 tle herders in eastern Uganda described as violent and underdeveloped by other
 Ugandans. Neither of these groups participates fully in Ugandan society, govern-
 ment, or educational institutions.
 People with Disabilities.-The Government has not legislated accessibility for the
 disabled. The proposed Constituent Assembly is slated to have one representaiive
 for the disabled. Provisions to protect the disabled are included in the draft constitu-
 tion. Widespread discrimination by society and employers limits job opportunities
 for those with physical disabilities; most are self-employed or are beggars. Edu-
 cational opportunities, however, exist for those who can afford standard school fees.
 A small ofice within the Ministry of Local Government tries to assist disabled
 Ugandans, but it is hampered by lack of funding.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Ugandan labor law is undergoing major reform.
 Uganda has adopted a tripartite (government-employer-worker) cooperative ap-
 proach to labor issues. The Government, in the midst of structural adjustment, is
 reviewing its laws and institutions in the labor field and vetting them with the
 International Labor Organization (ILO). In 1993 civil servants were permitted to
 join and form unions, a right previously reserved for private sector workers. Certain
 categories of government employees are still not permitted to form unions; these in-
 cude the police, army, permanent secretaries in the ministries, heads of depart-
 ments and stateowned enterprises, school principals, and other management level
 officials.
 The National Organization of Trade Unions (NOTU), with 15 labor unions, is the
 only labor federation in Uganda. Proposed legislation will reaffirm a single umbrella
 organizational system, but will not prevent multiple unions within individual indus-
 tries, NOTU is independent of the Government and political parties. It publishes a
 periodic newspaper on labor issues, NOTU Speaks. NOTU's influence on the overall
 economy remains marginal since about 90 percent of the Ugandan work force con-
 sists of peasant farmers. Even among industrial workers, high communications costs
 and lack of transportation have made it difficult for individual unions to organize,
 especially outside the major commercial centers of Kampala and Jinja.
 The right to strike is recognized by law, but the Government expects all efforts
 at reconciling labor disputes to be exhausted before workers resort to strikes. They
 must first submit their grievances and notice to strike to the Minister of Labor.
 Under the Trades Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act, an Industrial Court
 hears trade disputes referred to it, either by the Minister of Labor or the parties
 to the dispute. NOTU has proposed that the right to strike be recognized in the fu-
 ture constitution. There is no law prohibiting retribution against strikers.
 At least 14 strikes occurred in 1993, including: African textile mill workers and
 Sanwa electrical workers in April; the magistrates in Mbale in May- the Uganda
 Cooperative Transport Workers, lecturers at the National Teachers' Coilege, Uganda
 Fisheries Enterprises workers, and Uganda Polytechnic lecturers and students in
 June; doctors and workers at the Kyamulibwa Medical Research Center in July;
 Nyanza textiles workers in August; laborers at the Kakira Sugar Estate and Crown
 
 
 Bottlers factory in September. In September workers of GM Combined Uganda Ltd.
 (a deterqent company) struck for payment of salary arrears, and workers of Match
 International went on strike for nonpayment of wages. In October workers at the
 Mandela Freedom International Stadium at Namboole went on strike demanding
 higher wages. The Uganda Cooperative Transport Workers Union sponsored the
 largest strike in 1993. Violence followed unsuccessful wage negotiations at the
 Kakira Sugar Estate, when some strikers burned over 2,000 acres of sugar cane and
 destroyed machinery. The only strike that resulted in higher wages was that of the
 Kakira Sugar workers.
 A tripartite committee composed of NOTU the Federation of Ugandan Employers,
 and government ministries is reviewing Uganda's labor legislation. The Cainet
 passed on to the NRC draft laws on employment and workers' compensation. Other
 legislation on industrial trade unions, a minimum wage, social security, disputes
 and arbitration, occupational health and safety and hygiene were in various stages
 of review at year's end. "Labor" is slated to eiect two representatives for seats in
 the future Constituent Assembly.
 NOTU freely exercises the right to affiliate with and participate in regional and
 international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right to organize and
 bargain collectively is recognized by law and established in practice. On July 31, the
 law giving workers the right to form unions was liberalized to include civil servants
 and Bank of Uganda employees.
 Agriculture is the backbone of the economy, employing 80 percent of the popu-
 lation. The modern sector employs only an estimated 400,000 persons. The Govern-
 ment is the largest employer in the country. According to the 1988-89 census about
 20 percent of all workers in Uganda are unionized. While unionization and collective
 bargaining are common in the industrial wage sector, they are much less significant
 in the agricultural sector. A National Union of Plantation and Agricultural Workers
 exists, but the vast majority of small cultivators organize themselves on the basis
 of cooperatives for the purpose of selling their crops. Union officials are not har-
 assed, and unions have access to the tripartite Industrial Court. However, the Court
 suffers from lack of resources, and some of its decisions have beqn overruled by the
 Government. There is no law prohibiting antiunion discrimination by employers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor is prohibited by
 law. There is evidence, however, that forced prison labor is employed on private
 farms and construction sites. There are no reports of forced labor in export indus-
 tries.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Although employers are prohibited
 from employing workers below the age of 18, many children are employed in the
 informal sector out of economic necessity. There is no child labor in the formal sec-
 tor or export industries. The Ministry of Social Services is charged with enforcing
 the law on child labor. There are no minimum education requirements.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-No explicit minimum wage policy exists in
 Uganda. Wages are set by negotiation between unions and employers or by the
 boards of directors of state-owned industries. Wages in general are low, and many
 civil servants and other workers find second jobs, grow their own food, or engage
 in pilferage or corruption in order to feed their families and pay school fees.
 Although there is no legal maximum workweek, the normal workweek is 48 hours
 and time and a half is paid for each additional hour worked. The only occupationaf
 health and safety legislation in place is contained in the outdated Factories Act of
 1954, which concentrates on enineerng aspects of work and does not address many
 present-day working hazards. Itis enfoed by the Ministry of Labor's Department
 of Occupational Health, but in practice little inspection takes place due to lack of
 resources. A proposed law on occupntional health and safety was sent to the 
 in Geneva for review in 1993.
