 UGANDA
 Elements of the Ugandan National Liberation Army (UNLA), led
 by senior military officers primarily from the Acholi ethnic
 group, overthrew the government of President A. Milton Obote
 on July 27, 1985. An Interim Military Government (IMG) headed
 by a Military Council was installed with General Tito Okello
 Lutwa, formerly Chief of the Defense Forces, as Head of State
 and Military Council chairman. Immediately after assuming
 power, the Military Council began appointing a broad-based
 civilian cabinet, comprising all major ethnic groups as well
 as representatives of the four political parties which had
 contested the disputed 1980 election. The Council
 subsequently included members of four insurgent groups, but
 not Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Army/Movement
 (NRA/NRM), which is dominated by Bantus, in particular the
 Banyankole. Museveni's NRM/NRA forces continued hostilities
 against the interim Government but also agreed to enter into
 peace talks with the IMG in Nairobi under the chairmanship of
 Kenyan President Daniel Arap Moi. The talks culminated in a
 peace accord signed on December 17, in Nairobi between Okello
 and Museveni, who agreed to join the Government as vice
 chairman of the Military Council. By early 1986, the terms of
 the Accord had not been implemented, and further fighting took
 place. As of late January, the NRA appeared to have taken
 control of the capital.
 When Idi Amin fled Uganda in 1979, he left behind a devastated
 economy. Uganda has great agricultural potential with its
 fertile soil and regular rainfall and also has substantial
 mineral deposits. But the economy has continued to decline
 under the impact of civil war and social upheaval entailinj
 the dislocation of thousands of people. The Obote government,
 with the assistance of the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
 introduced ambitious economic reform measures in 1981, with
 some initial success, but abandoned the IMF program in 1983
 due to the deteriorating security situation. Since then, the
 inflation rate has soared from 25 to 30 percent a year in 1983
 to an estimated 175 percent in 1985. The new Government's
 economic program had not crystallized by the end of 1985 as
 first priority was given to ending the civil war.
 Human rights issues have played a major role in Uganda's
 turbulent 23-year postindependence history. The depredations
 of the Amin years are well-known and well documented. Chaos
 and widespread human rights violations continued during the
 1979-80 interim governments. After initial promise, the
 1980-85 Obote government was widely discredited by the time it
 fell because of its unwillingness, or inability, to halt or
 prevent large-scale violations of human rights, particularly
 perpetrated by ill-disciplined soldiers during military
 operations against the NRA, as well as unrestrained activities
 of civilian intelligence, security, and ruling-party agents.
 Various guerrilla groups bent on the violent overthrow of the
 Obote government also contributed to human rights violations
 through the use of both indiscriminate and selective
 terrorism. A special Amnesty International Report released in
 June 1985, indicated that the government security forces had
 been involved in mass detentions, routine torture, widespread
 abductions, and frequent killings of prisoners.
 Following the coup respect for rule of law improved
 temporarily, e.g., most political detainees were released in
 the first 2 weeks. But members of the UNLA, augmented by
 
 
 359
 UGANDA
 the four other ill-disciplined fighting forces (not including
 NRA), and untrained new recruits, were soon implicated in rape
 and indiscriminate killing of civilians as well as looting of
 civilian and government properties. The worst, documented
 human rights violations took place in September-October in the
 Luwero triangle, a region north and northwest of the capital
 Kampala, which has been the principal area of
 government-insurgent conflict since 1981. While the IMG
 undertook a concerted public effort to punish offenders, its
 ability to control its soldiers and allied fighting forces
 still remained in doubt at the end of 1985. Underlying the
 civil strife is a profound tension among the three main ethnic
 groups: Bantu, Nilotic, and Nilo-Hamitic.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Political Killing
 While it often was difficult to distinguish between victims of
 war and of political murder, there continued to be clear
 evidence of extralegal killings in Uganda in 1985, both before
 and after the July coup. Most of the killings were of
 villagers who died during and after military engagements
 between the government forces and the National Resistance Army
 (NRA) and other fighting forces. During 1985, the NRA, which
 had hitherto been based in the Luwero triangle, made a series
 of attacks to the west, culminating in a splitting of the NRA
 into two forces, one remaining in the triangle and the other
 in the foothills of the Ruwenzori mountains of western
 Uganda. As the NRA moved through territory, the Uganda
 Liberation Army (UNLA) would typically follow and loot the
 town, sometimes killing suspected NRA sympathizers.
 A number of killings were reported to have been committed by
 members of the youth wing of Obote's ruling party, the Uganda
 People Congress (UPC). In March and April 1985, armed youth
 reportedly entered villages where weddings were taking place
 and, using grenades and automatic weapons, killed a number of
 the celebrants. At least two incidents of this nature took
 place in each of which a minimum of 10 people were killed and
 over 30 wounded.
 There were also credible reports of a number of killings at
 military detention centers, military barracks, and civilian
 detention centers carried out by civilian security agents
 responsible directly to the Minister of State in the office of
 the President. In one incident in May, villagers identified a
 UNLA military truck which dropped off a load of more than a
 dozen mutilated bodies near Kampala. Reliable sources said
 the bodies had come from Makyndye Barracks in Kampala, where
 many extralegal detentions were known to occur.
 After the July 27 coup, further evidence of political killings
 during the Obote regime came to light. Among the most
 publicized were two mass burials of anonymous victims in the
 Luwero triangle. Conducted by senior IMG officials and
 participated in by ordinary citizens, the ceremonies involved
 the internment of hundreds of persons. Responsibility for the
 killings could not be definitely established, although general
 opinion was that they had been committed by agents of the
 Obote government.
 
 
 360
 UGANDA
 Beginning in September there were new'reports of killings,
 principally in the Luwero triangle area. The pattern was one
 of indiscriminate killing of civilians by soldiers of the UNLA
 as augmented by other fighting groups, principally the Uganda
 National Rescue Front (UNRF) and the Former Ugandan National
 Army (FUNA).
 On October 5, members of the IMG, including Minister of
 Internal Affairs and leader of the Democratic Party (DP) Paul
 Ssemogerere and Major General Issac Lumago, leader of FUNA,
 toured the capital of Luwero district which had recently been
 the scene of a UNLA/NRA confrontation. The team found
 evidence of indiscriminate killing by members of the
 government forces, but no disciplinary action was taken.
 Not all extralegal killings in Uganda during 1985 can be
 attributed to government forces. In the wake of the change of
 government, a number of local party officials and government
 appointees of the UPC were murdered, presumably out of revenge
 by citizens enraged at what was perceived to be an arrogation
 and abuse of power during the Obote era by these officials.
 There have also been reports that the principal dissident
 group, the NRA, has executed civilians whom it suspected of
 being government informers. There was one credible report
 that in 1984 NRA exterminated the population of a village in
 the Luwero triangle in retribution for a villager's betrayal
 of the whereabouts of an NRA detachment.
 b. Disappearance
 Reports of disappearance through abduction in 1985 were common
 and probably reached into the hundreds of cases. However, the
 number of disappearances dropped off significantly after the
 fall of the Obote government. The reasons for disppearances
 range from political thuggery to ransom, which was possibly
 the most common motive. Since the coup, each of the fighting
 groups, including government forces as well as those allied
 with the Government and the NRA, has been accused of
 responsibility for disappearances.
 The most notable disappearance that occurred during 1985 was
 that of Sebastian Ssebugwawo, a member of Parliament for the
 opposition Democratic Party. Ssebugwawo disappeared in late
 May 1985 after an altercation with a military officer. It is
 presumed that Ssebugwawo was killed, but his body was never
 recovered, and the Obote government's investigation was
 inconclusive. Members of Ssebugwawo's party accused the Obote
 government of conducting an investigation that was at best pro
 forma. The postcoup government has arrested two members of
 the military, a captain and a sergeant, who were allegedly
 involved in the abduction and presumed murder of Ssebugwawo.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture and inhuman treatment are not sanctioned by Ugandan
 law, but for many years there have been credible reports of
 extreme forms of torture taking place at detention centers,
 particularly military barracks, where political prisoners were
 often held illegally. The situation was extensively
 documented in Amnesty International's June 1985 special report
 on the state of human xights in Uganda in which-Amnesty
 asserted that it had "received a detailed account from someone
 who claims to have been tortured 'in a military barracks as
 
 
 361
 UGANDA
 recently as February 1985." A favored method of torture,
 often resulting in death, was to tie a victim down, sometimes
 in the presence of other prisoners, with a burning tire
 suspended above. The molten rubber drips onto the victim's
 face and body. Other reported means of torture and degrading
 treatment included rape, beatings, bayonetting, and
 castration.
 All fighting groups, including government forces and the NRA,
 have been accused of employing torture. The numbers of
 persons physically abused are estimated in the thousands
 during 1985, with the rate probably dropping off somewhat
 after the ousting of the Obote government and the disbandment
 of the National Security Agency, allegedly a frequent user of
 torture. Conditions in detention centers, which had been
 greatly increased in number to handle the demand, were poor.
 Bodies were left after death (from beatings, starvation,
 illness, etc.). Sanitation and medical assistance were
 nonexistent. On August 10, over 1,200 political detainees
 were given their freedom in a public ceremony presided over by
 General Okello. Some of these Obote era detainees were in
 such poor physical condition that they were taken immediately
 from prison to the hospital. According to reliable reports,
 the NRA since the coup has instituted its own detention
 centers for persons it finds objectionable and which are
 outside the jurisdiction of Ugandan law (the numbers of such
 persons held by the NRA are unknown, but indications are they
 are in the hundreds). NRA detention policies reportedly have
 been based on ethnic and political considerations.
 The year 1985 saw the continuation of reports both before and
 after the coup, that rape of women and forced concubinage by
 government forces occured, with instances of females under 12
 among the victims.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 A number of persons were subject to arbitrary detention, both
 legal and extralegal, during the first part of 1985. Legal
 detentions are accomplished under the Detention and Security
 Act of 1966, although this law has often been applied
 capriciously and was used during the Obote period against the
 opposition Democratic Party and suspected members of the NRA
 and other antigovernment groups. Extralegal detentions were
 most often performed by the military and civilian security
 agencies, such as the National Security Agency. In the case
 of military detentions, the victims were usually either
 detained on suspicion of being guerrilla sympathizers or,
 perhaps more commonly, were simply chosen as targets of ransom
 demands.
 In August and September 1985, the IMG released a total of
 1,400 Obote-era detainees. According to the Government, at
 the end of 1985, there were approximately 150 uncharged
 suspects in custody, primarily members of the disbanded
 National Security Agency, all of whom were accused of criminal
 activities. The IMG has issued one detention order since the
 coup, that for Cris Rwakasiisi, Minister of State in the
 Office of the President under Obote and responsible for
 overseeing National Security Agency operations. The IMG
 apprehended in 1985 over 200 officers and enlisted men caught
 looting or committing other crimes against civilians. Some
 were turned over to civil authorities for prosecution, and
 others were to be tried by courts martial. In addition, there
 
 
 362
 UGANDA
 were an unknown number being held extralegally by government
 forces, four allied fighting groups, and the NRA (in western
 and southwestern portions of the country controlled by the
 NRA).
 Since the coup, the IMG has invited all Ugandans living in
 exile to return home. Some prominent Ugandans took advantage
 of the IMG's invitation to return, notably former President
 Godfrey Binaisa. The principal impediments to Ugandans
 returning appeared to be security and economic conditions
 within Uganda, rather than government policy. While the IMG
 made greater efforts to see that those exiled in Sudan and
 Zaire returned, it stated that the Banyarwanda (forced earlier
 into Rwanda) were also included in this appeal.
 The Government, both before and since the coup, has not had a
 policy of forced or compulsory labor. However, individual
 government soldiers, primarily in the Luwero triangle, have
 reportedly forced women into concubinage and required them to
 raise crops, do household work, etc. Under Obote, especially
 in the north, children were abducted by military personnel and
 kept as personal servants.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Ugandan judicial system contains procedural safeguards
 modeled after British law, including the granting of bail and
 appeals to higher courts. The legal profession is generally
 respected. However, there have been many inequities in the
 working of the judicial system due to government pressures, to
 the general disorganization of the courts and the blurring of
 judicial jurisdiction during the civil war, and to alleged
 corruption among some members of the judiciary, e.g., the
 Government's use of extralegal and legal detention during the
 Obote period effectively prevented many individuals from
 receiving a fair trial. Moreover, during the Obote period,
 the government reportedly engaged in the harassment of
 attorneys, including detention of some lawyers suspected of
 being politically opposed to the government or the ruling UPC
 party. There were reports that compliant judges during the
 Obote period were assigned to politically sensitive cases out
 of normal rotation.
 The IMG signaled its intention to restore the independence and
 impartiality of the judicial system by appointing a
 well-respected non-Ugandan to the position of Chief Justice.
 It had also initiated a reorganization of the judicial
 administrative system by the end of 1985.
 There are no special courts for political or security cases.
 During the Obote period, members of the military and security
 forces enjoyed a near total immunity from civilian judicial
 authority, despite the formation of a legal unit within the
 UNLA in December 1984 for the purpose of carrying out
 courts-martial of soldiers accused of crimes. The IMG
 announced its intention in October to prosecute members of the
 military under the terms of the Military Act of 1966. The IMG
 also apprehended over 200 officers and enlisted men who were
 caught looting or committing other crimes.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Undisciplined elements of both the Obote and IMG regimes
 interfered with privacy and family through harassment of the
 
 
 363
 UGANDA
 populace, including physical abuse, and large-scale looting.
 In the first half of 1985 such activities were confined
 principally to the areas of armed conflict, i.e., the Luwero
 triangle and areas of western Uganda. During and immediately
 after the July 27 coup, looting, hijacking of private
 vehicles, and armed robbery continued in Kampala and in other
 disturbed areas. Without sufficient pay, food, housing, or
 clothing, the soldiers from disparate government forces turned
 to robbing citizens in the streets, often at roadblocks as
 well as in their homes. Elements of the military, often in
 league with civilians, also mounted larger-scale looting
 expeditions to strip entire households of furnishings in
 Kampala and other areas, particularly where military
 operations were taking place. Lira, the major city in Obote's
 home region of Lango, was also badly looted, reportedly by
 members of UNLA and associated paramilitary groups.
 There was no indication that either the Obote regime or the
 IMG has interfered with correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Despite the imposition of a military government, there is
 extensive public debate over the issues of the day, including
 in the press. Ugandan journalists indicate that freedom of
 the press has increased since the coup, and this was reflected
 in the coverage of internal events including reporting of
 human rights violations. Nevertheless, on January 2, 1986,
 the IMG announced the formation of a Press Security Committee
 whose ostensible purpose is to prevent sensational press
 reporting.
 In early October, the Ugandan press began to report atrocities
 including indiscriminate killing and rape by government forces
 in the Luwero triangle. The IMG responded by assembling a
 high-level team of government officials and a pool of Ugandan
 journalists to make a trip into the disturbed area to
 investigate the charges. The visit was covered extensively by
 government television as well as independent news media.
 During the Obote period there was no official censorship, but
 there was considerable pressure on journalists to toe the
 government line, and a number of journalists were detained,
 usually under the Detention Act, for having written stories
 critical of the government and the ruling UPC party. About 10
 journalists were detained in the 1984-85 period. Following
 the coup, the IMG has not interfered with the operation of the
 press, except for the detention of one Ugandan journalist, who
 was released uncharged and unharmed after 3 weeks. Foreign
 journalists, including some who could not obtain visas during
 the Obote period, have been able to enter Uganda and have had
 access to the new leaders.
 The Obote government banned one magazine in March, apparently
 for a critical article. Otherwise, international
 publications--often highly critical of the Obote as well as
 current Government--were readily available for sale in Uganda
 in 1985.
 Prior to the coup in early 1985, the citizenship of a
 prominent Ugandan academic, Mahmood Mamdani, was revoked.
 Mamdani, who is of Asian heritage, claimed the revocation was
 
 
 34
 UGANDA
 illegal. It is widely believed that this action was taken
 because Mamdani had criticized the Minister of State in the
 President's office.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of assembly and association in Uganda is generally
 respected, but permits for public gatherings must be obtained
 from police authorities who have the right to deny the permit
 in the interest of public safety. During the Obote period,
 nonpolitical events and national celebrations were often given
 strong government party overtones. In the early campaign for
 the scheduled 1985 elections, which were subsequently
 cancelled, a number of opposition political rallies were
 subject to harassment by UPC youth. In some instances,
 rallies were canceled by security authorities ostensibly
 because of "security problems." Since the coup, political
 activities have been suspended, but public gatherings have
 been permitted. Professional associations of doctors,
 attorneys, engineers, and accountants operate without
 hindrance, as do international associations such as the Rotary
 Club, Lions, YMCA, and YWCA.
 Under the Obote government, trade unionism remained limited
 and subject to government party influence. UPC "workers'
 councils" continued attempts to supplant traditional trade
 unions. Trade unionists reported that before the coup they
 were under government pressure to affiliate themselves with
 the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions.
 After the coup, unions were free to associate with any
 international labor organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Uganda. Islam, Christianity,
 and African traditional religions are freely practiced.
 Conversion between religions is not obstructed. There is no
 government control of religious publications, even those with
 an antigovernment slant. Foreign missionaries and other
 religious figures are welcome in Uganda. Religious leaders
 frequently speak out publicly on topics relating to their
 followers' welfare, addressing in particular human rights,
 security, and political issues. The opinions of religious
 leaders carry great weight in public discourse.
 The UPC is to some extent identified with the Church of Uganda
 (Anglican) while the Democratic Party is identified with Roman
 Catholicism. However, followers of various religions are
 found in both parties.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In theory, Ugandans are free to move, reside, and choose their
 place of work within the country. In practice, however,
 travel within the country in 1985 was difficult in view of
 sporadic guerrilla attacks, UNLA operations, and by October a
 de facto partition of western and southwestern Uganda, which
 were under NRA control, from the rest of the country. At
 year's end, a short-lived ceasefire had increased freedom of
 movement slightly. There are no restrictions which prevent
 Ugandans from emigrating.
 
 
 365
 UGANDA
 Perhaps as many as 500,000 persons have been displaced by
 conflict within Uganda since 1980. Many have sought sanctuary
 in neighboring states. The great majority of these displaced
 persons and refugees fled to eastern Zaire and southern Sudan
 in the aftermath of the 1979 liberation war and UNLA excesses
 in repulsing a 1980 guerrilla attack in the west Nile region.
 At its peak, the numbers of Ugandans in Zaire and Sudan
 totaled approximately 150,000. During the first half of 1985
 over 20,000 of these people returned to Uganda with the help
 of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Since
 the coup, a large number of persons living in southern Sudan
 have returned spontaneously to Uganda, several thousand of
 whom were young men of military age who have come back to
 serve in government fighting forces.
 Approximately 40,000 Banyarwanda fled Uganda to Rwanda in
 1982-83 as a result of quasi-official harassment of this
 minority group.. The majority were Ugandan citizens, but some
 were Rwandese nationals. Although the Obote government
 publicly invited these persons to return to Uganda as part of
 its stated policy of reconcilation and no revenge, it was
 reluctant to support a full-scale repatriation of the
 Banyarwanda, including those with valid legal claims to
 Ugandan nationality. Possibly 25,000 Banyarwanda have
 spontaneously repatriated themselves since the coup, mainly
 settling in southwestern Uganda, an area under NRA control.
 There were credible reports that some Banyarwanda returnees
 had been recruited into NRA forces. At the end of 1985, an
 estimated 200,000 persons out of Uganda's population of 15
 million still lived abroad.
 The IMG has appealed to the international community for
 assistance in resettlement of displaced persons, but the
 security situation during most of 1985 prevented
 implementation of such efforts.
 Given the poor security and economic situation, there were few
 non-Ugandans seeking refuge in Uganda. There were no reported
 incidents of Uganda forcibly repatriating foreign refugees in
 1985.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Internal rivalry led a portion of the Uganda National
 Liberation Army (UNLA) leadership--dominated by members of the
 Acholi ethnic group--to seize control of the government in
 July 1985 and to establish an Interm Military Government
 (IMG), headed by a Military Council. The IMG suspended
 political activity but it did not disband political parties.
 The IMG recruited into the Military Council and civilian
 Cabinet a cross section of ethnic, political, and religious
 personalities to form a relatively broad based government,
 excluding, however, supporters of Museveni's NRA. Four months
 of negotiations, hosted by President Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya,
 came close to bringing the NRM into the Council, but these
 arrangements collapsed in early 1986.
 President Obote and the Uganda Peoples Congress (UPC) ruled
 Uganda for nearly 13 of its 23 years as an independent nation
 (1962-71, and 1980-85). During these periods, Uganda
 maintained the structure of a parliamentary democracy, with
 elections, universal suffrage, legal opposition parties, and a
 free press. The legitimacy of this democracy was called in
 
 
 366
 UGANDA
 question under the first Obote government by postponement of
 elections after 1962. There was a widespread belief that the
 Obote government used its power to manipulate the 1980 general
 elections. Democratic structures also were weakened by the
 second Obote administration's extralegal actions, e.g. through
 arbitrary arrest of suspected political opponents and by the
 politicization of the armed forces and the exacerbation of
 ethnic divisions.
 At least five guerrilla groups of various sizes operated in
 Uganda during the period 1981-85. Each had an ethnic base.
 In additional to Museveni's National Resistance Movement and
 Army (NRM/NRA), dominated by the Banyankole, there were: the
 Federal Democratic Union of Uganda (FEDEMU), the Uganda
 Freedom Movement (UFM), the Uganda National Rescue Front
 (UNRF) and the Former Ugandan National Army (FUNA). The
 majority of the members of the first two groups--often led by
 former government soldiers but composed primarily of ethnic
 Bantu civilians turned guerrillas--were inside Uganda at the
 time of the coup. Members of the second two groups--largely
 led by and made up of ethnic Nilotics and ethnic Sudanics who
 had served in the armed forces during the 1960's and
 1970s--were mostly in exile in Sudan and Zaire at the time of
 the coup.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Obote government was highly sensitive to any foreign
 criticism of Uganda's human rights record and publicly
 disputed Western reports of human rights violations in Uganda,
 including the highly critical June 1985 Amnesty International
 special report on the status of human rights in Uganda. The
 Obote government invited representatives of Amnesty
 International to visit Uganda's detention centers but the trip
 did not materialize because of the July 27 coup. Amnesty
 International in its 1985 Report (covering 1984) focused its
 concern on the detention without trial of hundreds of alleged
 political opponents of the Obote government. Freedom House
 rated Uganda "partly free."
 One of the first acts of the Interim Military Government was
 to appoint as Minister of Internal Affairs, Paul K.
 Ssemogerere, leader of the opposition Democratic Party and
 long-time critic of the Obote regime's stand on human rights
 practices. While there continued to be serious human rights
 violations in Uganda due to the IMG's inability to control its
 troops and associated forces, the IMG made a credible effort
 to confront and report these incidents.
 The largest of the nongovernment organizations in Uganda, the
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), continued its
 programs of prison visits to both IMG and NRA controlled
 facilities, tracing, family reunification, and emergency
 assistance in disturbed areas. The ICRC has not been able,
 however, to gain permission to enter military barracks where
 detainees are held. The Uganda Red Cross continued to be very
 much in the forefront of relief efforts and other public
 service work and has been tasked with helping to resettle
 Banyarwanda returnees at such time as that program can
 commence. Other nongovernmental organizations working in
 Uganda include the League of Red Cross Societies, Oxford
 Famine Relief, Save the Children Fund, Doctors without
 
 
 367
 UGANDA
 Borders, the German Emergency Doctors, as well as many foreign
 religious organizations.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Uganda's estimated population of 14.7 million is growing at
 the annual rate of 3.1 percent, according to the World Bank.
 Gross national product per capita in 1983, the last year for
 which figures are available, was $220 and has probably dropped
 since then due to the disruption of the economy by civil
 strife.
 In the modern sector there are constraints on the economy,
 notably a government monopoly on purchasing key agricultural
 crops for export, but both the Obote and current Governments
 have generally encouraged a free market economy. Coffee
 exports are the source of over 90 percent of Uganda's foreign
 exchange earnings. By November, however, much of the
 processing of the coffee crop was disrupted because of the
 civil war. This situation seriously affected Uganda's ability
 to pay for essential imports, particularly petroleum
 products. Nevertheless, Uganda has great economic potential
 with important agricultural assets, including fertile soils,
 regular rainfall, substantial deposit of minerals such as tin,
 copper, and cobalt, a tradition of productive local
 enterprise, and facilities such as a road network and
 hydroelectric power. The Obote government, with IMF
 assistance, introduced ambitious economic reform measures
 starting in 1981 but later abandoned these measures as the
 overall security situation worsened, and inflation soared to a
 projected rate of 175 percent by late 1985. Following the
 coup, the IMG began talks with the IMF with a view toward
 eventually reinstituting a reform program.
 Life expectancy at birth is 49.1 years. The health
 infrastructure, which was devastated during the 1970's,
 continued to be one of the government's top priorities in
 1985. Infant mortality is one index of the breakdown in
 health care. According to UNICEF, one village near Kampala
 experienced an infant mortality rate of 32 deaths per 1,000
 live births in the late 1960's; this had risen to over 90 in
 1984. In 1985, the national infant mortality rate was 112.8
 per 1,000 live births, up from 92.6 in 1984, according to
 World Bank figures.
 Both the Obote and present Governments have made
 rehabilitation of the educational infrastructure,
 internationally renowned in the 1960's and a notable casualty
 of the Amin period, a top priority, together with medical
 services. However, there were credible reports that funds
 earmarked for education in the Obote government were diverted
 by personal and government party corruption. What educational
 renewal has taken place in the past 5 years has resulted from
 foreign assistance and from many self-help groups formed by
 parents, teachers, religious, and other civic groups which
 have provided much of the material and labor to rehabilitate
 schools. In 1982, a relatively peaceful year, the primary
 school enrollment ratio was 68 percent of the eligible
 children  (79 percent for males, 57 percent for females). The
 adult literacy rate in 1980 was 52 percent (65 percent for
 males, 40 percent for females).
 Minimum age for employment is 12 years except on light work
 which the Minister of Labor may exempt by statutory order. In
 
 
 368
 UGANDA
 addition, there are restrictions for employing persons under
 16 years old in mining and at night--apprenticeships
 exempted. The minimum wage is that of the lowest paid person
 employed by the Kampala City Council, currently about $14 per
 month.00). Medical care is to be provided by employers.
 Women are not legally discriminated against or officially
 restricted from education or employment. However, their
 access to education has been declining, according to United
 Nations International Children's Emergency Fund, as the
 educational system deteriorates and the economy declines.
 Families withdraw daughters rather than sons from school in
 times of economic hardship. At the same time, women have been
 active in politics at the grass roots level and have held
 several senior positions in national parties as well as in
 government. There were no women of cabinet-level rank in the
 IMG government.
 The country's boundaries cut across contiguous tribal areas
 and group together mutually distrustful ethnic groups.
 Historical animosities between ethnic groups have been
 exacerbated by Uganda's political problems and, in particular,
 by the ruination of the country's economic and political
 infrastructure during the Amin years, from which the country
 has not recovered. Particularly damaging was the 1972
 expulsion of an estimated 70,000 persons of Asian heritage who
 comprised the backbone of Uganda's entrepreneurial and skilled
 trade resources. The cumulative result of Uganda's long-term
 ethnic civil conflict has led to a breakdown of the country's
 social fabric. Two ethnic groups commonly are subject to
 discrimination in delivery of the government's economic and
 social services. These are the Banyarwanda and Karamajong.
 As noted above, the Banyarwanda have suffered expulsion from
 and displacement within Uganda. The Karamajong, who live in
 northeastern Uganda, have had indiscriminate military action
 directed against them-in reprisal for their violent cattle
 raiding.
 
 
 369
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: UGANDA
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..          7.8      9.1      9.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    7.8       9.1      9.0
 A.AIO ...... ..............    7.6       9.1      9.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     7.6       9.1      9.0
 (SEC.SUOP.ASSIST.) ..0 .0              0.0       0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.2       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.2       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       0.2       0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.2       0.3      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,...        0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      .0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1       0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1       0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        O,0       0.0      0.0
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EOTRNG ....        0.1       0.1      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         7.9       9.2      9.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 7.9             9.2      9.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0.
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   140.0    164.8      99.9    753.7
 IBRO               0.0      0.0       0.0      8.4
 IFC                9.7       2.9      0.0     15.8
 IDA              124.0    123.0      71.9    559.9
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      38.1     17.7     83.0
 UNOP               1.1      0.8       0.0     54.7
 OTHER-UN            5.2      0.0     10.3     31.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 370
